The Ground Launched Cruise Missile, or GLCM, (officially designated BGM-109G Gryphon)
was a ground-launched cruise missile developed by the United States Air Force in the last decade of the Cold War and disarmed under the INF Treaty.

==
Overview ==
The BGM-109G was developed as a counter to the mobile MRBM and IRBM nuclear missiles (SS-20 Saber) deployed by the Soviet Union in Eastern Bloc European countries.

The GLCM and the U.S. Army's Pershing II may have been the incentives that fostered Soviet willingness to sign the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF treaty), and thus possibly reduced the threat of nuclear wars in Europe.
GLCM is also a generic term for any ground-launched cruise missile.
Since the U.S. deployed only one modern cruise missile in the tactical role, the GLCM name stuck.
The GLCM was built by General Dynamics.

==
History ==


===
Design and employment ===
A conventionally configured cruise missile, the BGM-109 was essentially a small, pilotless flying machine, powered by a turbofan engine.
Unlike ballistic missiles, whose aimpoint is usually determined by gravitic trajectories, a cruise missile is capable of complicated aerial manoeuvres, and can fly a range of predetermined flight plans.
Also, it flies at much lower altitudes than a ballistic missile, typically with a terrain-hugging flight plan.
The trade-off for this low-observability flight is strike time; cruise missiles travel far more slowly than a ballistic weapon, and the GLCM was typical in this regard.

GLCM was developed as a ground-launched variant of the Tomahawk missile in use by the U.S. Navy (along with an undeveloped air-launched version, the Medium Range Air to Surface Missile (MRASM))
Unlike other variants of the Tomahawk, the GLCM carried only a W84 thermonuclear warhead; no conventional capability was provided.
The W84 warhead is a 0.2–150kt variable-yield weapon.

This yield contrasts with the yield of the W80 warhead found on other versions of the Tomahawk and on the ALCM from which the W84 was derived, which has a selectable yield of 5 or 150 kt.
The Pentagon credited the GLCM with a range of 2000–2500 kilometers.

Like other U.S. cruise missiles of this period, accuracy after more than 2000 km of flight was approximately 30 meters.

The missile was entirely subsonic, powered by a turbofan engine with a rocket booster assisting at launch.
Militarily, the GLCM was targeted against fixed targets—at the outer edge of its range, the missile's flight time with its subsonic turbofan was more than 2½ hours.
The missiles were launched from an elevated launcher, with the missile ejected from its canister for about 13 seconds of solid rocket booster flight.

The fins extended at 4 seconds, the air inlet and wings deployed at 10 seconds and the jet engine started at the end of the boost phase.
Flying at low level, the missile was guided by TERCOM (terrain contour matching) to the target.

This contrasted strongly with Pershing II, which had a flight time of 10–15 minutes.

However, the range of the GLCM gave it the ability to strike deep within then-Soviet territory, and the missile guidance and low radar cross-section would have made it far more difficult to intercept a GLCM even if the launch were detected in time.
BGM-109
G personnel were trained at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Arizona, by the 868th Tactical Missile Training Squadron from 1 July 1981.

On 1 October 1985, the squadron became part of the 868th Tactical Missile Training Group.
The group and squadron were inactivated on 31 May 1990.

An area near Fort Huachuca, Arizona was used for field training for GLCM flights.

GLCM testing was conducted at the Dugway Proving Ground in Utah, with many of the people involved in the testing going to operational wings as they were activated.

===
NATO deployment and protests ===
BGM-109G missiles would be based at six locations throughout Europe; in the United Kingdom (at RAF Greenham Common and RAF Molesworth), Belgium, Netherlands, Germany, and Comiso Air Station in Italy.

Each location had its own unique problems, but all required extensive construction by the USAF.

Initial operating capability (IOC) occurred in 1983.Normal basing was in blast shelters at military installations.

Each BGM-109G station was controlled by a Wing that consisted of a Tactical Missile Squadron (TMS), which was responsible for operation and deployment of the missiles; and a Tactical Missile Maintenance Squadron (TMMS), which was responsible for the support of the system.

Each TMS consisted of several flights, made up of 69 people and 22 vehicles.

The missile was designed to operate in a flight with sixteen missiles.

The flight would be normally on base, with the missiles and vehicles secured in the hardened storage area called the GAMA (GLCM Alert and Maintenance Area).

Four transporter erector launchers (TEL)
each carried four BGM-109G missiles in their containers and ready for launch.

Two launch control centers (LCC), each with two launch officers, were connected to the TELs and interconnected for launch.
Each TEL and LCC was towed by a large MAN KAT1 8x8 tractor and was capable of traversing rough terrain.
There were 16 support vehicles for the flight commander, normally a captain, 19 maintenance technicians, a medical technician and 44 security personnel.
During periods of increased tension, the flights would be deployed to pre-surveyed, classified locations in the countryside away from the base.
The members of the flight would dig in, erect camouflage netting to hide the vehicles, and prepare for launch.

Flight commanders were tasked to survey and select possible deployment sites, with all details closely held, and the commander selected the location preferred when the flight deployed from the base.
When deployed, the flight was self-sustaining, and secured with special intrusion detection radar.

The launchers (without warheads) were sent out on a number of simulated scrambles.
Although deployed in the face of a range of Soviet IRBMs, including the brand-new and extremely capable SS-20 Saber, the GLCM (sometimes referred to by its phonetic nickname, Glick-em) faced widespread public protest in Europe.

Anti-nuclear groups such as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament felt that the United States was deploying weapons meant to win a tactical nuclear war, without adequate consideration of the effects that even a 'victory' would bring.

Critics also argued that the Reagan Administration was unduly escalating tensions in Central Europe.
Between them, GLCM and Pershing II made a lethal combination.
GLCM missiles could be launched, undetected, followed 2 hours later by a Pershing strike, which would fly so quickly that it was possible
no response could be made before the Pershings struck.
Aside from presenting a course of action to NATO commanders in the event of war, it put the Kremlin leaders (in range of the GLCM and possibly the Pershing, even in Moscow) in a position of fearing a decapitating NATO first strike, which could have moved them toward a launch on warning policy as the only way to maintain mutually assured destruction.

However, the USSR did have submarine-launched missiles (i.e. Golf and Hotel class SSBNs
armed with
R-27 Zyb and SS-N-5s) available during this time, so any fears of a decapitating first strike were not necessarily justified.

===
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty ===
Despite initial fears of greater instability, the deployment of GLCM ultimately caused Soviet leaders to enter into negotiations for, and finally signature of, the INF treaty.

The recognition by Soviet leaders of the threat posed by the GLCM and Pershing II missiles made them far more inclined to agree to negotiate their own intermediate-range weapons, especially the SS-20, out of service, in exchange for the elimination of the threat posed by the GLCM and the Pershing II.Unlike SALT II or START I, which set limits to maximum nuclear arsenals, the INF Treaty banned whole categories of intermediate-range tactical nuclear weapons outright.
All ground-launched cruise missiles and ballistic missiles with ranges greater than 500 but less than 5500 kilometers were barred to the U.S. and USSR under this treaty.
This meant the withdrawal of GLCM and Pershing II on the American side.

The Soviets withdrew the GLCM's most direct counterpart, the SSC-4 or RK-55, and its supersonic follow-on, the SSC-X-5.
In addition, various Soviet MRBMs, IRBMs, and LRBMs were withdrawn: the SS-4 Sandal, SS-5 Skean,
SS-12 Scaleboard, SS-20 Saber, SS-22 Scaleboard B, and SS-23 Spider.

All of these equivalent weapons had been developed and deployed against NATO forces before the introduction of the GLCM, despite the categorization of the GLCM deployment by communists as 'aggressive'.
GLCM was removed from Europe beginning in 1988, and over the next three and a half years all units were transported to Davis Monthan AFB and destroyed or converted into displays by 1991.
Eight missiles survive for inert static display only.
In February 2018, U.S. military officials confirmed they were developing a new ground-launched, intermediate-range cruise missile to counter Russian development of a similar weapon system that violates the INF Treaty.
President Donald Trump announced on 20 October 2018 that he was withdrawing the U.S. from the INF treaty, citing Russian non-compliance.
The U.S. formally suspended the treaty on 1 February 2019, and Russia did so the following day.

===
USAF
BGM-109G GLCM units ===
38th Tactical Missile Wing - Pydna Missile Base) at Wüschheim AB, West Germany (
1985–1990)89th TMS  (80 missiles) 50°02′37″N 007°25′32″E303d
Tactical Missile Wing - RAF Molesworth, United Kingdom (1986–1989)87th TMS (64 missiles) 52°22′55″N
000°25′41″W485th
Tactical Missile Wing - Florennes Air Base, Belgium (1984–1989)71st TMS (48 missiles)
50°13′34″N 004°39′01″E486th Tactical Missile Wing - Woensdrecht Air Base, Netherlands (1987–1988)No Tactical Missile Squadron assigned (
48 missiles assigned/0 Deployed)51°26′21″N 004°
21′09″E487th Tactical Missile Wing - Comiso Air Base, Italy (1983–1991)302d TMS (112 missiles) 36°59′42″N 014°
36′48″E501st Tactical Missile Wing - RAF Greenham Common, United Kingdom (1982–1991)11th TMS (96 missiles) 51°22′42″N
001°18′07″W868th Tactical Missile Training Squadron,
Activated 1 July 1981Assigned to 868th Tactical Missile Training Group,
1 October 1985
Consisted of: 868th TM Training Squadron, 868th TM Maintenance Squadron, 868th Student Squadron
Davis-Monthan AFB, Arizona, inactivated on 31 May 1990
An area near Fort Huachuca was used for field training for GLCM
operationsNote: Each GLCM squadron was further subdivided into several flights.

Each flight included 2 Launch Control Vehicles (LCC) and 4 Transporter Erector Launchers (TEL), totalling 16 missiles per flight.
Each TEL could carry 4 missiles.

==
See also ==
BGM-75
AICBM
Tomahawk SLCM
SSC
-X-4/RK-55
List of nuclear weapons


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
This article incorporates public domain material from
the Air Force Historical Research Agency website http://www.afhra.af.mil/.
==
Bibliography ==
Cochran, Thomas; Arkin, William M.; Hoenig, Milton M. (1984).
Nuclear Weapons Databook Volume
I: U.S. Nuclear Forces and Capabilities.
Natural Resources Defense Council.
ISBN 0-88410-173-8.
==
External links ==
GLCM (Ground-Launched Cruise Missile):
BGM-109
G Gryphon - Designation Systems
485th Tactical Missile Wing
38 TMW Wueschheim Germany
501st Tactical Missile Wing at Greenham Common
An air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) is a cruise missile that is launched from a military aircraft.
Current versions are typically standoff weapons which are used to attack predetermined land targets with conventional, nuclear or thermonuclear payloads.

Specific types of ALCMs (current, past and under development) include:
AGM-28
Hound Dog (USA)
AGM-84H/
K SLAM-ER (USA)
AGM-86
ALCM (USA)
AGM-129 ACM (USA)
AGM-158
JASSM (USA)
AGM-158C LRASM (USA)
Air-Sol Moyenne Portée ASMP (France)
ASN4G (France)
BrahMos (India/Russia)
BrahMos-II (India/Russia)
CJ-10 (China)
Delilah (Israel)
Hatf-VIII (Ra'ad) (Pakistan)
Ra'ad-II (Pakistan)
Joint Strike Missile(Norway/USA)
Kalibr-A (Russia)
KEPD 350
(Germany/Sweden)
Kh-20
(USSR)
Kh-32
(Russia)
Kh-47M2
Kinzhal (Russia)
Kh-55/Kh-555 (USSR/Russia)
Kh-59
(USSR/Russia)
Kh-61
(USSR/Russia)
Kh-101
/Kh-102 (Russia)
KSR-5
(USSR)
LRSO
(Long Range Stand Off Weapon) (USA)
MICLA-BR (Brazil)
Perseus (France/UK)
Popeye (Israel)
SOM (Turkey)
Soumar (Iran)
Storm Shadow (France/UK/Italy)
Ya-Ali (Iran)
3M-51 Alfa (Russia)
3M22
Zircon (Russia)
10Kh (USSR)


== See also ==
Air-launched ballistic missile
Air-to-surface missile


==
References ==
The Tomahawk () Land Attack Missile (TLAM) is a long-range, all-weather, jet-powered, subsonic cruise missile that is primarily used by the United States Navy and Royal Navy in ship- and submarine-based land-attack operations.

Designed at APL/JHU, it was initially produced in the 1970s by General Dynamics as a medium- to long-range, low-altitude missile that could be launched from a surface platform.
The missile's modular design accommodates a wide variety of warhead, guidance, and range capabilities.
At least six variants and multiple upgraded versions have been introduced since then, including air-, sub-, and ground-launched variants and conventional and nuclear-armed ones.
As of 2019, only non-nuclear, sea-launched variants assembled by Raytheon are currently in service.
The U.S. Navy contracted with APL/JHU to design BGM-109 Tomahawk missile, the project was headed by James Walker at Applied Physics Laboratory near Laurel, Maryland.
Since then, it has been upgraded several times with guidance systems for precision navigation.
In 1992–1994, McDonnell Douglas Corporation was the sole supplier of Tomahawk Missiles and produced Block II and Block III Tomahawk missiles and remanufactured many Tomahawks to Block III specifications.
In 1994, Hughes outbid McDonnell Douglas Aerospace to become the sole supplier of Tomahawk missiles.
It is now manufactured by Raytheon.
In 2016, the U.S. Department of Defense purchased 149 Tomahawk Block IV missiles for $202.3 million.
The Tomahawk was most recently used by the U.S. Navy against Syrian chemical weapons facilities when 66 were launched in the 2018 missile strikes against Syria.

== Variants ==
There have been several variants of the missile, including:
BGM-109A Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Nuclear (TLAM-N) with a W80 nuclear warhead.
Retired from service sometime between 2010 and 2013.
Reports from early 2018 state that the U.S. Navy is considering (re)introducing a (yet unknown type of) nuclear-armed cruise missile into service.

RGM/UGM-109B Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile (TASM) – active radar homing anti-ship missile variant; withdrawn from service in 1994 and converted to Block IV version.

BGM-109C Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Conventional (TLAM-C) with a unitary warhead.
This was initially a modified Bullpup warhead.

BGM-109D Tomahawk Land Attack Missile – Dispenser (TLAM-D) with cluster munitions.

RGM/UGM-109E Tomahawk Land Attack Missile (TLAM Block IV) – improved version of the TLAM-C.
BGM-109
G Ground Launched Cruise Missile (GLCM) – with a W84 nuclear warhead;
withdrawn from service in 1991 to comply with the INF Treaty.

AGM-109H/L Medium Range Air-to-Surface Missile (MRASM) – a shorter-range, turbojet powered air-launched cruise missile with cluster munitions; never entered service, cost US$569,000 (1999).Ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCM) and
their truck-like launch vehicles were employed at bases in Europe; they were withdrawn from service to comply with the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
Many of the anti-ship versions were converted into TLAMs at the end of the Cold War.
The Block III TLAMs that entered service in 1993 can fly 3 percent farther using their new turbofan engines and use Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers to strike more precisely.
Block III TLAM-Cs retain the Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation (DSMAC) II navigation system, allowing three kinds of navigation: GPS-only, which allow for rapid mission planning, with some reduced accuracy, DSMAC-only, which take longer to plan but terminal accuracy is somewhat better; and GPS-aided missions that combine DSMAC II and GPS navigation for greatest accuracy.
Block IV TLAMs have an improved turbofan engine that allows them to get better fuel economy and change speeds in flight.
The Block IV TLAMs can loiter better and have an electro-optical sensors that allow real-time battle damage assessment.
The Block IVs can be given a new target in flight and can transmit an image, via satcom, immediately before impact to help determine whether the missile is on target and the likely damage from the attack.

== Upgrades ==
A major improvement to the Tomahawk is network-centric warfare-capabilities, using data from multiple sensors (aircraft, UAVs, satellites, foot soldiers, tanks, ships) to find its target.
It will also be able to send data from its sensors to these platforms.

Tomahawk Block II variants were all tested during January 1981 to October 1983.
Deployed in 1984, some of the improvements included: an improved booster rocket, cruise missile radar altimeter, and navigation through the Digital Scene Matching Area Corellator (DSMAC).
DSMAC was a highly accurate rudimentary AI which allowed early low power computers to navigate and precisely target objectives using cameras on board the missile.
With its ability to visually identify and aim directly at a target, it was more accurate than weapons using estimated GPS coordinates.
Due to the very limited computer power of the day, DSMAC did not directly evaluate the maps, but instead would compute contrast maps and then combine multiple maps into a buffer, then compare the average of those combined images to determine if it was similar to the data in its small memory system.
The data for the flight path was very low resolution in order to free up memory to be used for high resolution data about the target area.
The guidance data was computed by a mainframe computer which took spy satellite photos and estimated what the terrain would appear like during low level flight.
Since this data would not match the real terrain exactly, and since terrain changes seasonally and with changes in light quality, DSMAC would filter out differences between maps and use the remaining similar sections in order to find its location regardless of changes in how the ground appeared.
It also had an extremely bright strobe light it could use to illuminate the ground for fractions of a second in order to find its position at night, and was able to take the difference in ground appearance into account.
Tomahawk Block III introduced in 1993 added time-of-arrival control and improved accuracy for Digital Scene Matching Area Correlator (DSMAC) and jam-resistant GPS, smaller, lighter WDU-36 warhead, engine improvements and extended missile's range.
Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS) takes advantage of a loitering feature in the missile's flight path and allows commanders to redirect the missile to an alternative target, if required.
It can be reprogrammed in-flight to attack predesignated targets with GPS coordinates stored in its memory or to any other GPS coordinates.
Also, the missile can send data about its status back to the commander.
It entered service with the US Navy in late 2004.
The Tactical Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS) added the capability for limited mission planning on board
the firing unit (FRU).Tomahawk Block IV introduced in 2006 adds the strike controller which can change the missile in flight to one of 15 preprogrammed alternate targets or redirect it to a new target.
This targeting flexibility includes the capability to loiter over the battlefield awaiting a more critical target.
The missile can also transmit battle damage indication imagery and missile health and status messages via the two-way satellite data link.
Firing platforms now have the capability to plan and execute GPS-only missions.
Block IV also has an improved anti-jam GPS receiver for enhanced mission performance.

Block IV includes Tomahawk Weapons Control System (TTWCS), and Tomahawk Command and Control System (TC2S).On 16 August 2010, the Navy completed the first live test of the Joint Multi-Effects Warhead System (JMEWS), a new warhead designed to give the Tomahawk the same blast-fragmentation capabilities while introducing enhanced penetration capabilities in a single warhead.

In the static test, the warhead detonated and created a hole large enough for the follow-through element to completely penetrate the concrete target.
In February 2014, U.S. Central Command sponsored development and testing of the JMEWS, analyzing the ability of the programmable warhead to integrate onto the Block IV Tomahawk, giving the missile bunker buster effects to better penetrate hardened structures.
In 2012, the USN studied applying Advanced Anti-Radiation Guided Missile (AARGM) technology into the Tactical Tomahawk.
In 2014, Raytheon began testing Block IV improvements to attack sea and moving land targets.
The new passive radar seeker will pick up the electromagnetic radar signature of a target and follow it, and actively send out a signal to bounce off potential targets before impact to discriminate its legitimacy before impact.
Mounting the multi-mode sensor on the missile's nose would remove fuel space, but company officials believe the Navy would be willing to give up space for the sensor's new technologies.
The previous Tomahawk Anti-Ship Missile, retired over a decade earlier, was equipped with inertial guidance and the seeker of the Harpoon missile and there was concern with its ability to clearly discriminate between targets from a long distance, since at the time Navy sensors did not have as much range as the missile itself, which would be more reliable with the new seeker's passive detection and millimeter-wave active radar homing.
Raytheon estimates adding the new seeker would cost $250,000 per missile.
Other upgrades include a sea-skimming flight path.
The first Block IV TLAMs modified with a maritime attack capability will enter service in 2021.A supersonic version of the Tomahawk is under consideration for development with a ramjet to increase its speed to Mach 3.

A limiting factor to this is the dimensions of shipboard launch tubes.

Instead of modifying every ship able to carry cruise missiles, the ramjet-powered Tomahawk would still have to fit within a 21-inch-diameter and 20-foot-long tube.
In October 2015, Raytheon announced the Tomahawk had demonstrated new capabilities in a test launch, using its onboard camera to take a reconnaissance photo and transmit it to fleet headquarters.

It then entered a loitering pattern until given new targeting coordinates to strike.
By January 2016, Los Alamos National Laboratory was working on a project to turn unburned fuel left over when a Tomahawk reaches its target into an additional explosive force.

To do this, the missile's JP-10 fuel is turned into a fuel air explosive to combine with oxygen in the air and burn rapidly.

The thermobaric explosion of the burning fuel acts, in effect, as an additional warhead and can even be more powerful than the main warhead itself when there is sufficient fuel left in the case of a short-range target.

The Tomahawk Block V is planned to go into production in 2020, the Block Va being the Maritime Strike Tomahawk (MST) which allows the missile to engage a moving target at sea and the Block Vb outfitted with the JMEWS warhead for hard-target penetration.
All Block IV Tomahawks will be converted to Block V standard, while the remaining Block III missiles will be retired and demilitarized.
In 2020, Los Alamos National Laboratory reported that it would use corn-based ethanol to produce domestic fuel for Tomahawk missiles, which also does not require harsh acids to manufacture, compared to petroleum-based JP-10.
== Launch systems ==
Each missile is stored and launched from a pressurized canister that protects it during transportation and storage, and also serves as a launch tube.
These canisters were racked in Armored Box Launchers (ABL), which were installed on the four reactivated Iowa-class battleships USS Iowa, USS New Jersey, USS Missouri, and USS Wisconsin.
The ABLs were also installed on eight Spruance-class destroyer, the four Virginia-class cruiser, and the nuclear cruiser USS Long Beach.
These canisters are also in vertical launching systems (VLS) in other surface ships, capsule launch systems (CLS) in the later Los Angeles-class submarine and Virginia-class submarines, and in submarines' torpedo tubes.

All ABL equipped ships have been decommissioned.

For submarine-launched missiles (called UGM-109s), after being ejected by gas pressure (vertically via the VLS) or by water impulse (horizontally via the torpedo tube), a solid-fuel booster is ignited to propel the missile and guide it out of the water.
After achieving flight, the missile's wings are unfolded for lift, the airscoop is exposed and the turbofan engine is employed for cruise flight.
Over water, the Tomahawk uses inertial guidance or GPS to follow a preset course; once over land, the missile's guidance system is aided by terrain contour matching (TERCOM).
Terminal guidance is provided by the Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation (DSMAC) system or GPS, producing a claimed circular error probable of about 10 meters.

The Tomahawk Weapon System consists of the missile, Theater Mission Planning Center (TMPC)/Afloat Planning System, and either the Tomahawk Weapon Control System (on surface ships) or Combat Control System (for submarines).

Several versions of control systems have been used, including:

v2 TWCS – Tomahawk Weapon Control System (1983), also known as "green screens," was based on an old tank computing system.

v3 ATWCS – Advanced Tomahawk Weapon Control System (1994), first Commercial Off the Shelf, uses HP-UX.

v4 TTWCS – Tactical Tomahawk Weapon Control System, (2003).

v5 TTWCS –
Next Generation Tactical Tomahawk Weapon Control System.
(
2006)
On August 18, 2019, the United States Navy conducted a test flight of a Tomahawk missile launched from a ground-based version of the Mark 41 Vertical Launch System.
It was the United States' first acknowledged launch of a missile that would have violated the 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, from which the Trump administration withdrew on August 2.
==
Munitions ==
The TLAM-D contains 166 sub-munitions in 24 canisters: 22 canisters of seven each, and two canisters of six each to conform to the dimensions of the airframe.
The sub-munitions are the same type of Combined Effects Munition bomblet used in large quantities by the U.S. Air Force with the CBU-87 Combined Effects Munition.
The sub-munitions canisters are dispensed two at a time, one per side.
The missile can perform up to five separate target segments which enables it to attack multiple targets.
However, in order to achieve a sufficient density of coverage typically all 24 canisters are dispensed sequentially from back to front.
==
Navigation ==
TERCOM –
Terrain Contour Matching.
A digital representation of an area of terrain is mapped based on digital terrain elevation data or stereo imagery.
This map is then inserted into a TLAM mission which is then loaded onto the missile.
When the missile is in flight it compares the stored map data with radar altimeter data collected as the missile overflies the map.
Based on comparison results
the missile's inertial navigation system is updated and the missile corrects its course.
TERCOM was based on, and was a significant improvement on, "Fingerprint," a technology developed in 1964 for the SLAM.DSMAC – Digital Scene Matching Area Correlation.
A digitized image of an area is mapped and then inserted into a TLAM mission.
During the flight the missile will verify that the images that it has stored correlates with the image it sees below itself.
Based on comparison results
the missile's inertial navigation system is updated and the missile corrects its course.

==
Operational history ==


===
United States Navy ===
In the 1991 Gulf War, 288 Tomahawks were launched, 12 from submarines and 276 from surface ships.
The first salvo was fired by the destroyer USS Paul F. Foster on January 17, 1991.
The attack submarines USS Pittsburgh and USS Louisville followed.

On 17 January 1993, 46 Tomahawks were fired at the Zafraniyah Nuclear Fabrication Facility outside Baghdad, in response to Iraq's refusal to cooperate with UN disarmament inspectors.
One missile crashed into the side of the Al Rasheed Hotel, killing two civilians.
On 26 June 1993, 23 Tomahawks were fired at the Iraqi Intelligence Service's command and control center.
On 10 September 1995, USS Normandy launched 13 Tomahawk missiles from the central Adriatic Sea against a key air defense radio relay tower in Bosnian Serb territory during Operation Deliberate Force.
On 3 September 1996, 44 ship-launched UGM-109 and B-52-launched AGM-86 cruise missiles were fired at air defense targets in southern Iraq.
On 20 August 1998, 79 Tomahawk missiles were fired simultaneously at two targets in Afghanistan and Sudan in retaliation for the bombings of American embassies by Al-Qaeda.
On 16 December 1998, 325 Tomahawk missiles were fired at key Iraqi targets during Operation Desert Fox.
In early 1999, 218 Tomahawk missiles were fired by U.S. ships and a British submarine during 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia against targets in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
In October 2001, about 50 Tomahawk missiles struck targets in Afghanistan in the opening hours of Operation Enduring Freedom.
During the 2003 invasion of Iraq, more than 802 Tomahawk missiles were fired at key Iraqi targets.
On 3 March 2008, two Tomahawk missiles were fired at a target in Somalia by a US vessel during the Dobley airstrike, reportedly in an attempt to kill Saleh Ali Saleh Nabhan, an al Qaeda militant.
On 17 December 2009, two Tomahawk missiles were fired at targets in Yemen.
One TLAM-D struck an alleged Al-Qaeda training camp in al-Ma’jalah in al-Mahfad, a region of the Abyan governorate of Yemen.
Amnesty International reported that 55 people were killed in the attack, including 41 civilians (21 children, 14 women, and six men).
The US and Yemen governments refused to confirm or deny involvement, but diplomatic cables released as part of United States diplomatic cables leak later confirmed the missile was fired by a U.S. Navy ship.
On 19 March 2011, 124 Tomahawk missiles were fired by U.S. and British forces (112 US, 12 British) against at least 20 Libyan targets around Tripoli and Misrata.
As of 22 March 2011, 159 UGM-109 were fired by US and UK ships against Libyan targets.
On 23 September 2014, 47 Tomahawk missiles were fired by the United States from USS Arleigh Burke and USS Philippine Sea, which were operating from international waters in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf, against ISIL targets in Syria in the vicinity of Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor, Al-Hasakah and Abu Kamal, and against Khorasan group targets in Syria west of Aleppo.
On 13 October 2016 five Tomahawk cruise missiles were launched by USS Nitze at three radar sites in Yemen held by Houthi rebels in response to anti-ship missiles fired at US Navy ships the day before.

On 6 April 2017, 59 Tomahawk missiles were launched from USS Ross (DDG-71) and USS Porter (DDG-78), targeting Shayrat Airbase near Homs, in Syria.
The strike was in response to a chemical weapons attack, an act allegedly carried out by Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad.
U.S. Central Command stated in a press release that Tomahawk missiles hit "aircraft, hardened aircraft shelters, petroleum and logistical storage, ammunition supply bunkers, defense systems, and radars".
Initial U.S. reports claimed "approximately 20 planes" were destroyed, and that 58 out of the 59 cruise missiles launched had "severely degraded or destroyed" their intended target.
A later report by US Secretary of Defense James Mattis claimed that the strike destroyed about 20% of the Syrian government's operational aircraft.
Syrian state-run media claimed that nine civilians, including four children living in nearby villages were killed and another seven wounded as a result of the strike after missiles fell on their homes, but The Pentagon said civilians were not targeted.
According to the satellite images the runways and the taxiways have been  undamaged and combat flights from the attacked airbase resumed on 7 April a few hours after the attack, although U.S. officials did not state that the runway was a target.
An independent bomb damage assessment conducted by ImageSat International counted hits on 44 targets, with some targets being hit by more than one missile; these figures were determined using satellite images of the airbase 10 hours after the strike.
However, the Russian defense ministry contends that the combat effectiveness of the attack was "extremely low"; only 23 missiles hit the base destroying six aircraft, and it did not know where the other 36 landed.
Russian television news, citing a Syrian source at the airfield, said that nine planes were destroyed by the strikes (5 Su-22M3s, 1 Su-22M4, and 3
Mig-23ML)
and that all planes were thought to have been out of action at the time.

Al-Masdar News reported that 15 fighter jets were damaged or destroyed and that the destruction of fuel tankers caused several explosions and a large fire.
However, Lost Armour's online photographic database, for vehicle losses in the War in Syria, has images of 10 destroyed aircraft at Shayrat airbase.
Some observers conclude that the Russian government—and therefore also the Syrian government—was warned and Syria had enough time to move most of the planes to another base.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the strike damaged over a dozen hangars, a fuel depot, and an air defense base.
On April 14, 2018, the US launched 66 Tomahawk cruise missiles at Syrian targets near Damascus and Homs, as part of the 2018 bombing of Damascus and Homs.
These strikes were done in retaliation for alleged Douma chemical attack.
The United States Department of Defense said Syria fired 40 defensive missiles at the allied weapons but did not hit any targets.
The Russian military said that Syrian air defenses shot down 71 of the 103 missiles launched by the US and its allies.

===
Royal Navy ===
In 1995 the US agreed to sell 65 Tomahawks to the UK for torpedo-launch from their nuclear attack submarines.
The first missiles were acquired and test-fired in November 1998; all Royal Navy fleet submarines are now Tomahawk capable, including the Astute-class.
The Kosovo War in 1999 saw the Swiftsure-class HMS Splendid become the first British submarine to fire the Tomahawk in combat.
The UK subsequently bought 20 more Block III to replenish stocks.
The Royal Navy has since fired Tomahawks during the 2000s Afghanistan War, in Operation Telic as the British contribution to the 2003 Iraq War, and during Operation Ellamy in Libya in 2011.

In April 2004, the UK and US governments reached an agreement for the British to buy 64 of the new generation of Tomahawk missile—the Block IV or TacTom missile.
It entered service with the Royal Navy on 27 March 2008, three months ahead of schedule.

In July 2014 the US approved the sale to the UK of a further 65 submarine-launched Block IV's at a cost of US$140m including spares and support; as of 2011 the Block III missiles were on British books at £1.1m and the Block IV at £0.87m including VAT.The Sylver Vertical Launching System on the new Type 45 destroyer is claimed by its manufacturers to have the capability to fire the Tomahawk, although the A50 launcher carried by the Type 45 is too short for the weapon (the longer A70 silo would be required).
Nevertheless, the Type 45 has been designed with weight and space margin for a strike-length Mk41 or Sylver A70 silo to be retrofitted, allowing Type 45 to use the TLAM Block IV if required.
The new Type 26 frigates will have strike-length Mk41 VLS tubes.
SYLVER user France is developing MdCN, a version of the Storm Shadow/Scalp cruise missile that has a shorter range but a higher speed than Tomahawk and can be launched from the SYLVER system.

===
United States Air Force ===
The Air Force is a former operator of the nuclear-armed version of the Tomahawk, the BGM-109G Gryphon.

===
United States Army ===
In November 2020, the U.S. Army selected the Tomahawk to fulfill its Mid-Range Capability (MRC), giving it a land-based long-range missile capable of striking ground and sea targets.
The Army plans to use the Tomahawk alongside a ground-based SM-6 and field them by late 2023.

===
Canada ===
According to infographics released by Royal Canadian Navy, their new frigates (CSC) will be equipped with the missile.

===
Other users ===
The Netherlands (2005) and Spain (2002 and 2005) were interested in acquiring the Tomahawk system, but the orders were later cancelled in 2007 and 2009 respectively.
In 2009 the Congressional Commission on the Strategic Posture of the United States stated that Japan would be concerned if the TLAM-N were retired, but the government of Japan has denied that it had expressed any such view.
The SLCM version of the Popeye was developed by Israel after the US Clinton administration refused an Israeli request in 2000 to purchase Tomahawk SLCM's because of international Missile Technology Control Regime proliferation rules.
As of March 12, 2015 Poland has expressed interest in purchasing long-range Tomahawk missiles for its future submarines.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
United Kingdom
United States


==
See also ==
List of missiles
Babur (cruise missile)
Hoveyzeh
Hsiung Feng IIE
RK-55
3M-54 Klub
Raduga
Kh-55
AGM-129 ACM
Hyunmoo-3
DH-10
UGM-89 Perseus
ArcLight (missile)
Scalp Naval (missile)
Nirbhay


=
= References ==


==
External links ==
Raytheon official site for the Tomahawk missile
CSIS Missile Threat - Tomahawk Cruise Missile
Hypersonic Missiles is the debut studio album by English musician Sam Fender, released on 13 September 2019 by Polydor Records.

Supported by seven singles—"Play God", "Leave Fast", "Dead Boys", "That Sound", "Hypersonic Missiles",
"Will We Talk?"
and "The Borders"—the album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart, number one on the Scottish Albums Chart, and number six on the Irish Albums Chart.
It sold over 41,000 copies in the first week on the UK Albums Chart and was the 11th best selling vinyl album of 2019.
The album has since sold in excess of 100,000 copies.
Hypersonic Missiles received generally positive reviews from critics, particularly towards Fender's lyricism and stylistic influences.

==
Background ==
Sam Fender grew up in North Shields in North Tyneside.
He started obsessing over Bruce Springsteen albums after his brother introduced him to the albums Darkness on the Edge of Town and Born to Run.
At the age of 13 he began to write his own music inspired by Springsteen as well as Oasis and Joni Mitchell.
He started to perform open mic nights with his brother where he would cover Jimi Hendrix songs as well as noughties indie rock songs.
After he turned 18 he began performing paid gigs at restaurants.
In 2010 he was spotted performing by Ben Howard's manager who quickly took him on as a client.
Following brief acting roles on the shows Vera and Wolfblood, Fender released his debut single "
Play God" on 30 March 2017 before re-releasing it in anticipation of his album in January 2019.
It was Fender's first single to chart, reaching number 51 in Scotland and 89 on the UK Singles Chart. "
Play God" was featured on the soundtrack for FIFA 19.In 2018, Fender was placed on BBC's Sound of 2018 shortlist alongside Billie Eilish, Khalid, Lewis Capaldi and winner Sigrid.
He released his single "Dead Boys" which was premiered as Annie Mac's Hottest Record in the World.
Fender released his debut EP Dead Boys on 20 November 2018 featuring the album tracks "Dead Boys", "That Sound" and "Leave Fast".
Alongside the EP's release, he embarked on a UK headline tour which included 3 nights at "Omeara" in London.
In 2019, Fender won the
Critics' Choice Award at the Brit Awards.
On 6 March 2019, Fender released the title track of Hypersonic Missiles.
The song was described by Fender himself as an "unorthodox love song."
On 6 July, he announced the album alongside the release of the single
"Will We Talk?".
As well as this, he announced his biggest UK tour to date which completely sold out and included two nights at O2 Brixton Academy and four nights at O2 Academy Newcastle.
Following the album's announcement, Fender performed the fastest selling date ever at the Mouth of the Tyne Festival as well as supporting Bob Dylan and Neil Young at Hyde Park, London.
Fender built his own studio in his hometown of North Shields to record the album with money from his record label.
He worked with his long-time friend and producer Bramwell Bronte on the record despite the suggestion from his record label to work with a high brow producer, a fact that Fender has said he is proud of.
==
Music and lyrics ==
Hypersonic Missiles drew heavy comparisons to Bruce Springsteen due to Fender's "lyricism and his vignettes of working-class struggle.
"
Many also drew comparisons to The Killers and Jeff Buckley blending elements of Americana, post-punk and pop rock.
The title track was described by Fender as being inspired by a "newly developed Russian missile that travels at something like nine times the speed of sound" as well as describing the song's protagonist as being a "tin foil hatter.
"
The track "The Borders" was described by Fender as his favourite and most personal song on the album and describes the "story of two boys growing up together and then going their separate ways."
NME described the track as "chest-punching".
The Guardian described the track's "hypnotic, motorik beats" as well as the drum machines on "You’re Not the Only One" to The War on Drugs.
Fender tackles his own entitlement on the track "White Privilege" and has said that his white privilege "has affected my success, definitely, white boy with a guitar, fucking great, original, here comes another one.
""Dead Boys" tackles the theme of male suicide and mental health issues and was written as a reaction to losing a friend to suicide.
The track has been described as "stark" and "cathartic."
The track "Play God" was described by Fender being "set in an alternate dystopian reality that shares similarities with our own world."
"
That Sound" was described as being "a celebration of music" and "a not-so-subtle middle finger to the naysayers that tend to rear their heads as soon as things start to work out for you, especially back home."
Clash magazine described it as "crisp power pop, it soars towards the crunching chorus, a real ear-worm that stays stuck in your head for days.
""Saturday
" was described by Fender at a gig at Electric Brixton in London as being about "hating your landlord."
"
Will We Talk?"
was described as "a heady blast of high-octane, melody-packed, smash'n'grab rock'n'roll that launches from the traps at full pelt and doesn't relent until the guitars and a string-section subside three minutes later.
"
The track is about one-night stands and is inspired by "The Cut" nightclub in Newcastle. "
Call Me Lover" is about infidelity and was inspired by an affair with a married woman that Fender had at 19.
He also described the track as one of the few "pop songs" on the album. "
Leave Fast" was described by The Line of Best Fit as "an excellent study on provincial fear."
The track stems from the fear of staying in your hometown forever.
The track "Use" was described by Pitchfork as entering Nina Simone-inspired territory.

==
Critical reception ==
Hypersonic Missiles received critical acclaim from critics.
At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 81, based on 11 reviews.
Alexis Petridis of The Guardian praised the album, calling it "perfectly imperfect rock".
Jordan Basset of the NME after giving the album 4 out of 5, added that "the Geordie Springsteen's debut excels at documenting small-town frustration, which is why he means so much to so many people.
This album isn't perfect, but he's a welcome antidote to polite chaps with guitars".
AllMusic claimed "it reveals itself to be a fitting soundtrack to the weekend, addressing hopes and frustrations with a persistent intensity and rousing melodies that fall in line with the catharsis at hand."
In a more mixed review, Pitchfork claimed that the album had a lack of focus and was full of "mostly formulaic arrangements".
===
Accolades ===


==
Track listing ==
Adapted from Sam Fender's online store.

All tracks are written by Sam Fender.

==
Personnel ==
Adapted from Discogs.

==
Charts ==


==
Certifications ==


==
References ==
Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 (HTV-2) is an experimental hypersonic glide vehicle developed as part of the DARPA Falcon Project capable of flying at 13,000 mph
(Mach 17.53, 21,000 km/h).
It is a test bed for technologies to provide the United States with the capability to reach any target in the world within one hour
(Prompt Global Strike) using an unmanned hypersonic bomber aircraft.

==
Development ==
The Falcon HTV-1 program, which preceded the Falcon HTV-2 program, was conducted in April, 2010.
The mission ended within nine minutes from launch.
Both these missions are funded by the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to help develop hypersonic technologies and to demonstrate its effectiveness.
Under the original plan, HTV-1 was to feature a hypersonic lift-to-drag ratio of 2.5, increasing to 3.5-4 for the HTV-2 and 4-5 for the HTV-3.
The actual lift-to-drag ratio of HTV-2 was estimated to be 2.6.HTV-2 was to lead to the development of an HTV-3X vehicle, known as Blackswift, which would have formed the basis for deployment around 2025 of a reusable Hypersonic Cruise Vehicle, an unmanned aircraft capable of taking off from a conventional runway with a 5,400 kg (12,000 lb) payload to strike targets 16,650 km away in under 2 hours.
The HCV would have required a lift-to-drag ratio of 6-7 at Mach 10 and 130,000 ft (40,000m).

== Design ==
Development of protection structures that are tough and lightweight, development of an aerodynamic shape that has a high lift to drag ratio, development of automatic navigation control systems etc.
were some of the initial technical challenges that had been overcome in the final design.
The various departments involved in designing the vehicle included aerothermodynamics, materials science, hypersonic navigation, guidance and control systems, endo-
and exo-atmospheric flight dynamics, telemetry and range safety analysis.
The craft could cover 17,000 kilometres (11,000 mi), the distance between London and Sydney, in 49 minutes.
Built by Lockheed Martin Corp, the HTV-2 is made of carbon composite material; the durability of such material was needed to prevent important internal components from being destroyed because they are a few inches from its surface.
The surface temperature of the HTV-2 was expected to reach 1,930 °C (3,500 °F) or more in flight; steel melts at 1,370 °C (2,500 °F).

==
Flight testing ==
Both flights reached Mach 20 (high-hypersonic speed) and lost telemetry at 9 minutes of a planned 30-minute mission.

The HTV-2's first flight was launched on 22 April 2010.
The HTV-2 glider was to fly 4,800 miles (7,700 km) across the Pacific to Kwajalein at Mach 20.
The HTV-2 was boosted by a Minotaur IV Lite rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California; the glider was carried inside the nose of the Minotaur IV Lite rocket into outer space with a launch altitude of 100 miles (160 km).

The flight plan called for the craft to separate from the launch vehicle, level out and glide above the Pacific at Mach 20.

Contact was lost with the vehicle at nine minutes into the 30-minute mission, and the glider's skin disintegrated.
In mid-November, DARPA stated that the first test flight ended when the computer autopilot "commanded flight termination" after the vehicle began to roll violently.
A second flight was initially scheduled to be launched on August 10, 2011, but bad weather forced a delay.

The flight was launched the following day, on 11 August 2011.
The unmanned Falcon HTV-2 successfully separated from the booster and entered the mission's glide phase, but again lost contact with control about nine minutes into its planned 30-minute Mach 20 glide flight.
Initial reports indicated it purposely impacted the Pacific Ocean along its planned flight path as a safety precaution.
The glider's surface reached 1,930 °C (3,500 °F) (the speed and heat caused part of the skin to peel away from the aerostructure) and controlled itself for 3 minutes before crashing.

==
Future development ==
DARPA does not plan to conduct a third flight test of the HTV-2.

The decision was made because substantial data was collected from the first two flights, and a third was not thought likely to provide any additional valuable data for the cost.

The first flight provided data in aerodynamics and flight performance, while the second provided information about structures and high temperatures.

Experience gained from the HTV-2 will be used to improve hypersonic flight.

Work on the HTV-2 will continue to Summer 2014 to capture technology lessons and improve design tools and methods for high-temperature composite aeroshells.

== See also ==
Tactical Boost Glide – follow-on project
HGV-202F - a similar Indian system
DF-ZF – a similar Chinese system
Avangard – a similar Russian system
Boeing X-51 - scramjet-powered hypersonic cruise missile demonstrator
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle - scramjet-powered hypersonic cruise missile demostrator


=
= References ==


==
External links ==
Falcon page on Darpa.mil
HCV page on Globalsecurity.org
"Air Drops Dummy Rocket for Darpa's Falcon", Aviation Week,
"Hypersonics
Back in the News" on Defensetech.org
"Going Hypersonic:
Flying FALCON for Defense" and "Air Force Plans Flight Tests Of Hypersonic Vehicle" on Space.com
Death of HTV explained
Space weapons are weapons used in space warfare.
They include weapons that can attack space systems in orbit (i.e. anti-satellite weapons), attack targets on the earth from space or disable missiles travelling through space.
In the course of the militarisation of space, such weapons were developed mainly by the contesting superpowers during the Cold War, and some remain under development today.
Space weapons are also a central theme in military science fiction and sci-fi video games.

== Space-to-space weapons
==
The Soviet Almaz secret military space station program was equipped with a fixed 23mm autocannon to prevent hostile interception or boarding by hostile forces.
The Soviet unmanned Polyus weapons platform was designed to be equipped with a megawatt carbon-dioxide laser and a self-defense cannon.

== Earth-to-space weapons ==

Anti-satellite weapons, which are primarily surface-to-space and air-to-space missiles, have been developed by the United States, the USSR/Russia, India and the People's Republic of China.
Multiple test firings have been done as part of recent Chinese and U.S test programs that involved destroying an orbiting satellite.

In general use of explosive and kinetic kill systems is limited to relatively low altitude due to space debris issues and so as to avoid leaving debris from launch in orbit.

===
Strategic Defense Initiative ===
On March 23, 1983, President Ronald Reagan proposed the Strategic Defense Initiative, a research program with a goal of developing a defensive system which would destroy enemy ICBMs.
The defensive system was nicknamed Star Wars, after the movie, by its detractors.

Some concepts of the system included Brilliant Pebbles, which were Kinetic Kill Vehicles, essentially small rockets launched from satellites toward their targets (a warhead, warhead bus, or even an upper stage of an ICBM).
Other aspects included satellites in orbit carrying powerful laser weapons, plasma weapons, or particle beams.
When a missile launch was detected, the satellite would fire at the missile (or warheads) and destroy it.
Although no real hardware was ever manufactured for deployment, the military did test the use of lasers mounted on Boeing 747s to destroy missiles in the 2000s, however these were discontinued due to practical limitations of keeping a constant fleet airborne near potential launch sites due to the lasers range limitations keeping a small number from being sufficient.
The tests took place at Edwards Air Force Base.

== Space-to-Earth weapons ==


===
Orbital weaponry ===
Orbital weaponry is any weapon that is in orbit around a large body such as a planet or moon.
As of September 2017, there are no known operative orbital weapons systems, but several nations have deployed orbital surveillance networks to observe other nations or armed forces.
Several orbital weaponry systems were designed by the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
During World War II Nazi Germany was also developing plans for an orbital weapon called the Sun gun, an orbital mirror that would have been used to focus and weaponize beams of sunlight.
Development of orbital weaponry was largely halted after the entry into force of the Outer Space Treaty and the SALT II treaty.
These agreements prohibit weapons of mass destruction from being placed in space.
As other weapons exist, notably those using kinetic bombardment, that would not violate these treaties, some private groups and government officials have proposed a Space Preservation Treaty which would ban the placement of any weaponry in outer space.

===
Orbital bombardment ===
Orbital bombardment is the act of attacking targets on a planet, moon or other astronomical object from orbit around the object, rather than from an aircraft, or a platform beyond orbit.
It has been proposed as a means of attack for several weapons systems concepts, including kinetic bombardment and as a nuclear delivery system.

During the Cold War, the Soviet Union deployed a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System from 1968 to 1983.
Using this system, a nuclear warhead could be placed in low Earth orbit, and later de-orbited to hit any location on the Earth's surface.
While the Soviets deployed a working version of the system, they were forbidden by the Outer Space Treaty to place live warheads in space.
The fractional orbital bombardment system was phased out in January 1983 in compliance with the SALT II treaty of 1979, which, among other things, prohibited the deployment of systems capable of placing weapons of mass destruction in such a partial orbit.

Orbital bombardment systems with conventional warheads are permitted under the terms of SALT II.
Some of the proposed systems rely on large tungsten carbide/uranium cermet rods dropped from orbit and depend on kinetic energy, rather than explosives, but their mass makes them prohibitively difficult to transport to orbit.
As of 2020 the only true orbital bombardment in history has been executed for scientific purposes.
On 5 April 2019 the Japanese Hayabusa2 robotic space probe released an explosive device called an "impactor" from space onto the surface of asteroid 162173 Ryugu, in order to collect debris released by the explosion.
The mission was successful and Hayabusa2 retrieved valuable samples of the celestial body which it brought back to Earth.

==
In fiction ==

Fictional or real space weapons in various forms are often prominently featured in science fiction, particularly in military science fiction and in video games with a sci-fi theme.

== See also ==
Laser weapon


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Space weapons at Wikimedia Commons

Nuclear Files.org
Basic facts and issues regarding space weapons
SpaceDebate.org – collection of articles, quotes, and links on the debate over space weapons
GR-1 / SS-X-10 SCRAG (Fractional Orbital Bombardment System)
Cyberwarfare is the use of digital attacks to attack a nation, causing comparable harm to actual warfare and/or disrupting the vital computer systems.
There is significant debate among experts regarding the definition of cyberwarfare, and even if such a thing exists.
One view is that the term "cyberwarfare" is a misnomer, since no offensive cyber actions to date could be described as "war".
An alternative view is that "cyberwarfare" is a suitable label for cyber attacks which cause physical damage to people and objects in the real world.
While there is debate over how to define and use "cyberwarfare" as a term, many countries including the United States, United Kingdom, Russia, India, Pakistan, China, Israel, Iran, and North Korea have active cyber capabilities for offensive and defensive operations.
As states explore the use of cyber operations and combine capabilities the likelihood of physical confrontation and violence playing out as a result of, or part of, a cyber operation is increased.
However, meeting the scale and protracted nature of war is unlikely, thus ambiguity remains.

The first instance of kinetic military action used in response to a cyber-attack resulting in the loss of human life was observed on 5 May 2019, when the Israel Defense Forces targeted and destroyed a building associated with an on-going cyber-attack.

==
Definition ==
There is ongoing debate regarding how cyberwarfare should be defined and no absolute definition is widely agreed.
While the majority of scholars, militaries and governments use definitions which refer to state and state-sponsored actors, Other definitions may include non-state actors, such as terrorist groups, companies, political or ideological extremist groups, hacktivists, and transnational criminal organizations depending on the context of the work.
Examples of definitions proposed by experts in the field are as follows.

'Cyberwarfare' is used in a broad context to denote interstate use of technological force within computer networks in which information is stored, shared or communicated online.

Paulo Shakarian and colleagues, put forward the following definition drawing from various works including Clausewitz's definition of war: "War is the continuation of politics by other means":"Cyberwarfare is an extension of policy by actions taken in cyberspace by state actors (or by non-state actors with significant state direction or support)
that constitute a serious threat to another state's security, or an action of the same nature taken in response to a serious threat to a state's security (actual or perceived).
"

Taddeo offers the following definition:

"The warfare grounded on certain uses of ICTs within an offensive or defensive military strategy endorsed by a state and aiming at the immediate disruption or control of the enemys resources, and which is waged within the informational environment, with agents and targets ranging both on the physical and non-physical domains and whose level of violence may vary upon circumstances".

Robinson et al.
propose that the intent of the attacker dictates whether an attack is warfare or not, defining cyber warfare as "the use of cyber attacks with a warfare-like intent.
"The
former US National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection and Counter-terrorism, Richard A. Clarke, defines cyberwarfare as "actions by a nation-state to penetrate another nation's computers or networks for the purposes of causing damage or disruption.
"
Own cyber-physical infrastructure may be weaponized and used by the adversary in case of a cyber conflict, thus turning such infrastructure into tactical weapons.

===
Controversy of term ===
There is debate on whether the term "cyberwarfare" is accurate.
Eugene Kaspersky, founder of Kaspersky Lab, concludes that "cyberterrorism" is a more accurate term than "cyberwar".
He states that "with today's attacks, you are clueless about who did it or when they will strike again.
It's not cyber-war, but cyberterrorism."
Howard Schmidt, former Cyber Security Coordinator of the Obama Administration, said that "there is no cyberwar...
I think that is a terrible metaphor
and I think that is a terrible concept.
There are no winners in that environment.
"Some
experts take issue with the possible consequences linked to the warfare analogy.
Ron Deibert, of Canada's Citizen Lab, has warned of a "militarization of cyberspace", as militaristic responses may not be appropriate.
Although, to date, even serious cyber attacks which have disrupted large parts of a nations electrical grids (230,000 customers, Ukraine, 2015) or affected access to medical care, thus endangering life (NHS, WannaCry, 2017) have not led to military action.

Oxford academic Lucas Kello proposed a new term – "Unpeace" – to denote highly damaging cyber actions whose non-violent effects do not rise to the level of traditional war.
Such actions are neither warlike nor peace like.
Although they are non-violent, and thus not acts of war, their damaging effects on the economy and society may be greater than even some armed attacks.
This term is closely related to the concept of the "grey zone" which has come to prominence in recent years, describing actions which fall below the traditional threshold of war.

===
Cyberwarfare vs. cyber war ===
The term "cyberwarfare" is distinct from the term "cyber war".
"
Cyberwarfare" does not imply scale, protraction or violence which are typically associated with the term "war".
Cyber warfare includes techniques, tactics and procedures which may be involved in a cyber war.
The term war inherently refers to a large scale action, typically over a protracted period of time and may include objectives seeking to utilize violence or the aim to kill.
A cyber war could accurately describe a protracted period of back-and-forth cyber attacks (including in combination with traditional military action) between nations.
To date, no such action is known to have occurred.
Instead, tit-for-tat military-cyber actions are more commonplace.

For example, in June 2019 the United States launched a cyber attack against Iranian weapons systems in retaliation to the shooting down of a US drone being in the Strait of Hormuz.

==
Types of threat ==


==
Types of warfare ==
Cyber warfare can present a multitude of threats towards a nation.
At the most basic level, cyber attacks can be used to support traditional warfare.
For example, tampering with the operation of air defenses via cyber means in order to facilitate an air attack.
Aside from these "hard" threats, cyber warfare can also contribute towards "soft" threats such as espionage and propaganda.

Eugene Kaspersky, founder of Kaspersky Lab, equates large-scale cyber weapons, such as Flame and NetTraveler which his company discovered, to biological weapons, claiming that in an interconnected world, they have the potential to be equally destructive.

===
Espionage ===
Traditional espionage is not an act of war, nor is cyber-espionage, and both are generally assumed to be ongoing between major powers.
Despite this assumption, some incidents can cause serious tensions between nations, and are often described as "attacks".
For example:
Massive spying by the US on many countries, revealed by Edward Snowden.

After the NSA's spying on Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel was revealed, the Chancellor compared the NSA with the Stasi.

The NSA recording nearly every cell phone conversation in the Bahamas, without the Bahamian government's permission, and similar programs in Kenya, the Philippines, Mexico and Afghanistan.

The "Titan Rain" probes of American defense contractors computer systems since 2003.

The Office of Personnel Management data breach, in the US, widely attributed to China.

The security firm Area 1 published details of a breach that compromised one of the European Union's diplomatic communication channels for three years.
Out of all cyber attacks, 25% of them are espionage based.

===
Sabotage ===
Computers and satellites that coordinate other activities are vulnerable components of a system and could lead to the disruption of equipment.
Compromise of military systems, such as C4ISTAR components that are responsible for orders and communications could lead to their interception or malicious replacement.
Power, water, fuel, communications, and transportation infrastructure all may be vulnerable to disruption.
According to Clarke, the civilian realm is also at risk, noting that the security breaches have already gone beyond stolen credit card numbers, and that potential targets can also include the electric power grid, trains, or the stock market.
In mid-July 2010, security experts discovered a malicious software program called Stuxnet that had infiltrated factory computers and had spread to plants around the world.
It is considered "the first attack on critical industrial infrastructure that sits at the foundation of modern economies," notes The New York Times.
Stuxnet, while extremely effective in delaying Iran's nuclear program for the development of nuclear weaponry, came at a high cost.
For the first time, it became clear that not only could cyber weapons be defensive but they could be offensive.
The large decentralization and scale of cyberspace makes it extremely difficult to direct from a policy perspective.
Non-state actors can play as large a part in the cyberwar space as state actors, which leads to dangerous, sometimes disastrous, consequences.
Small groups of highly skilled malware developers are able to as effectively impact global politics and cyber warfare as large governmental agencies.
A major aspect of this ability lies in the willingness of these groups to share their exploits and developments on the web as a form of arms proliferation.
This allows lesser hackers to become more proficient in creating the large scale attacks that once only a small handful were skillful enough to manage.
In addition, thriving black markets for these kinds of cyber weapons are buying and selling these cyber capabilities to the highest bidder without regard for consequences.

====
Denial-of-service attack ====
In computing, a denial-of-service attack (DoS attack) or distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS attack) is an attempt to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users.
Perpetrators of DoS attacks typically target sites or services hosted on high-profile web servers such as banks, credit card payment gateways, and even root nameservers.
DoS attacks often leverage internet-connected devices with vulnerable security measures to carry out these large-scale attacks.
DoS attacks may not be limited to computer-based methods, as strategic physical attacks against infrastructure can be just as devastating.
For example, cutting undersea communication cables may severely cripple some regions and countries with regards to their information warfare ability.

====
Electrical power grid ====
The federal government of the United States admits that the electric power grid is susceptible to cyberwarfare.
The United States Department of Homeland Security works with industries to identify vulnerabilities and to help industries enhance the security of control system networks.
The federal government is also working to ensure that security is built in as the next generation of "smart grid" networks are developed.
In April 2009, reports surfaced that China and Russia had infiltrated the U.S. electrical grid and left behind software programs that could be used to disrupt the system, according to current and former national security officials.
The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) has issued a public notice that warns that the electrical grid is not adequately protected from cyber attack.
China denies intruding into the U.S. electrical grid.
One countermeasure would be to disconnect the power grid from the Internet and run the net with droop speed control only.
Massive power outages caused by a cyber attack could disrupt the economy, distract from a simultaneous military attack, or create a national trauma.

Iranian hackers, possibly Iranian Cyber Army pushed a massive power outage for 12 hours in 44 of 81 provinces of Turkey, impacting 40 million people.
Istanbul and Ankara were among the places suffering blackout.
Howard Schmidt, former Cyber-Security Coordinator of the US, commented on those possibilities:
It's possible that hackers have gotten into administrative computer systems of utility companies, but says those aren't linked to the equipment controlling the grid, at least not in developed countries.
[
Schmidt] has never heard that the grid itself has been hacked.

In June 2019, Russia said that its electrical grid has been under cyber-attack by the United States.
The New York Times reported that American hackers from the United States Cyber Command planted malware potentially capable of disrupting the Russian electrical grid.

===
Propaganda ===
Cyber propaganda is an effort to control information in whatever form it takes, and influence public opinion.
It is a form of psychological warfare, except it uses social media, fake news websites and other digital means.
In 2018, Sir Nicholas Carter, Chief of the General Staff of the British Army stated that this kind of attack from actors such as Russia "is a form of system warfare that seeks to de-legitimize the political and social system on which our military strength is based".
Jowell and O'Donnell
(2006) state that "propaganda is the deliberate, systematic attempt to shape perceptions, manipulate cognitions, and direct behavior to achieve a response that furthers the desired intent of the propagandist" (p. 7).
The internet is a phenomenal means of communication.
People can get their message across to a huge audience, and with this opens a window for evil.
Terrorist organizations can use this medium to brainwash people.
It has been suggested that restricted media coverage of terrorist attacks would in turn decrease the number of terrorist attacks that occur afterwards (Cowen 2006).

===
Economic disruption ===
In 2017, the WannaCry and Petya (NotPetya) cyber attacks, masquerading as ransomware, caused large-scale disruptions in Ukraine as well as to the U.K.'s National Health Service, pharmaceutical giant Merck, Maersk shipping company and other organizations around the world.
These attacks are also categorized as cybercrimes, specifically financial crime because they negatively affect a company or group.

===
Surprise cyber attack ===
The idea of a "cyber Pearl Harbor" has been debated by scholars, drawing an analogy to the historical act of war.
Others have used "cyber 9/11" to draw attention to the nontraditional, asymmetric, or irregular aspect of cyber action against a state.
==
Motivations ==
There are a number of reasons nations undertake offensive cyber operations.
Sandro Gaycken, a cyber security expert and adviser to NATO, advocates that states take cyber warfare seriously as they are viewed as an attractive activity by many nations, in times of war and peace.
Offensive cyber operations offer a large variety of cheap and risk-free options to weaken other countries and strengthen their own positions.
Considered from a long-term, geostrategic perspective, cyber offensive operations can cripple whole economies, change political views, agitate conflicts within or among states, reduce their military efficiency and equalize the capacities of high-tech nations to that of low-tech nations, and use access to their critical infrastructures to blackmail them.

===
Military ===
With the emergence of cyber as a substantial threat to national and global security, cyber war, warfare and/or attacks also became a domain of interest and purpose for the Military.

In the U.S., General Keith B. Alexander, first head of USCYBERCOM, told the Senate Armed Services Committee that computer network warfare is evolving so rapidly that there is a "mismatch between our technical capabilities to conduct operations and the governing laws and policies.
Cyber Command is the newest global combatant and its sole mission is cyberspace, outside the traditional battlefields of land, sea, air and space.
"
It will attempt to find and, when necessary, neutralize cyberattacks and to defend military computer networks.
Alexander sketched out the broad battlefield envisioned for the computer warfare command, listing the kind of targets that his new headquarters could be ordered to attack, including "traditional battlefield prizes – command-and-control systems at military headquarters, air defense networks and weapons systems that require computers to operate.
"One
cyber warfare scenario, Cyber-ShockWave, which was wargamed on the cabinet level by former administration officials, raised issues ranging from the National Guard to the power grid to the limits of statutory authority.
The distributed nature of internet based attacks means that it is difficult to determine motivation and attacking party, meaning that it is unclear when a specific act should be considered an act of war.
Examples of cyberwarfare driven by political motivations can be found worldwide.
In 2008, Russia began a cyber attack on the Georgian government website, which was carried out along with Georgian military operations in South Ossetia.
In 2008, Chinese "nationalist hackers" attacked CNN as it reported on Chinese repression on Tibet.
Hackers from Armenia and Azerbaijan have actively participated in cyberwarfare as part of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict, with Azerbaijani hackers targeting Armenian websites and posting Ilham Aliyev's statements.
Jobs in cyberwarfare have become increasingly popular in the military.
All four branches of the United States military actively recruit for cyber warfare positions.
As the military have become more and more entangled into the national and global threat proposed by the utilization of the cyber domain, a new research field within the Military Science field have slowly emerged.
In essence, its focus is centered towards describing, understanding and explaining what Military Cyber Operations is, can do and be tackled.
In the Handbook of Military Sciences Aaron Brantly and Max Smeets define Military Cyber Operations to be "those cyber operations which a military entity of a nation-state plans and conducts to achieve strategic, operational, or tactical gain.
"
More so, they argue these types of military operations are commonly divided into three types of operations.

Defensive Cyber Operations:
Encompassing "those actions taken through the use of computer networks to protect, monitor, analyze, detect, and respond to unauthorized activity within a governments information systems and computer networks"."

Cyber Espionage Operations:
Encompassing "those actions taken through the use of computer networks to gather data from target or adversary information systems or network"."

Offensive Cyber Operations:
Encompassing "those actions taken through the use of computer networks to disrupt, deny, degrade, or destroy information resident in computers and computer networks, or the computers and networks themselves, or in basic, operations designed to achieve tangible effects"."
===
Civil ===
Potential targets in internet sabotage include all aspects of the Internet from the backbones of the web, to the internet service providers, to the varying types of data communication mediums and network equipment.
This would include: web servers, enterprise information systems, client server systems, communication links, network equipment, and the desktops and laptops in businesses and homes.
Electrical grids, financial networks, and telecommunication systems are also deemed vulnerable, especially due to current trends in computerization and automation.

===
Hacktivism ===
Politically motivated hacktivism involves the subversive use of computers and computer networks to promote an agenda, and can potentially extend to attacks, theft and virtual sabotage that could be seen as cyberwarfare – or mistaken for it.

Hacktivists use their knowledge and software tools to gain unauthorized access to computer systems they seek to manipulate or damage not for material gain or to cause widespread destruction, but to draw attention to their cause through well-publicized disruptions of select targets.
Anonymous and other hacktivist groups are often portrayed in the media as cyber-terrorists, wreaking havoc by hacking websites, posting sensitive information about their victims, and threatening further attacks if their demands are not met.
However, hacktivism is more than that.
Actors are politically motivated to change the world, through the use of fundamentalism.
Groups like Anonymous, however, have divided opinion with their methods.

===
Income generation ===
Cyber attacks, including ransomware, can be used to generate income.
States can use these techniques to generate significant sources of income, which can evade sanctions and perhaps while simultaneously harming adversaries (depending on targets).
This tactic was observed in August 2019 when it was revealed North Korea had generated $2 billion to fund its weapons program, avoiding the blanket of sanctions levied by the United States, United Nations and the European Union


===
Private sector ===
Computer hacking represents a modern threat in ongoing global conflicts and industrial espionage and as such is presumed to widely occur.
It is typical that this type of crime is underreported to the extent they are known.
According to McAfee's George Kurtz, corporations around the world face millions of cyberattacks a day.
"
Most of these attacks don't gain any media attention or lead to strong political statements by victims."
This type of crime is usually financially motivated.
===
Non-profit research ===
But not all those who engage in cyberwarfare do so for financial or ideological reasons.
There are institutes and companies like the University of Cincinnati or the Kaspersky Security Lab which engage in cyberwarfare so as to better understand the field through actions like the researching and publishing of new security threats.

==
Preparedness ==
A number of countries conduct exercise to increase preparedness and explore the strategy, tactics and operations involved in conducting and defending against cyber attacks against nations, this is typically done in the form of war games.

The Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of Excellence (CCDCE), part of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), have conducted a yearly war game called Locked Shields since 2010 designed to test readiness and improve skills, strategy tactics and operational decision making of participating national organizations.
Locked Shields 2019 saw 1200 participants from 30 nations compete in a red team vs. blue team exercise.
The war game involved a fictional country, Berylia, which was "experiencing a deteriorating security situation, where a number of hostile events coincide with coordinated cyber attacks against a major civilian internet service provider and maritime surveillance system.
The attacks caused severe disruptions in the power generation and distribution, 4G communication systems, maritime surveillance, water purification plant and other critical infrastructure components".
CCDCE describe the aim of the exercise was to "maintain the operation of various systems under intense pressure, the strategic part addresses the capability to understand the impact of decisions made at the strategic and policy level."
Ultimately, France was the winner of Locked Shields 2019.The European Union conduct cyber war game scenarios with member states and partner nations to improve readiness, skills and observe how strategic and tactical decisions may affect the scenario.
As well as war games which serve a broader purpose to explore options and improve skills, cyber war games are targeted at preparing for specific threats.
In 2018 the Sunday Times reported the UK government was conducting cyber war games which could "blackout Moscow".
These types of war games move beyond defensive preparedness, as previously described above and onto preparing offensive capabilities which can be used as deterrence, or for "war".

==
Cyber activities by nation ==
Approximately 120 countries have been developing ways to use the Internet as a weapon and target financial markets, government computer systems and utilities.

===
Asia ===


====
China ====

Foreign Policy magazine puts the size of China's "hacker army" at anywhere from 50,000 to 100,000 individuals.
Diplomatic cables highlight US concerns that China is using access to Microsoft source code and 'harvesting the talents of its private sector' to boost its offensive and defensive capabilities.
The 2018 cyberattack on the Marriott hotel chain that collected personal details of roughly 500 million guests is now known to be a part of a Chinese intelligence-gathering effort that also hacked health insurers and the security clearance files of millions more Americans, The hackers, are suspected of working on behalf of the Ministry of State Security, the country's Communist-controlled civilian spy agency.

"The information is exactly what the Chinese use to root out spies, recruit intelligence agents and build a rich repository of Americans' personal data for future targeting."

A 2008 article in the Culture Mandala:
The Bulletin of the Centre for East-West Cultural and Economic Studies by Jason Fritz alleges that the Chinese government from 1995 to 2008 was involved in a number of high-profile cases of espionage, primarily through the use of a "decentralized network of students, business people, scientists, diplomats, and engineers from within the Chinese Diaspora".
A defector in Belgium, purportedly an agent, claimed that there were hundreds of spies in industries throughout Europe, and on his defection to Australia Chinese diplomat Chen Yonglin said there were over 1,000 such in that country.

In 2007, a Russian executive was sentenced to 11 years for passing information about the rocket and space technology organization to China.
Targets in the United States have included "aerospace engineering programs, space shuttle design, C4ISR data, high-performance computers, Nuclear weapon design, cruise missile data, semiconductors, integrated circuit design, and details of US arms sales to Taiwan".
While China continues to be held responsible for a string of cyber-attacks on a number of public and private institutions in the United States, India, Russia, Canada, and France, the Chinese government denies any involvement in cyber-spying campaigns.
The administration maintains the position that China is not the threat but rather the victim of an increasing number of cyber-attacks.
Most reports about China's cyber warfare capabilities have yet to be confirmed by the Chinese government.
According to Fritz, China has expanded its cyber capabilities and military technology by acquiring foreign military technology.
Fritz states that the Chinese government uses "new space-based surveillance and intelligence gathering systems, Anti-satellite weapon, anti-radar, infrared decoys, and false target generators" to assist in this quest, and that they support their "Informatisation" of their military through "increased education of soldiers in cyber warfare; improving the information network for military training, and has built more virtual laboratories, digital libraries and digital campuses.
"
Through this informatisation, they hope to prepare their forces to engage in a different kind of warfare, against technically capable adversaries.
Many recent news reports link China's technological capabilities to the beginning of a new "cyber cold war.
"In
response to reports of cyberattacks by China against the United States, Amitai Etzioni of the Institute for Communitarian Policy Studies has suggested that China and the United States agree to a policy of mutually assured restraint with respect to cyberspace.
This would involve allowing both states to take the measures they deem necessary for their self-defense while simultaneously agreeing to refrain from taking offensive steps; it would also entail vetting these commitments.
Operation Shady RAT is an ongoing series of cyber attacks starting mid-2006, reported by Internet security company McAfee in August 2011.
China is widely believed to be the state actor behind these attacks which hit at least 72 organizations including governments and defense contractors.
On 14 September 2020, a database showing personal details of about 2.4 million people around the world was leaked and published.

A Chinese company, Zhenhua Data Information Technology Co., Ltd. complied the database.
According to the information from "National Enterprise Credit Information Publicity System", which is run by State Administration for Market Regulation in China, the shareholders of Zhenhua Data Information Technology Co., Ltd. are two natural persons and one general partnership enterprise whose partners are natural persons.
Wang Xuefeng, who is the chief executive and the shareholder of Zhenhua Data, has publicly boasted that he supports "hybrid warfare" through manipulation of public opinion and "psychological warfare".

====
India ====
The Department of Information Technology created the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) in 2004 to thwart cyber attacks in India.
That year, there were 23 reported cyber security breaches.
In 2011, there were 13,301.
That year, the government created a new subdivision, the National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) to thwart attacks against energy, transport, banking, telecom, defense, space and other sensitive areas.

The Executive Director of the Nuclear Power Corporation of India (NPCIL) stated in February 2013 that his company alone was forced to block up to ten targeted attacks a day.
CERT-
In was left to protect less critical sectors.

A high-profile cyber attack on 12 July 2012 breached the email accounts of about 12,000 people, including those of officials from the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Defense Research and Development Organizations (DRDO), and the Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP).
A government-private sector plan being overseen by National Security Advisor (NSA)
Shivshankar Menon began in October 2012, and intends to boost up India's cyber security capabilities in the light of a group of experts findings that India faces a 470,000 shortfall of such experts despite the country's reputation of being an IT and software powerhouse.
In February 2013, Information Technology Secretary J. Satyanarayana stated that the NCIIPC was finalizing policies related to national cyber security that would focus on domestic security solutions, reducing exposure through foreign technology.
Other steps include the isolation of various security agencies to ensure that a synchronised attack could not succeed on all fronts and the planned appointment of a National Cyber Security Coordinator.
As of that month, there had been no significant economic or physical damage to India related to cyber attacks.

On 26 November 2010, a group calling itself the Indian Cyber Army hacked the websites belonging to the Pakistan Army and the others belong to different ministries, including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Finance, Pakistan Computer Bureau, Council of Islamic Ideology, etc.
The attack was done as a revenge for the Mumbai terrorist attacks.
On 4 December 2010, a group calling itself the Pakistan Cyber Army hacked the website of India's top investigating agency, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
The National Informatics Center (NIC) has begun an inquiry.
In July 2016, Cymmetria researchers discovered and revealed the cyber attack dubbed 'Patchwork', which compromised an estimated 2500 corporate and government agencies using code stolen from GitHub and the dark web.
Examples of weapons used are an exploit for the Sandworm vulnerability (CVE-2014-4114), a compiled AutoIt script, and UAC bypass code dubbed UACME.
Targets are believed to be mainly military and political assignments around Southeast Asia and the South China Sea and the attackers are believed to be of Indian origin and gathering intelligence from influential parties.
The Defence Cyber Agency, which is the Indian Military agency responsible for Cyberwarfare, is expected to become operational by November 2019.

====
Philippines ====
The Chinese are being blamed after a cybersecurity company, F-Secure Labs, found a malware, NanHaiShu, which targeted the Philippines Department of Justice.
It sent information in an infected machine to a server with a Chinese IP address.
The malware which is considered particularly sophisticated in nature was introduced by phishing emails that were designed to look like they were coming from an authentic sources.
The information sent is believed to be relating to the South China Sea legal case.

====
South Korea ====
In July 2009, there were a series of coordinated denial of service attacks against major government, news media, and financial websites in South Korea and the United States.
While many thought the attack was directed by North Korea, one researcher traced the attacks to the United Kingdom.
Security researcher Chris Kubecka presented evidence multiple European Union and United Kingdom companies unwittingly helped attack South Korea due to a W32.Dozer infections, malware used in part of the attack.
Some of the companies used in the attack were partially owned by several governments, further complicating attribution.

In July 2011, the South Korean company SK Communications was hacked, resulting in the theft of the personal details (including names, phone numbers, home and email addresses and resident registration numbers) of up to 35 million people.
A trojaned software update was used to gain access to the SK Communications network.
Links exist between this hack and other malicious activity and it is believed to be part of a broader, concerted hacking effort.
With ongoing tensions on the Korean Peninsula, South Korea's defense ministry stated that South Korea was going to improve cyber-defense strategies in hopes of preparing itself from possible cyber attacks.
In March 2013, South Korea's major banks – Shinhan Bank, Woori Bank and NongHyup Bank – as well as many broadcasting stations – KBS, YTN and MBC – were hacked and more than 30,000 computers were affected; it is one of the biggest attacks South Korea has faced in years.
Although it remains uncertain as to who was involved in this incident, there has been immediate assertions that North Korea is connected, as it threatened to attack South Korea's government institutions, major national banks and traditional newspapers numerous times – in reaction to the sanctions it received from nuclear testing and to the continuation of Foal Eagle, South Korea's annual joint military exercise with the United States.
North Korea's cyber warfare capabilities raise the alarm for South Korea, as North Korea is increasing its manpower through military academies specializing in hacking.
Current figures state that South Korea only has 400 units of specialized personnel, while North Korea has more than 3,000 highly trained hackers; this portrays a huge gap in cyber warfare capabilities and sends a message to South Korea that it has to step up and strengthen its Cyber Warfare Command forces.
Therefore, in order to be prepared from future attacks, South Korea and the United States will discuss further about deterrence plans at the Security Consultative Meeting (SCM).
At SCM, they plan on developing strategies that focuses on accelerating the deployment of ballistic missiles as well as fostering its defense shield program, known as the Korean Air and Missile Defense.

====
Sri Lanka ====


====
North Korea ====


===
Africa ===


====
Egypt ====
In an extension of a bilateral dispute between Ethiopia and Egypt over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, Ethiopian government websites have been hacked by the Egypt-based hackers in June 2020.
===
Europe ===


====
Cyprus ====
The New York Times published an exposé revealing an extensive three-year phishing campaign aimed against diplomats based in Cyprus.
After accessing the state system the hackers had access to the European Union's entire exchange database.
By login into Coreu, hackers accessed communications linking all EU states, on both sensitive and not so sensitive matters.
The event exposed poor protection of routine exchanges among European Union officials and a coordinated effort from a foreign entity to spy on another country. "
After over a decade of experience countering Chinese cyberoperations and extensive technical analysis, there is no doubt this campaign is connected to the Chinese government", said Blake Darche, one of the Area 1 Security experts - the company revealing the stolen documents.
The Chinese Embassy in the US did not return calls for comment.
In 2019, another coordinated effort took place that allowed hackers to gain access to government (gov.cy) emails.
Cisco's Talos Security Department revealed that "Sea Turtle" hackers carried out a broad piracy campaign in the DNS countries, hitting 40 different organizations, including Cyprus.

====
Estonia ====
In April 2007, Estonia came under cyber attack in the wake of relocation of the Bronze Soldier of Tallinn.
The largest part of the attacks were coming from Russia and from official servers of the authorities of Russia.
In the attack, ministries, banks, and media were targeted.
This attack on Estonia, a seemingly small Baltic nation, was so effective because of how most of the nation is run online.
Estonia has implemented an e-government, where bank services, political elections and taxes are all done online.
This attack really hurt Estonia's economy and the people of Estonia.
At least 150 people were injured on the first day due to riots in the streets.

====
France ====
In 2013, the French Minister of Defense, Mr Jean-Yves Le Drian, ordered the creation of a cyberarmy, representing its 4th national army corp (along with ground, naval and air forces) under the French Ministry of Defense, to protect French and European interests on its soil and abroad.
A contract was made with French firm EADS (Airbus) to identify and secure its main elements susceptible to cyber threats.

In 2016 France had thus built the largest cyberarmy in Europe, with a planned 2600 "cyber-soldiers" and a 440 million euros investment for cybersecurity products for this new army corp.
An additional 4400 reservists constitute the heart of this army from 2019.

====
Germany ====
In 2013, Germany revealed the existence of their 60-person Computer Network Operation unit.
The German intelligence agency, BND, announced it was seeking to hire 130 "hackers" for a new "cyber defence station" unit.

In March 2013, BND president Gerhard Schindler announced that his agency had observed up to five attacks a day on government authorities, thought mainly to originate in China.

He confirmed the attackers had so far only accessed data and expressed concern that the stolen information could be used as the basis of future sabotage attacks against arms manufacturers, telecommunications companies and government and military agencies.
Shortly after Edward Snowden leaked details of the U.S. National Security Agency's cyber surveillance system, German Interior Minister Hans-Peter Friedrich announced that the BND would be given an additional budget of 100 million Euros to increase their cyber surveillance capability from 5% of total internet traffic in Germany to 20% of total traffic, the maximum amount allowed by German law.

====
Greece ====
Greek hackers from Anonymous Greece targeted Azerbaijani governmental websites during the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan.

====
Netherlands ====
In the Netherlands, Cyber Defense is nationally coordinated by the Nationaal Cyber Security Centrum (NCSC).
The Dutch Ministry of Defense laid out a cyber strategy in 2011.
The first focus is to improve the cyber defense handled by the Joint IT branch (JIVC).
To improve intel operations the intel community in the Netherlands (including the military intel organization MIVD) has set up the Joint Sigint Cyber Unit (JSCU).
The ministry of Defense is furthermore setting up an offensive cyber force, called Defensie Cyber Command (DCC), which will be operational in the end of 2014.

====
Norway ====


====
Russia ====
Russian, South Ossetian, Georgian and Azerbaijani sites were attacked by hackers during the 2008 South Ossetia War.
American-led cyberattacks against Russia
When Russia was still a part of the Soviet Union in 1982, a portion of its Trans-Siberia pipeline within its territory exploded, allegedly due to a Trojan Horse computer malware implanted in the pirated Canadian software by the Central Intelligence Agency.
The malware caused the SCADA system running the pipeline to malfunction.
The "Farewell Dossier" provided information on this attack, and wrote that compromised computer chips would become a part of Soviet military equipment
, flawed turbines would be placed in the gas pipeline, and defective plans would disrupt the output of chemical plants and a tractor factory.
This caused the "most monumental nonnuclear explosion and fire ever seen from space."
However, the Soviet Union did not blame the United States for the attack.
In June 2019, the New York Times reported that American hackers from the United States Cyber Command planted malware potentially capable of disrupting the Russian electrical grid.
Russian-led cyberattacks
It has been claimed that Russian security services organized a number of denial of service attacks as a part of their cyber-warfare against other countries, most notably the 2007 cyberattacks on Estonia and the 2008 cyberattacks on Russia, South Ossetia, Georgia, and Azerbaijan.
One identified young Russian hacker said that he was paid by Russian state security services to lead hacking attacks on NATO computers.
He was studying computer sciences at the Department of the Defense of Information.
His tuition was paid for by the FSB.

====
Sweden ====
In January 2017, Sweden's armed forces were subjected to a cyber-attack that caused them to shutdown a so-called Caxcis IT system used in military exercises.

====
Ukraine ====
According to CrowdStrike from 2014 to 2016, the Russian APT Fancy Bear used Android malware to target the Ukrainian Army's Rocket Forces and Artillery.
They distributed an infected version of an Android app whose original purpose was to control targeting data for the D-30 Howitzer artillery.
The app, used by Ukrainian officers, was loaded with the X-Agent spyware and posted online on military forums.
The attack was claimed by Crowd-Strike to be successful, with more than 80% of Ukrainian D-30 Howitzers destroyed, the highest percentage loss of any artillery pieces in the army (a percentage that had never been previously reported and would mean the loss of nearly the entire arsenal of the biggest artillery piece of the Ukrainian Armed Forces).
According to the Ukrainian army this number is incorrect and that losses in artillery weapons "were way below those reported" and that these losses "have nothing to do with the stated
cause".
In 2014, the Russians were suspected to use a cyber weapon called "Snake", or "Ouroboros," to conduct a cyber attack on Ukraine during a period of political turmoil.
The Snake tool kit began spreading into Ukrainian computer systems in 2010.
It performed Computer Network Exploitation (CNE), as well as highly sophisticated Computer Network Attacks (CNA).On 23 December 2015
the Black-Energy malware was used in a cyberattack on Ukraine's power-grid that left more than 200,000 people temporarily without power.
A mining company and a large railway operator were also victims of the attack.

====
United Kingdom ====
MI6 reportedly infiltrated an Al Qaeda website and replaced the instructions for making a pipe bomb with the recipe for making cupcakes.
In October 2010, Iain Lobban, the director of the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), said the UK faces a "real and credible" threat from cyber attacks by hostile states and criminals and government systems are targeted 1,000 times each month, such attacks threatened the UK's economic future, and some countries were already using cyber assaults to put pressure on other nations.
On 12 November 2013, financial organizations in London conducted cyber war games dubbed "Waking Shark 2" to simulate massive internet-based attacks against bank and other financial organizations.
The Waking Shark 2 cyber war games followed a similar exercise in Wall Street.
===
Middle East ===


====
Iran ====
Iran has been both victim and predator of several cyberwarfare operations.
Iran is considered an emerging military power in the field.
In September 2010, Iran was attacked by the Stuxnet worm, thought to specifically target its Natanz nuclear enrichment facility.
It was a 500-kilobyte computer worm that infected at least 14 industrial sites in Iran, including the Natanz uranium-enrichment plant.
Although the official authors of Stuxnet haven't been officially identified, Stuxnet is believed to be developed and deployed by the United States and Israel.
The worm is said to be the most advanced piece of malware ever discovered and significantly increases the profile of cyberwarfare.

====
Israel ====
In the 2006 war against Hezbollah, Israel alleges that cyber-warfare was part of the conflict, where the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) intelligence estimates several countries in the Middle East used Russian hackers and scientists to operate on their behalf.
As a result, Israel attached growing importance to cyber-tactics, and became, along with the U.S., France and a couple of other nations, involved in cyber-war planning.
Many international high-tech companies are now locating research and development operations in Israel, where local hires are often veterans of the IDF's elite computer units.
Richard A. Clarke adds that "our Israeli friends have learned a thing or two from the programs we have been working on for more than two decades.
"In September 2007
, Israel carried out an airstrike on Syria dubbed Operation Orchard.
U.S. industry and military sources speculated that the Israelis may have used cyberwarfare to allow their planes to pass undetected by radar into Syria.
Following US President Donald Trump's decision to pull out of the Iran nuclear deal in May 2018, cyber warfare units in the United States and Israel monitoring internet traffic out of Iran noted a surge in retaliatory cyber attacks from Iran.
Security firms warned that Iranian hackers were sending emails containing malware to diplomats who work in the foreign affairs offices of US allies and employees at telecommunications companies, trying to infiltrate their computer systems.

====
Saudi Arabia ====
On 15 August 2012 at 11:08 am local time, the Shamoon virus began destroying over 35,000 computer systems, rendering them inoperable.
The virus used to target the Saudi government by causing destruction to the state owned national oil company Saudi Aramco.
The attackers posted a pastie on PasteBin.com hours prior to the wiper logic bomb occurring, citing oppression and the Al-Saud regime as a reason behind the attack.

The attack was well staged according to Chris Kubecka, a former security advisor to Saudi Aramco after the attack and group leader of security for Aramco Overseas.
It was an unnamed Saudi Aramco employee on the Information Technology team which opened a malicious phishing email, allowing initial entry into the computer network around mid-2012.

Kubecka also detailed in her Black Hat USA talk
Saudi Aramco placed the majority of their security budget on the ICS control network, leaving the business network at risk for a major incident.
"
When you realize most of your security budget was spent on ICS & IT gets Pwnd".
The virus has been noted to have behavior differing from other malware attacks, due to the destructive nature and the cost of the attack and recovery.
US Defense Secretary Leon Panetta called the attack a "Cyber Pearl Harbor" Known years later as the "Biggest hack in history" and intended for cyber warfare.
Shamoon can spread from an infected machine to other computers on the network.
Once a system is infected, the virus continues to compile a list of files from specific locations on the system, upload them to the attacker, and erase them.
Finally the virus overwrites the master boot record of the infected computer, making it unusable.
The virus has been used for cyber warfare against the national oil companies Saudi Aramco and Qatar's RasGas.
Saudi Aramco announced the attack on their Facebook page and went offline again until a company statement was issued on 25 August 2012.
The statement falsely reported normal business was resumed on 25 August 2012.
However a Middle Eastern journalist leaked photographs taken on 1 September 2012 showing kilometers of petrol trucks unable to be loaded due to backed business systems still inoperable.

On 29 August 2012 the same attackers behind Shamoon posted another pastie on PasteBin.com, taunting Saudi Aramco with proof they still retained access to the company network.
The post contained the username and password on security and network equipment and the new password for the CEO Khalid
Al- Falih
The attackers also referenced a portion of the Shamoon malware as further proof in the pastie.

According to Kubecka, in order to restore operations.
Saudi Aramco used its large private fleet of aircraft and available funds to purchase much of the world's hard drives, driving the price up.
New hard drives were required as quickly as possible so oil prices were not affected by speculation.
By 1 September 2012 gasoline resources were dwindling for the public of Saudi Arabia 17 days after the 15 August attack.
RasGas was also affected by a different variant, crippling them in a similar manner.

====
Qatar ====
In March 2018
American Republican fundraiser Elliott Broidy filed a lawsuit against Qatar, alleging that Qatar's government stole and leaked his emails in order to discredit him because he was viewed "as an impediment to their plan to improve the country's standing in Washington.
"
In May 2018, the lawsuit named Mohammed bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, brother of the Emir of Qatar, and his associate Ahmed Al-Rumaihi, as allegedly orchestrating Qatar's cyber warfare campaign against Broidy.
Further litigation revealed that the same cybercriminals who targeted Broidy had targeted as many as 1,200 other individuals, some of whom are also "well-known enemies of Qatar" such as senior officials of the U.A.E., Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Bahrain.
While these hackers almost always obscured their location, some of their activity was traced to a telecommunication network in Qatar.

====
United Arab Emirates ====
The United Arab Emirates has launched several cyber-attacks in the past targeting dissidents.
Ahmed Mansoor, an Emirati citizen, was jailed for sharing his thoughts on Facebook and Twitter.
He was given the code name Egret under the state-led covert project called Raven, which spied on top political opponents, dissidents, and journalists.
Project Raven deployed a secret hacking tool called Karma, to spy without requiring the target to engage with any web links.

===
North America ===


====
United States ====
Cyberwarfare in the United States is a part of the American military strategy of proactive cyber defence and the use of cyberwarfare as a platform for attack.
The new United States military strategy makes explicit that a cyberattack is casus belli just as a traditional act of war.
In 2013 Cyberwarfare was, for the first time, considered a larger threat than Al Qaeda or terrorism, by many U.S. intelligence officials.
In 2017, Representative Mike Rogers, chairman of the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, for instance, said that
"We are in a cyber war in this country, and most Americans don't know it.
And we are not necessarily winning.
We have got huge challenges when it comes to cybersecurity.
"U.S.
government security expert Richard A. Clarke, in his book Cyber War (May 2010), defines "cyberwarfare" as "actions by a nation-state to penetrate another nation's computers or networks for the purposes of causing damage or disruption."
The Economist describes cyberspace as "the fifth domain of warfare," and William J. Lynn, U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense, states that "as a doctrinal matter, the Pentagon has formally recognized cyberspace as a new domain in warfare . . .
[
which] has become just as critical to military operations as land, sea, air, and space.
"In 2009
, president Barack Obama declared America's digital infrastructure to be a "strategic national asset," and in May 2010 the Pentagon set up its new U.S. Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM), headed by General Keith B. Alexander, director of the National Security Agency (NSA), to defend American military networks and attack other countries' systems.
The EU has set up ENISA (European Union Agency for Network and Information Security) which is headed by Prof. Udo Helmbrecht and there are now further plans to significantly expand ENISA's capabilities.
The United Kingdom has also set up a cyber-security and "operations centre" based in Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the British equivalent of the NSA.
In the U.S.
however, Cyber Command is only set up to protect the military, whereas the government and corporate infrastructures are primarily the responsibility respectively of the Department of Homeland Security and private companies.
In February 2010, top American lawmakers warned that the "threat of a crippling attack on telecommunications and computer networks was sharply on the rise."
According to The Lipman Report, numerous key sectors of the U.S. economy along with that of other nations, are currently at risk, including cyber threats to public and private facilities, banking and finance, transportation, manufacturing, medical, education and government, all of which are now dependent on computers for daily operations.
In 2009, president Obama stated that "cyber intruders have probed our electrical grids.
"The
Economist writes that China has plans of "winning informationised wars by the mid-21st century".
They note that other countries are likewise organizing for cyberwar, among them Russia, Israel and North Korea.
Iran boasts of having the world's second-largest cyber-army.
James Gosler, a government cybersecurity specialist, worries that the U.S. has a severe shortage of computer security specialists, estimating that there are only about 1,000 qualified people in the country today, but needs a force of 20,000 to 30,000 skilled experts.
At the July 2010 Black Hat computer security conference, Michael Hayden, former deputy director of national intelligence, challenged thousands of attendees to help devise ways to "reshape the Internet's security architecture", explaining, "You guys made the cyberworld look like the north German plain.
"In
January 2012, Mike McConnell, the former director of national intelligence at the National Security Agency under president George W. Bush told the Reuters news agency that the U.S. has already launched attacks on computer networks in other countries.
McConnell did not name the country that the U.S. attacked but according to other sources it may have been Iran.
In June 2012 the New York Times reported that president Obama had ordered the cyber attack on Iranian nuclear enrichment facilities.
In August 2010, the U.S. for the first time warned publicly about the Chinese military's use of civilian computer experts in clandestine cyber attacks aimed at American companies and government agencies.
The Pentagon also pointed to an alleged China-based computer spying network dubbed GhostNet that was revealed in a research report last year.
The Pentagon stated:

The People's Liberation Army is using "information warfare units" to develop viruses to attack enemy computer systems and networks, and those units include civilian computer professionals.
Commander Bob Mehal, will monitor the PLA's buildup of its cyberwarfare capabilities and will continue to develop capabilities to counter any potential threat.

The United States Department of Defense sees the use of computers and the Internet to conduct warfare in cyberspace as a threat to national security.
The United States Joint Forces Command describes some of its attributes:
Cyberspace technology is emerging as an "instrument of power" in societies, and is becoming more available to a country's opponents, who may use it to attack, degrade, and disrupt communications and the flow of information.
With low barriers to entry, coupled with the anonymous nature of activities in cyberspace, the list of potential adversaries is broad.

Furthermore, the globe-spanning range of cyberspace and its disregard for national borders will challenge legal systems and complicate a nation's ability to deter threats and respond to contingencies.

In February 2010, the United States Joint Forces Command released a study which included a summary of the threats posed by the internet:
With very little investment, and cloaked in a veil of anonymity, our adversaries will inevitably attempt to harm our national interests.
Cyberspace will become a main front in both irregular and traditional conflicts.
Enemies in cyberspace will include both states and non-states and will range from the unsophisticated amateur to highly trained professional hackers.
Through cyberspace, enemies will target industry, academia, government, as well as the military in the air, land, maritime, and space domains.
In much the same way that airpower transformed the battlefield of World War II, cyberspace has fractured the physical barriers that shield a nation from attacks on its commerce and communication.
Indeed, adversaries have already taken advantage of computer networks and the power of information technology not only to plan and execute savage acts of terrorism, but also to influence directly the perceptions and will of the U.S. Government and the American population.

On 6 October 2011, it was announced that Creech AFB's drone and Predator fleet's command and control data stream had been keylogged, resisting all attempts to reverse the exploit, for the past two weeks.
The Air Force issued a statement that the virus had "posed no threat to our operational mission".
On 21 November 2011, it was widely reported in the U.S. media that a hacker had destroyed a water pump at the Curran-Gardner Township Public Water District in Illinois.
However, it later turned out that this information was not only false, but had been inappropriately leaked from the Illinois Statewide Terrorism and Intelligence Center.
According to the Foreign Policy magazine, NSA's Tailored Access Operations (TAO) unit "has successfully penetrated Chinese computer and telecommunications systems for almost 15 years, generating some of the best and most reliable intelligence information about what is going on inside the People's Republic of China.
"On 24 November 2014.
The Sony Pictures Entertainment hack was a release of confidential data belonging to Sony Pictures Entertainment (SPE).

In June 2015, the United States Office of Personnel Management (OPM) announced that it had been the target of a data breach targeting the records of as many as four million people.
Later, FBI Director James Comey put the number at 18 million.
The Washington Post has reported that the attack originated in China, citing unnamed government officials.
In 2016, Jeh Johnson the United States Secretary of Homeland Security and James Clapper
the U.S. Director of National Intelligence issued a joint statement accusing Russia of interfering with the 2016 United States presidential election.
The New York Times reported the Obama administration has formally accused Russia of stealing and disclosing Democratic National Committee emails.
Under U.S. law (50 U.S.C.Title 50 – War and National Defense, Chapter 15 – National Security, Subchapter III Accountability for Intelligence Activities) there must be a formal Presidential finding prior to authorizing a covert attack.
Then U.S. vice president Joe Biden said on the American news interview program Meet The Press that the United States will respond.
The New York Times noted that Biden's comment "seems to suggest that Mr. Obama is prepared to order – or has already ordered – some kind of covert action".
On 29 December the United States imposed the most extensive sanctions against Russia since the Cold War, expelling 35 Russian diplomats from the United States.
The United States has used cyberattacks for tactical advantage in Afghanistan.
In 2014 Barack Obama ordered an intensification of cyberwarfare against North Korea's missile program for sabotaging test launches in their opening seconds.
In 2016 President Barack Obama authorized the planting of cyber weapons in Russian infrastructure in the final weeks of his presidency in response to Moscow's alleged interference in the 2016 presidential election.
In March 2017, WikiLeaks has published more than 8,000 documents on the CIA.
The confidential documents, codenamed Vault 7 and dated from 2013 to 2016, include details on CIA's software capabilities, such as the ability to compromise cars, smart TVs, web browsers (including Google Chrome, Microsoft Edge, Mozilla Firefox, and Opera Software ASA), and the operating systems of most smartphones (including Apple's iOS and Google's Android), as well as other operating systems such as Microsoft Windows, macOS, and Linux.
For a global perspective of countries and other actors engaged in cyber warfare, see the George Washington University-based National Security Archive's CyberWar map.
"Kill switch bill"On 19 June 2010
, United States Senator Joe Lieberman (I-CT) introduced a bill called "Protecting Cyberspace as a National Asset Act of 2010", which he co-wrote with Senator Susan Collins (R-ME) and Senator Thomas Carper (D-DE).
If signed into law, this controversial bill, which the American media dubbed the "Kill switch bill", would grant the president emergency powers over parts of the Internet.
However, all three co-authors of the bill issued a statement that instead, the bill "[narrowed] existing broad presidential authority to take over telecommunications networks".

==
Cyberpeace ==
The rise of cyber as a warfighting domain has led to efforts to determine how cyberspace can be used to foster peace.

For example, the German civil rights panel FIfF runs a campaign for cyberpeace − for the control of cyberweapons and surveillance technology and against the militarization of cyberspace and the development and stockpiling of offensive exploits and malware.
Measures for cyberpeace include policymakers developing new rules and norms for warfare, individuals and organizations building new tools and secure infrastructures, promoting open source, the establishment of cyber security centers, auditing of critical infrastructure cybersecurity, obligations to disclose vulnerabilities, disarmament, defensive security strategies, decentralization, education and widely applying relevant tools and infrastructures, encryption and other cyberdefenses.
The topics of cyber peacekeeping and cyber peacemaking have also been studied by researchers, as a way to restore and strengthen peace in the aftermath of both cyber and traditional warfare.

==
Cyber counterintelligence ==
Cyber counter-intelligence are measures to identify, penetrate, or neutralize foreign operations that use cyber means as the primary tradecraft methodology, as well as foreign intelligence service collection efforts that use traditional methods to gauge cyber capabilities and intentions.

On 7 April 2009, The Pentagon announced they spent more than $100 million in the last six months responding to and repairing damage from cyber attacks and other computer network problems.

On 1 April 2009, U.S. lawmakers pushed for the appointment of a White House cyber security "czar" to dramatically escalate U.S. defenses against cyber attacks, crafting proposals that would empower the government to set and enforce security standards for private industry for the first time.

On 9 February 2009, the White House announced that it will conduct a review of the nation's cyber security to ensure that the Federal government of the United States cyber security initiatives are appropriately integrated, resourced and coordinated with the United States Congress and the private sector.

In the wake of the 2007 cyberwar waged against Estonia, NATO established the Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCD CoE) in Tallinn, Estonia, in order to enhance the organization's cyber defence capability.
The center was formally established on 14 May 2008, and it received full accreditation by NATO and attained the status of International Military Organization on 28 October 2008.
Since Estonia has led international efforts to fight cybercrime, the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation says it will permanently base a computer crime expert in Estonia in 2009 to help fight international threats against computer systems.

In 2015, the Department of Defense released an updated cyber strategy memorandum detailing the present and future tactics deployed in the service of defense against cyberwarfare.

In this memorandum, three cybermissions are laid out.

The first cybermission seeks to arm and maintain existing capabilities in the area of cyberspace, the second cybermission focuses on prevention of cyberwarfare, and the third cybermission includes strategies for retaliation and preemption (as distinguished from prevention).One of the hardest issues in cyber counterintelligence
is the problem of attribution.
Unlike conventional warfare, figuring out who is behind an attack can be very difficult.
However Defense Secretary Leon Panetta has claimed that the United States has the capability to trace attacks back to their sources and hold the attackers "accountable".

==
Doubts about existence ==
In October 2011 the Journal of Strategic Studies, a leading journal in that field, published an article by Thomas Rid, "Cyber War Will Not Take Place" which argued that all politically motivated cyber attacks are merely sophisticated versions of sabotage, espionage, or subversion – and that it is unlikely that cyber war will occur in the future.

==
Legal perspective ==
Various parties have attempted to come up with international legal frameworks to clarify what is and is not acceptable, but none have yet been widely accepted.

The Tallinn Manual, published in 2013, is an academic, non-binding study on how international law, in particular the jus ad bellum and international humanitarian law, apply to cyber conflicts and cyber warfare.
It was written at the invitation of the Tallinn-based NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence by an international group of approximately twenty experts between 2009 and 2012.

The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (members of which include China and Russia) defines cyberwar to include dissemination of information "harmful to the spiritual, moral and cultural spheres of other states".
In September 2011, these countries proposed to the UN Secretary General a document called "International code of conduct for information
security".
In contrast, the United approach focuses on physical and economic damage and injury, putting political concerns under freedom of speech.
This difference of opinion has led to reluctance in the West to pursue global cyber arms control agreements.

However, American General Keith B. Alexander did endorse talks with Russia over a proposal to limit military attacks in cyberspace.
In June 2013, Barack Obama and Vladimir Putin agreed to install a secure Cyberwar-Hotline providing "a direct secure voice communications line between the US cybersecurity coordinator and the Russian deputy secretary of the security council, should there be a need to directly manage a crisis situation arising from an ICT security incident" (White House quote).A Ukrainian professor of International Law, Alexander Merezhko, has developed a project called the International Convention on Prohibition of Cyberwar in Internet.
According to this project, cyberwar is defined as the use of Internet and related technological means by one state against the political, economic, technological and information sovereignty and independence of another state.
Professor Merezhko's project suggests that the Internet ought to remain free from warfare tactics and be treated as an international landmark.
He states that the Internet (cyberspace) is a "common heritage of mankind".
On the February 2017 RSA Conference Microsoft president Brad Smith suggested global rules – a "Digital Geneva Convention" – for cyber attacks that "ban the nation-state hacking of all the civilian aspects of our economic and political infrastructures".
He also stated that an independent organization could investigate and publicly disclose evidence that attributes nation-state attacks to specific countries.
Furthermore, he said that the technology sector should collectively and neutrally work together to protect Internet users and pledge to remain neutral in conflict and not aid governments in offensive activity and to adopt a coordinated disclosure process for software and hardware vulnerabilities.
In contrast to a treaty, a fact-binding body has instead been proposed to regulate cyber operations.

==
In popular culture ==


===
In films ===
Independence Day (1996)
Terminator 3:
Rise of the Machines (2003)
Terminator Genisys (2015)
Terminator: Dark Fate (2019)Documentaries

Hacking the Infrastructure: Cyber Warfare (2016) by Viceland
Cyber War Threat (2015)
Darknet, Hacker, Cyberwar (2017)
Zero Days (2016)


===
In television ===
"Cancelled", an episode of the animated sitcom South Park


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andress, Jason.
Winterfeld, Steve.
(
2011).
Cyber Warfare:
Techniques, Tactics and Tools for Security Practitioners.
Syngress.

ISBN 1-59749-637-5
Bodmer, Kilger, Carpenter, & Jones (2012).
Reverse Deception: Organized Cyber Threat Counter-Exploitation.
New York:
McGraw-Hill Osborne Media.
ISBN 0071772499, "ISBN 978
-0071772495"
Brenner, S. (2009).
Cyber Threats: The Emerging Fault Lines of the Nation State.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN
0-19-538501-2
Carr, Jeffrey.
(
2010).
Inside Cyber Warfare: Mapping the Cyber Underworld.
O'Reilly.
ISBN
978-0-596-80215-8
Conti, Gregory.
Raymond, David.
(
2017).
On Cyber
: Towards an Operational Art for Cyber Conflict.
Kopidion Press.
ISBN 978-0692911563
Cordesman, Anthony H.; Cordesman, Justin G. (2002).
Cyber-threats, Information Warfare, and Critical Infrastructure Protection:
Defending the U.S. Homeland.
Greenwood Publishing Group.
ISBN 978-0-275-97423-7.

Costigan, Sean S.; Perry, Jake (2012).
Cyberspaces and global affairs.
Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate.
ISBN 9781409427544.

Fritsch, Lothar & Fischer-Hübner, Simone (2019).
Implications of Privacy &amp; Security Research for the Upcoming Battlefield of Things.
Journal of Information Warfare, 17(4), 72–87.

Gaycken, Sandro.
(
2012).
Cyberwar –
Das Wettrüsten hat längst begonnen.
Goldmann/Randomhouse.
ISBN
978-3442157105
Geers, Kenneth.
(
2011).
Strategic Cyber Security.
NATO Cyber Centre.
Strategic Cyber Security, ISBN 978-9949-9040-7-5, 169 pages
Halpern, Sue, "The Drums of Cyberwar" (review of Andy Greenberg, Sandworm:
A New Era of Cyberwar and the Hunt for the Kremlin's Most Dangerous Hackers, Doubleday, 2019, 348 pp.)
,
The New York Review of Books, vol.
LXVI, no.
20 (19 December 2019), pp.
14, 16, 20.

Shane Harris (2014).
@War:
The Rise of the Military-Internet Complex.
Eamon Dolan/Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
ISBN 978-0544251793.

Hunt, Edward (2012).
"
US Government Computer Penetration Programs and the Implications for Cyberwar".
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing.
34 (3): 4–21.
doi:10.1109/mahc.2011.82.
S2CID 16367311.

Janczewski, Lech; Colarik, Andrew M. (2007).
Cyber Warfare and Cyber Terrorism.
Idea Group Inc (IGI).
ISBN 978-1-59140-992-2.

Rid, Thomas (2012).
"
Cyber War Will Not Take Place".
Journal of Strategic Studies.
35: 5–32.
doi:10.1080/01402390.2011.608939.
S2CID 153828543.

Woltag, Johann-Christoph: 'Cyber Warfare' in Rüdiger Wolfrum (Ed.)
Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law (Oxford University Press 2012).

==
External links ==
 Media related to Cyberwarfare at Wikimedia Commons
The Information Age at Wikibooks
NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre of Excellence (CCDCOE)
Cyberwar Twitter feed from Richard Stiennon
Cyberwar News community by Reza RafatiVideos
"Sabotaging the System" video, "60 Minutes", 8 November 2009, CBS News, 15 minutesArticles
ABC:
Former White House security advisor warns of cyber war
Wall Street Journal:
Fighting Wars in Cyberspace
Will There Be An Electronic Pearl Harbor, PC World by Ira Winkler, 1 December 2009
Senate panel: 80 percent of cyberattacks preventable, Wired, 17 November 2009
Duncan Gardham, 26 June 2009, Hackers recruited to fight 'new cold war', Telegraph UK
Stefano Mele, Jan 2016, Cyber Strategy & Policy Brief (Volume 01 – January 2016)
Stefano Mele, Jun 2013, Cyber-Weapons: Legal and Strategic Aspects (version 2.0)
Stefano Mele, Sep 2010, Cyberwarfare and its damaging effects on citizens
Cybersecurity:
Authoritative Reports and Resources, US Congressional Research Service
Why the USA is Losing The Cyberwar Against China, by Joseph Steinberg, VentureBeat, 9 November 2011
Michael Riley and Ashlee Vance, 20 July 2011,
Cyber Weapons: The New Arms Race
The Digital Arms Race:
NSA Preps America for Future Battle, Der Spiegel, January 2015
Neptune (Ukrainian: «
Нептун») is a Ukrainian cruise anti-ship missile developed by Luch Design Bureau which has maximum firing range of 280 km.

Expected to be mounted on three platforms: ship, land and air launchers.
The missile is in service in the Ukrainian Navy since March 2021.The missiles are designed to be located in transport and launch containers (TLC) with dimensions of 5,300 × 600 × 600 mm.
The length of the missile itself with an accelerator of 5,050 mm.
TLC with a rocket with a cross-shaped hard wing can be placed on terrestrial, marine or air carriers.

The system is designed to defeat combat surface ships and transport vessels from the structure of shock groups (convoy) or moving individually with a displacement of up to 5,000 tons.

The missile is based on a design of the Soviet anti-ship missile Kh-35
, however Ukrainian constructors substantially improved missile range and electronics.
==
History ==
The missile was revealed for the first time in the exhibition "Weapons and Security 2015" which held in Kyiv.
According to information from open sources, the first flight samples of the cruise missile were manufactured in the spring of 2016.
Production of advanced missile weapons takes place in cooperation with other Ukrainian enterprises, including Artem Luch GAhK, Kharkiv State Aviation Plant, «Motor Sich» (turbofan MS-400 engine), Pivdenne YuMZ PivdenMash, Lviv LORTA or other radar electronics, Vyshneve ZhMZ Vizar Kiev and others.
March 22, 2016, the first tests of the Neptune missile were conducted.
The tests were attended by secretary of NSDC of Ukraine Oleksandr Turchynov.
In mid-2017, missiles were tested concurrently with trials of the Vilkha complex.
However, unlike the Vilkha, the test results and capabilities of the "Neptune" rocket were not advertised.
On January 30, 2018, according to the press service of NSDC, the first flight tests of the Ukrainian ground-based cruise missile, which is capable of accurately hitting ground and naval targets, were successful.
On August 17, 2018, the missile successfully hit a target at the range of 100 km during test fire in the southern part of Odesa oblast.
6 April 2019, the missile was successfully tested again and hit target during tests near Odesa, according to President Petro Poroshenko's statement, it would be provided to the Ukrainian military in December 2019.Maximum range is about 300 km.
After the United States and the Russian Federation both left the INF Treaty, Ukraine announced that it was considering developing intermediate-range cruise missiles.
Analysts consider an extended-range Neptune missile to be a candidate for such an effort.
A Memorandum was signed with the Republic of Indonesia on concluding a contract for the supply of a complex of anti-ship cruise missiles RK-360MC "Neptune" manufactured by KB
"Luch".
Thus, Indonesia may become the first foreign buyer of "Neptune" , according to Defense Express with reference to the Ukrainian special exporter State Enterprise (SE)
"Progress".

In March 2021, the Ukrainian Navy obtained the first units of the RK-360MC Neptune.

==
Gallery ==

		
		
		
		


==
See also ==
Atmaca
RK-55
Babur
Kh-35
Hrim-2
Korshun – (RK-55 derivative)
Exocet
RBS-15
Harpoon


==
References ==


== Video ==
О. Турчинов:
Наші ракети здатні
забезпечити надійну оборону
Чорноморського та
Азовського узбережжя


==
External links ==
Дослідна протикорабельна ракета «Нептун» (Україна.
2016 рік)
"The anti-ship missile "Neptune" has undergone part of the test in 2017 year".
uprom.info.
National Industrial Portal.
2018-01-25.
Retrieved 2018-01-26.

Illia Ponomarenko (2018-02-02). "
New Neptune cruise missiles to enter full production within 3 years, expert says".
Kyiv Post.
Retrieved 2018-02-05.

Illia Ponomarenko (2018-01-30). "
Ukraine tests new cruise missile".
Kyiv Post.
Retrieved 2018-02-05.
This article is a list of shotguns.
Shotguns have traditionally fired iron, stone or lead shot stored in large shells that are normally loaded.

== See also ==
Assault shotgun
Automatic shotgun
Combat shotgun
List of bullpup firearms
List of combat shotguns
List of multiple barrel firearms
List of revolvers
List of semi-automatic shotguns
Riot shotgun
Semi-automatic shotgun
List of rifles


==
References ==
Military tactics encompasses the art of organizing and employing fighting forces on or near the battlefield.
They involve the application of four battlefield functions which are closely related – kinetic or firepower, mobility, protection or security, and shock action.
Tactics are a separate function from command and control and logistics.
In contemporary military science, tactics are the lowest of three levels of warfighting, the higher levels being the strategic and operational levels.
Throughout history, there has been a shifting balance between the four tactical functions, generally based on the application of military technology, which has led to one or more of the tactical functions being dominant for a period of time, usually accompanied by the dominance of an associated fighting arm deployed on the battlefield, such as infantry, artillery, cavalry or tanks.

==
Tactical functions ==


===
Kinetic or firepower ===
Beginning with the use of melee and missile weapons such as clubs and spears, the kinetic or firepower function of tactics has developed along with technological advances so that the emphasis has shifted over time from the close-range melee and missile weapons to longer-range projectile weapons.
Kinetic effects were generally delivered by the sword, spear, javelin and bow until the introduction of artillery by the Romans.
Until the mid 19th century, the value of infantry-delivered missile firepower was not high, meaning that the result of a given battle was rarely decided by infantry firepower alone, often relying on artillery to deliver significant kinetic effects.
The development of disciplined volley fire, delivered at close range, began to improve the hitting power of infantry, and compensated in part for the limited range, poor accuracy and low rate of fire of early muskets.
Advances in technology, particularly the introduction of the rifled musket, used in the Crimean War and American Civil War, meant flatter trajectories and improved accuracy at greater ranges, along with higher casualties.
The resulting increase in defensive firepower meant infantry attacks without artillery support became increasingly difficult.
Firepower also became crucial to fixing an enemy in place to allow a decisive strike.
Machine guns added significantly to infantry firepower at the turn of the 20th century, and the mobile firepower provided by tanks, self-propelled artillery and military aircraft rose significantly in the century that followed.
Along with infantry weapons, tanks and other armoured vehicles, self-propelled artillery, guided weapons and aircraft provide the firepower of modern armies.

===
Mobility ===
Mobility, which determines how quickly a fighting force can move, was for most of human history limited by the speed of a soldier on foot, even when supplies were carried by beasts of burden.
With this restriction, most armies could not travel more than 32 kilometres (20 mi) per day, unless travelling on rivers.
Only small elements of a force such as cavalry or specially trained light troops could exceed this limit.
This restriction on tactical mobility remained until the latter years of World War I when the advent of the tank improved mobility sufficiently to allow decisive tactical manoeuvre.
Despite this advance, full tactical mobility was not achieved until World War II when armoured and motorised formations achieved remarkable successes.
However, large elements of the armies of World War II remained reliant on horse-drawn transport, which limited tactical mobility within the overall force.
Tactical mobility can be limited by the use of field obstacles, often created by military engineers.

===
Protection and security ===
Personal armour has been worn since the classical period to provide a measure of individual protection, which was also extended to include barding of the mount.
The limitations of armour have always been weight and bulk, and its consequent effects on mobility as well as human and animal endurance.
By the 18th and 19th centuries, personal armour had been largely discarded, until the re-introduction of helmets during World War I in response to the firepower of artillery.
Armoured fighting vehicles proliferated during World War II, and after that war, body armour returned for the infantry, particularly in Western armies.
Fortifications, which have been used since ancient times, provide collective protection, and modern examples include entrenchments, roadblocks, barbed wire and minefields.
Like obstacles, fortifications are often created by military engineers.

===
Shock action ===
Shock action is as much a psychological function of tactics as a physical one, and can be significantly enhanced by the use of surprise.
It has been provided by charging infantry, and well as by chariots, war elephants, cavalry and armoured vehicles which provide momentum to an assault.
It has also been used in a defensive way, for example by the drenching flights of arrows from English longbowmen at the Battle of Agincourt in 1415 which caused the horses of the French knights to panic.
During early modern warfare, the use of the tactical formations of columns and lines had a greater effect than the firepower of the formations alone.
During the early stages of World War II, the combined effects of German machine gun and tank gun firepower, enhanced by accurate indirect fire and air attack, often broke up Allied units before their assault commenced, or caused them to falter due to casualties among key unit leaders.
In both the early modern and World War II examples, the cumulative psychological shock effect on the enemy was often greater than the actual casualties incurred.

==
Development over time ==
The development of tactics has involved a shifting balance between the four tactical functions since ancient times, and changes in firepower and mobility have been fundamental to these changes.
Various models have been proposed to explain the interaction between the tactical functions and the dominance of individual fighting arms during different periods.
J. F. C. Fuller proposed three "tactical cycles" in each of the classical and Christian eras.
For the latter epoch, he proposed a "shock" cycle between 650 and 1450, a "shock and projectile" cycle 1450–1850, and a "projectile" cycle from 1850, with respect to the Western and North American warfare.
During World War II, Tom Wintringham proposed six chronological periods, which alternate the dominance between unarmoured and armoured forces and highlight tactical trends in each period.

Massed volley fire by archers brought infantry firepower to the fore in Japanese warfare in the second half of the 13th century, preceding the rise of the English longbowman.
The mobility and shock action of the Oirat Mongol army at the Battle of Tumu in 1449 demonstrated that cavalry could still defeat a large infantry force.
In both the European and Oriental traditions of warfare, the advent of gunpowder during the late Medieval and Early Modern periods created a relentless shift to infantry firepower becoming "a decisive, if not dominant" arm on the battlefield, exemplified by the significant impact of massed arquebusiers at the Battle of Nagashino in 1575.

==
Combined arms tactics ==
The synchronisation of the various fighting arms to achieve the tactical mission is known as combined arms tactics.
One method of measuring tactical effectiveness is the extent to which the arms, including military aviation, are integrated on the battlefield.
A key principle of effective combined arms tactics is that for maximum potential to be achieved, all elements of combined arms teams need the same level of mobility, and sufficient firepower and protection.
The history of the development of combined arms tactics has been dogged by costly and painful lessons.
For example, while German commanders in World War II clearly understood from the outset the key principle of combined arms tactics outlined above, British commanders were late to this realisation.
Successful combined arms tactics require the fighting arms to train alongside each other and to be familiar with each other's capabilities.

==
Impact of air power ==
Beginning in the latter stages of World War I, airpower has brought a significant change to military tactics.
World War II saw the development of close air support which greatly enhanced the effect of ground forces with the use of aerial firepower and improved tactical reconnaissance and the interdiction of hostile air power.
It also made possible the supply of ground forces by air, achieved by the British during the Burma Campaign but unsuccessful for the Germans at the Battle of Stalingrad.
Following World War II, rotary-wing aircraft had a significant impact on firepower and mobility, comprising a fighting arm in its own right in many armies.
Aircraft, particularly those operating at low or medium altitudes, remain vulnerable to ground-based air defence systems as well as other aircraft.
Parachute and glider operations and rotary-wing aircraft have provided significant mobility to ground forces but the reduced mobility, protection and firepower of troops delivered by air once landed has limited the tactical utility of such vertical envelopment or air assault operations.
This was demonstrated during Operation Market Garden in September 1944, and during the Vietnam War, in the latter case despite the additional firepower provided by helicopter gunships and the ability quickly to remove casualties, provided by aeromedical evacuation.

==
Concept ==
Military tactics answer the questions of how best to deploy and employ forces on a small scale.
Some practices have not changed since the dawn of warfare: assault, ambushes, skirmishing, turning flanks, reconnaissance, creating and using obstacles and defenses, etc.
Using ground to best advantage has not changed much either.
Heights, rivers, swamps, passes, choke points, and natural cover, can all be used in multiple ways.
Before the nineteenth century, many military tactics were confined to battlefield concerns: how to maneuver units during combat in open terrain.
Nowadays, specialized tactics exist for many situations, for example for securing a room in a building.

Technological changes can render existing tactics obsolete, and sociological changes can shift the goals and methods of warfare, requiring new tactics.
Tactics define how soldiers are armed and trained.

Thus technology and society influence the development of types of soldiers or warriors through history:
Greek Hoplite, Roman Legionary, Medieval Knight, Turk-Mongol Horse Archer, Chinese Crossbowman, or an Air Cavalry trooper.
Each – constrained by his weaponry, logistics and social conditioning – would use a battlefield differently, but would usually seek the same outcomes from their use of tactics.
The First World War forced great changes in tactics as advances in technology rendered prior tactics useless.
"Gray-zone" tactics are also becoming more widely used.
These include “everything from strong-arm diplomacy and economic coercion, to media manipulation and cyberattacks, to use of paramilitaries and proxy forces.”
The title "gray-zone" comes from to the ambiguity between defense vs. offense, as well as the ambiguity between peace-keeping vs. war effort.

== See also ==
List of military tactics
Combat arms


=
= References ==


===
Notes ===


===
Bibliography ===
Haskew, Michael; Jorgensen, Christer; McNab, Chris; Niderost, Eric; Rice, Rob S. (2008).
Fighting Techniques of the Oriental World 1200-1860: Equipment, Combat Skills and Tactics.
London, United Kingdom: Amber Books.
ISBN 978-1-905704-96-5.

Holmes, Richard; Strachan, Hew; Bellamy, Chris; Bicheno, Hugh (2001).
The Oxford Companion to Military History.
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-866209-9.

Johnson, Rob, Michael Whitby, John France (2010).
How to win on the battlefield : 25 key tactics to outwit, outflank, and outfight the enemy.
Thames & Hudson.
ISBN
978-0-500-25161-4.CS1 maint:
multiple names: authors list (link)
Muhm, Gerhard. "
German Tactics in the Italian Campaign".
Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.
Retrieved 27 September 2007.

Gerhard Muhm :
La Tattica nella campagna ass d’Italia, in LINEA GOTICA AVAMPOSTO DEI BALCANI, (Hrsg.)
Amedeo Montemaggi - Edizioni Civitas, Roma 1993.

==
External links ==
Contemporary Marine tactics for war fighting
Napoleon's tactics and strategy
Small Unit Actions during German Campaign in Russia
The People's Liberation Army (PLA, Chinese: 中国人民解放军) is the regular armed forces of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the armed wing of the PRC's founding and ruling political party, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
Besides the Central Military Commission (CMC) and several minor units directly under it, the PLA has five major service branches: the Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, Rocket Force, and the Strategic Support Force.
A majority of military units around the country are assigned to one of five theater commands by geographical location.
The PLA is the world's largest military force and constitutes the second largest defense budget in the world.
It is also one of the fastest modernizing militaries in the world, and has been termed as a potential military superpower, with significant regional defense and rising global power projection capabilities.
Per Credit Suisse in 2015, the PLA is the world's third-most powerful military.
PRC law explicitly affirms the leadership of the party over the armed forces of the People's Republic and designates the CMC (Central Military Commission) as the nationwide military command of the People's Republic of China.
The Party CMC operates under the name of the State CMC for legal and governmental functions and as the ceremonial Ministry of National Defense for diplomatic functions.
The PLA is obliged to follow the principle of the Communist Party's absolute civilian control of the military under the doctrine of "the party commands the gun" (Dǎng zhǐhuī qiāng-党指挥枪)-taken from a speech given by Mao Zedong during an emergency meeting of top party leadership on the 7th of August 1927 at the beginning of the Chinese civil war.
Its commander-in-chief is the Chairman of the Central Military Commission (customarily also the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party).
Since 1949, China has used nine different military strategies, which the PLA calls "strategic guidelines".

The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993.
In times of national emergency, the People's Armed Police and the China Militia act as a reserve and support element for the People's Liberation Army Ground Force.

== Mission ==
Former paramount leader Hu Jintao stated the missions of the PLA as:
The insurance the leadership of the party
The protection of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, internal security and national development of the People's Republic of China
Safeguarding the country's interests
And the maintenance and safeguarding of world peace


==
History ==


===
Second Sino-Japanese War ===
The People's Liberation Army was founded on 1 August 1927 during the Nanchang uprising when troops of the Kuomintang (KMT) rebelled under the leadership of Zhu De,
He Long, Ye Jianying and Zhou Enlai after the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by Chiang Kai-shek.
They were then known as the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army, or simply the Red Army.
Between 1934 and 1935, the Red Army survived several campaigns led against it by Chiang Kai-Shek and engaged in the Long March.

During the Second Sino-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945, the Communist military forces were nominally integrated into the National Revolutionary Army of the Republic of China forming two main units known as the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army.
During this time, these two military groups primarily employed guerrilla tactics, generally avoiding large-scale battles with the Japanese with some exceptions while at the same time consolidating their ground by absorbing nationalist troops and paramilitary forces behind Japanese lines into their forces.
After the Japanese surrendered in 1945, the Communist Party merged the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army, renaming the new million-strong force the "People's Liberation Army".
They eventually won the Chinese Civil War, establishing the People's Republic of China in 1949.
The PLA then saw a huge reorganisation with the establishment of the Air Force leadership structure in November 1949 followed by the Navy leadership the following April.
In 1950, the leadership structures of the artillery, armoured troops, air defence troops, public security forces, and worker–soldier militias were also established.
The chemical warfare defence forces, the railroad forces, the communications forces, and the strategic forces, as well as other separate forces (like engineering and construction, logistics and medical services), were established later on, all these depended on the leadership of the Communist Party and the National People's Congress via the Central Military Commission (and until 1975 the National Defense Council).
=== 1950s, 1960s and 1970s ===
During the 1950s, the PLA with Soviet assistance began to transform itself from a peasant army into a modern one.
Since 1949, China has used nine different military strategies, which the PLA calls "strategic guidelines".

The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993.
Part of this process was the reorganisation that created thirteen military regions in 1955.
The PLA also contained many former National Revolutionary Army units and generals who had defected to the PLA.
Ma Hongbin and his son Ma Dunjing were the only two Muslim generals who led a Muslim unit, the 81st corps, to ever serve in the PLA.
Han Youwen, a Salar Muslim general, also defected to the PLA.
In November 1950, some units of the PLA under the name of the People's Volunteer Army intervened in the Korean War as United Nations forces under General Douglas MacArthur approached the Yalu River.
Under the weight of this offensive, Chinese forces drove MacArthur's forces out of North Korea and captured Seoul, but were subsequently pushed back south of Pyongyang north of the 38th Parallel.
The war also served as a catalyst for the rapid modernization of the PLAAF.
In 1962, the PLA ground force also fought India in the Sino-Indian War, achieving all objectives.

Prior to the Cultural Revolution, military region commanders tended to remain in their posts for long periods of time.
As the PLA took a stronger role in politics, this began to be seen as somewhat of a threat to the party's (or, at least, civilian) control of the military.
The longest-serving military region commanders were Xu Shiyou in the Nanjing Military Region (1954–74), Yang Dezhi in the Jinan Military Region (1958–74), Chen Xilian in the Shenyang Military Region (1959–73), and Han Xianchu in the Fuzhou Military Region (1960–74).
The establishment of a professional military force equipped with modern weapons and doctrine was the last of the Four Modernizations announced by Zhou Enlai and supported by Deng Xiaoping.
In keeping with Deng's mandate to reform, the PLA has demobilized millions of men and women since 1978 and has introduced modern methods in such areas as recruitment and manpower, strategy, and education and training.
In 1979, the PLA fought Vietnam over a border skirmish in the Sino-Vietnamese War where both sides claimed victory.

During the Sino-Soviet split, strained relations between China and the Soviet Union resulted in bloody border clashes and mutual backing of each other's adversaries.
China and Afghanistan had neutral relations with each other during the King's rule.
When the pro-Soviet Afghan Communists seized power in Afghanistan in 1978, relations between China and the Afghan communists quickly turned hostile.
The Afghan pro-Soviet communists supported China's enemies in Vietnam and blamed China for supporting Afghan anti-communist militants.
China responded to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan by supporting the Afghan mujahideen and ramping up their military presence near Afghanistan in Xinjiang.
China acquired military equipment from the United States to defend itself from Soviet attack.
The People's Liberation Army Ground Force trained and supported the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan War, moving its training camps for the mujahideen from Pakistan into China itself.
Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of anti-aircraft missiles, rocket launchers, and machine guns were given to the Mujahidin by the Chinese.
Chinese military advisors and army troops were also present with the Mujahidin during training.

===
Since 1980 ===
In 1981, the PLA conducted its largest military exercise in North China since the founding of the People's Republic.
In the 1980s, China shrunk its military considerably to free up resources for economic development, resulting in the relative decline in resources devoted to the PLA.
Following the PLA's suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, ideological correctness was temporarily revived as the dominant theme in Chinese military affairs.
Reform and modernisation have today resumed their position as the PLA's primary objectives, although the armed forces' political loyalty to the CCP has remained a leading concern.
Another area of concern to the political leadership was the PLA's involvement in civilian economic activities.
These activities were thought to have impacted PLA readiness and has led the political leadership to attempt to divest the PLA from its non-military business interests.

Beginning in the 1980s, the PLA tried to transform itself from a land-based power centred on a vast ground force to a smaller, more mobile, high-tech one capable of mounting operations beyond its borders.
The motivation for this was that a massive land invasion by Russia was no longer seen as a major threat, and the new threats to China are seen to be a declaration of independence by Taiwan, possibly with assistance from the United States, or a confrontation over the Spratly Islands.
In 1985, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the CMC, the PLA changed from being constantly prepared to "hit early, strike hard and to fight a nuclear war" to developing the military in an era of peace.
The PLA reoriented itself to modernization, improving its fighting ability, and to become a world-class force.
Deng Xiaoping stressed that the PLA needed to focus more on quality rather than on quantity.
The decision of the Chinese government in 1985 to reduce the size of the military by one million was completed by 1987.
Staffing in military leadership was cut by about 50 percent.
During the Ninth Five Year Plan (1996–2000) the PLA was reduced by a further 500,000.
The PLA had also been expected to be reduced by another 200,000 by 2005.
The PLA has focused on increasing mechanisation and informatization so as to be able to fight a high-intensity war.

Former CMC chairman Jiang Zemin in 1990 called on the military to "meet political standards,
be militarily competent, have a good working style, adhere strictly to discipline, and provide vigorous logistic support"
(Chinese: 政治合格、军事过硬、作风优良、纪律严明、保障有力
; pinyin:
zhèngzhì hégé,
jūnshì guòyìng, zuòfēng yōuliáng, jìlǜ yánmíng, bǎozhàng yǒulì).
The 1991 Gulf War provided the Chinese leadership with a stark realisation that the PLA was an oversized, almost-obsolete force.
The possibility of a militarised Japan has also been a continuous concern to the Chinese leadership since the late 1990s.
In addition, China's military leadership has been reacting to and learning from the successes and failures of the American military during the Kosovo War, the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and the Iraqi insurgency.
All these lessons inspired China to transform the PLA from a military based on quantity to one based on quality.
Chairman Jiang Zemin officially made a "Revolution in Military Affairs" (RMA) part of the official national military strategy in 1993 to modernise the Chinese armed forces.
A goal of the RMA is to transform the PLA into a force capable of winning what it calls "local wars under high-tech conditions" rather than a massive, numbers-dominated ground-type war.
Chinese military planners call for short decisive campaigns, limited in both their geographic scope and their political goals.
In contrast to the past, more attention is given to reconnaissance, mobility, and deep reach.
This new vision has shifted resources towards the navy and air force.
The PLA is also actively preparing for space warfare and cyber-warfare.

For the past 10 to 20 years, the PLA has acquired some advanced weapons systems from Russia, including Sovremenny class destroyers, Sukhoi Su-27 and Sukhoi Su-30 aircraft, and Kilo-class diesel-electric submarines.
It has also started to produce several new classes of destroyers and frigates including the Type 052D class guided missile destroyer.
In addition, the PLAAF has designed its very own Chengdu J-10 fighter aircraft and a new stealth fighter, the Chengdu J-20.
The PLA launched the new Jin class nuclear submarines on 3 December 2004 capable of launching nuclear warheads that could strike targets across the Pacific Ocean and have two aircraft carriers, one commissioned in 2012 and a second launched in 2017.

In 2015, the PLA formed new units including the PLA Ground Force, the PLA Rocket Force and the PLA Strategic Support Force.
The PLA on 1 August 2017 marked the 90th anniversary since its establishment, before the big anniversary it mounted its biggest parade yet and the first outside of Beijing, held in the Zhurihe Training Base in the Northern Theater Command (within the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region), the first time it had ever been done to mark PLA Day as past parades had already been on 1 October, National Day of the PRC.

===
Peacekeeping Operations ===
The People's Republic of China has sent the PLA to various hotspots as part of China's role as a prominent member of the United Nations.
Such units usually include engineers and logistical units and members of the paramilitary People's Armed Police and have been deployed as part of peacekeeping operations in Lebanon, the Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Ivory Coast, Haiti, and more recently, Mali and South Sudan.

===
Notable Campaigns ===
1927–1950:
Chinese Civil War
1937–1945:
Second Sino-Japanese War
1949
: Yangtze incident against British warships on the Yangtze river.

1949:
Incorporation of Xinjiang into the People's Republic of China
1950: Incorporation of Tibet into the People's Republic of China
1950–1953:
Korean War under the banner of the Chinese People's Volunteer Army.

1954–1955: First Taiwan Strait Crisis.

1955–1970: Vietnam War.

1958:
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis at Quemoy and Matsu.

1962: Sino-Indian War.
1967:
Border skirmishes with India.

1969: Sino-Soviet border conflict.

1974:
Battle of the Paracel Islands with South Vietnam.

1979: Sino-Vietnamese War.

1979–1990: Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979–1990.

1988:
Johnson South Reef Skirmish with Vietnam.

1989:
Enforcement of martial law in Beijing during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.

1990:
Baren Township riot.

1995–1996
: Third Taiwan Strait Crisis.

1997: PLA Control of Hong Kong's Military Defense
1999: PLA Control of Macau's Military Defense
2007–present:
UNIFIL peacekeeping operations in Lebanon
2009–present
: Anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden
2014: Search and rescue efforts for Flight MH370
2014: UN Peacekeeping operations in Mali
2015: UNMISS peacekeeping operations in South Sudan


== Organization ==


===
National Military Command ===
The state military system upholds the principle of the CCP's absolute leadership over the armed forces.
The party and the State jointly established the CMC that carries out the task of supreme military leadership over the armed forces.
The 1954 Constitution stated that the State President directs the armed forces and made the State President the chairman of the Defense Commission.
The Defense Commission is an advisory body and does not hold any actual power over the armed forces.
On 28 September 1954, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party re-established the CMC as the commanding organ of the PLA.
From that time onward, the current system of a joint system of party and state leadership of the military was established.
The Central Committee of the Communist Party leads in all military affairs.
The State President directs the state military forces and the development of the military forces which is managed by the State Council.

To ensure the absolute leadership of the Communist Party over the armed forces, every level of party committee in the military forces implements the principles of democratic centralism.
In addition, division-level and higher units establish political commissars and political organisations, ensuring that the branch organisations are in line.
These systems combined the party organisation with the military organisation to achieve the party's leadership and administrative leadership.
This is seen as the key guarantee to the absolute leadership of the party over the military.

In October 2014 the People's Liberation Army Daily reminded readers of the Gutian Congress, which stipulated the basic principle of the Party controlling the military, and called for vigilance as "[f]oreign hostile forces preach the nationalization and de-politicization of the military, attempting to muddle our minds and drag our military out from under the Party's flag."
===
Leadership ===
The leadership by the CCP is a fundamental principle of the Chinese military command system.
The PLA reports not to the State Council but rather to two Central Military Commissions, one belonging to the state and one belonging to the party.

In practice, the two central military commissions usually do not contradict each other because their membership is usually identical.
Often, the only difference in membership between the two occurs for a few months every five years, during the period between a party congress, when Party CMC membership changes, and the next ensuing National People's Congress, when the state CMC changes.
The CMC carries out its responsibilities as authorised by the Constitution and National Defense Law.
The leadership of each type of military force is under the leadership and management of the corresponding part of the Central Military Commission of the CCP Central Committee.
Forces under each military branch or force such as the subordinate forces, academies and schools, scientific research and engineering institutions and logistical support organisations are also under the leadership of the CMC.
This arrangement has been especially useful as China over the past several decades has moved increasingly towards military organisations composed of forces from more than one military branch.
In September 1982, to meet the needs of modernisation and to improve co-ordination in the command of forces including multiple service branches and to strengthen unified command of the military, the CMC ordered the abolition of the leadership organisation of the various military branches.
Today, the PLA has air force, navy and second artillery leadership organs.

In 1986, the People's Armed Forces Department, except in some border regions, was placed under the joint leadership of the PLA and the local authorities.
Although the local party organisations paid close attention to the People's Armed Forces Department, as a result of some practical problems, the CMC decided that from 1 April 1996, the People's Armed Forces Department would once again fall under the jurisdiction of the PLA.

According to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the CMC is composed of the following: the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Members.
The Chairman of the Central Military Commission has overall responsibility for the commission.

The Central Military Commission of the Chinese Communist Party and the Central Military Commission of the People's Republic of China
Chairman
Xi Jinping (also
General Secretary, President and Commander-in-chief of Joint Battle
Command)Vice Chairmen
Air Force General Xu Qiliang
General Zhang YouxiaMembers
Minister of National Defense – General Wei Fenghe
Chief of the Joint staff – General Li Zuocheng
Director of the Political Work Department – Admiral Miao Hua
Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection –
General Zhang Shengmin


===
Central Military Commission ===
In December 1982, the fifth National People's Congress revised the state constitution to state that the State Central Military Commission leads all the armed forces of the state.
The chairman of the State CMC is chosen and removed by the full NPC while the other members are chosen by the NPC standing committee.
However, the CMC of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party remained the party organisation that directly commands the military and all the other armed forces.

In actual practice, the party CMC, after consultation with the democratic parties, proposes the names of the State CMC members of the NPC so that these people after going through the legal processes can be elected by the NPC to the State Central Military Commission.
That is to say, that the CMC of the Central Committee and the CMC of the State are one group and one organisation.
However, looking at it organizationally, these two CMCs are subordinate to two different systems – the party system and the state system.
Therefore, the armed forces are under the absolute leadership of the Communist Party and are also the armed forces of the state.
This is a unique joint leadership system that reflects the origin of the PLA as the military branch of the Communist Party.
It only became the national military when the People's Republic of China was established in 1949.

By convention, the chairman and vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission are civilian members of the Chinese Communist Party, but they are not necessarily the heads of the civilian government.
Both Jiang Zemin and Deng Xiaoping retained the office of chairman even after relinquishing their other positions.
All of the other members of the CMC are uniformed active military officials.
Unlike other nations, the Minister of National Defense is not the head of the military, but is usually a vice-chairman of the CMC.

In 2012, to attempt to reduce corruption at the highest rungs of the leadership of the Chinese military, the commission banned the service of alcohol at military receptions.

===
2016
Military Reforms ===
On 1 January 2016, the CMC released a guideline on deepening national defense and military reform, about a month after CMC Chairman Xi Jinping called for an overhaul of the military administration and command system at a key meeting setting the stage for one of the most sweeping military reforms since the founding of the country.

On 11 January 2016 in one of the most sweeping military reforms since the founding of the People's Republic the PLA was restructured and a joint staff department directly attached to the CMC, the highest leadership organization in the military was created.
The previous four general headquarters of the PLA were disbanded and completely reformed.
They were divided into  15 functional departments instead — a significant expansion from the domain of the General Office, which is now a single department within the Central Military Commission .

General Office (办公厅)
Joint Staff Department (联合参谋部)
Political Work Department (政治工作部)
Logistic Support Department (后勤保障部)
Equipment Development Department (装备发展部)
Training and Administration Department (训练管理部)
National Defense Mobilization Department (国防动员部)
Discipline Inspection Commission (纪律检查委员会)
Politics and Legal Affairs Commission (政法委员会)
Science and Technology Commission (科学技术委员会)
Office for Strategic Planning (战略规划办公室)
Office for Reform and Organizational Structure (改革和编制办公室)
Office for International Military Cooperation (国际军事合作办公室)
Audit Office (审计署)
Agency for Offices Administration
(机关事务管理总局)Included among the 15 departments are three commissions.
The CMC Discipline Inspection Commission is charged with rooting out corruption.

===
Theater Commands ===
Until 2016, China's territory was divided into seven military regions, but they were reorganized into five theater commands in early 2016.
This reflects a change in their concept of operations from primarily ground-oriented to mobile and coordinated movement of all services.
The five new theatre commands are:

Eastern Theater Command
Western Theater Command
Northern Theater Command
Southern Theater Command
Central Theater CommandThe PLA garrisons in Hong Kong and Macau both come under the Southern Theater Command.

The military reforms have also introduced a major change in the areas of responsibilities.
Rather than separately commanding their own troops, service branches are now primarily responsible for administrative tasks (like equipping and maintaining the troops).
It is the theater commands now that have the command authority.
This should, in theory, facilitate the implementation of joint operations across all service branches.
Coordination with civilian national security groups such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is achieved primarily by the leading groups of the Chinese Communist Party.
Particularly important are the leading groups on foreign affairs, which include those dealing with Taiwan.

==
Service Branches ==
The PLA encompasses five main service branches: the Ground Force, the Navy, the Air Force, the Rocket Force, and the Strategic Support Force.
Following the 200,000 troop reduction announced in 2003, the total strength of the PLA has been reduced from 2.5 million to just under 2.3 million.
Further reforms will see an additional 300,000 personnel reduction from its current strength of 2.28 million personnel.
The reductions will come mainly from non-combat ground forces, which will allow more funds to be diverted to naval, air, and strategic missile forces.

This shows China's shift from ground force prioritisation to emphasising air and naval power with high-tech equipment for offensive roles over disputed coastal territories.
In recent years, the PLA has paid close attention to the performance of US forces in Afghanistan and Iraq.
As well as learning from the success of the US military in network-centric warfare, joint operations, C4ISR, and hi-tech weaponry, the PLA is also studying unconventional tactics that could be used to exploit the vulnerabilities of a more technologically advanced enemy.
This has been reflected in the two parallel guidelines for the PLA ground forces development.
While speeding up the process of introducing new technology into the force and retiring the older equipment, the PLA has also placed an emphasis on asymmetric warfare, including exploring new methods of using existing equipment to defeat a technologically superior enemy.

In addition to the four main service branches, the PLA is supported by two paramilitary organisations: the People's Armed Police (including the China Coast Guard) and the Militia (including the maritime militia).
===
Ground Force (PLAGF) ===
The PLA is estimated to have a ground force composing of 975,000 personnel, approximately half of the PLA's total manpower of around 2 million.
The ground forces are divided among the five theatre commands as named above.
In times of crisis, the ground Force is reinforced by numerous reserve and paramilitary units.
The PLAGF reserve component is composed of 510,000 personnel divided into 30 infantry and 12 anti-aircraft artillery (AAA) divisions.
In recent years two amphibious mechanised divisions were also established in Nanjing and Guangzhou military regions.
At least 40 percent of PLA divisions and brigades are now mechanised or armoured, twice the percentage before 2015.

While much of the PLA Ground Force was being reduced over the past few years, technology-intensive elements such as special operations forces (SOF), army aviation, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), and electronic warfare units have all experienced rapid expansion.
The latest operational doctrine of the PLA ground forces highlights the importance of information technology, electronic and information warfare, and long-range precision strikes in future warfare.
The older generation telephone/radio-based command, control, and communications (C3) systems are being replaced by an integrated battlefield information networks featuring local/wide-area networks (LAN/WAN), satellite communications, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based surveillance and reconnaissance systems, and mobile command and control centres.
On 1 January 2016, as part of military reforms, China created for the first time a separate headquarters for the ground forces.
China's ground forces have never had their own headquarters until now.
Previously, the People's Liberation Army's Four General Departments served as the de facto army headquarters, functioning together as the equivalent of a joint staff, to which the navy, air force and the newly renamed Rocket Force would report.
The Commander of the PLA Ground Force is Han Weiguo.
The Political Commissar is Liu Lei.

===
Navy (PLAN) ===
Until the early 1990s, the navy performed a subordinate role to the PLA Land Forces.
Since then it has undergone rapid modernisation.
The 250,000 strong People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) is organised into three major fleets: the North Sea Fleet headquartered at Qingdao, the East Sea Fleet headquartered at Ningbo, and the South Sea Fleet headquartered in Zhanjiang.
Each fleet consists of a number of surface ship, submarine, naval air force, coastal defence, and marine units.
The navy includes a 25,000 strong Marine Corps (organised into seven brigades), a 26,000 strong Naval Aviation Force operating several hundred attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft.
As part of its overall programme of naval modernisation, the PLAN is in the stage of developing a blue water navy.
In November 2012, then Party General Secretary Hu Jintao reported to the Chinese Communist Party 18th National Congress
his desire to "enhance our capacity for exploiting marine resource and build China into a strong maritime power".
===
Air Force (PLAAF) ===
The 395,000 strong People's Liberation Army Air Force is organised into five Theater Command Air Forces (TCAF) and 24 air divisions.
The largest operational units within the Aviation Corps is the air division, which has 2 to 3 aviation regiments, each with 20 to 36 aircraft.
The surface-to-air missile (SAM) Corps is organised into SAM divisions and brigades.
There are also three airborne divisions manned by the PLAAF.
J-XX and XXJ are names applied by Western intelligence agencies to describe programs by the People's Republic of China to develop one or more fifth-generation fighter aircraft.

===
Rocket Force (PLARF) ===
The People's Liberation Army Rocket Force (PLARF) is the main strategic missile force of the PLA and consists of at least 120,000 personnel.
It controls China's nuclear and conventional strategic missiles.
China's total nuclear arsenal size is estimated to be between 100 and 400 thermonuclear warheads.

===
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF) ===
Founded on 31 December 2015 as part of the first wave of reforms of the PLA, the People's Liberation Army Strategic Support Force was established as the newest and latest branch of the PLA.
Personnel numbers are estimated at 175,000.
Initial announcements regarding the Strategic Support Force did not provide much detail, but Yang Yujun of the Chinese Ministry of Defense described it as an integration of all current combat support forces including but limited to: space, cyber, electronic and intelligence branches.
Additionally, commentators have speculated that the new service branch will include high-tech operations forces such as space, cyberspace and electronic warfare operations units, independent of other branches of the military.
Yin Zhuo, rear admiral of the People's Liberation Army Navy and member of the eleventh Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) said that "the major mission of the PLA Strategic Support Force is the provision of support to the combat operations so that the PLA can gain regional advantages in the aerospace, space, network and electromagnetic space warfare and ensure integrated operations in the conduction of US joint warfare style operations."
==
Conscription and terms of service ==
Technically, military service with the PLA is obligatory for all Chinese citizens.
In practice, mandatory military service has not been implemented since 1949 as the People's Liberation Army has been able to recruit sufficient numbers voluntarily.
All 18-year-old males have to register themselves with the government authorities, in a way similar to the Selective Service System of the United States.
In practice, registering does not mean that the person doing so must join the People's Liberation Army.
Article 55 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China prescribes conscription by stating: "It is a sacred duty of every citizen of the People's Republic of China to defend his or her motherland and resist invasion.
It is an honoured obligation of the citizens of the People's Republic of China to perform military service and to join the militia forces.
"
The 1984 Military Service Law spells out the legal basis of conscription, describing military service as a duty for "all citizens without distinction of race... and religious creed".
This law has not been amended since it came into effect.
Technically, those 18–22 years of age enter selective compulsory military service, with a 24-month service obligation.
In reality, numbers of registering personals are enough to support all military posts in China, creating "volunteer
conscription".
Residents of the Special administrative regions, Hong Kong and Macau, are exempted from joining the military.

==
Military Intelligence ==


===
Joint Staff Department ===
The Joint Staff Department carries out staff and operational functions for the PLA and had major responsibility for implementing military modernisation plans.
Headed by chief of general staff, the department serves as the headquarters for the entire PLA and contained directorates for the five armed services: Ground Forces, Air Force, Navy, Rocket Forces and Support Forces.
The Joint Staff Department included functionally organised subdepartments for operations, training, intelligence, mobilisation, surveying, communications and politics, the departments for artillery, armoured units, quartermaster units and joint forces engineering units were later dissolved, with the former two forming now part of the Ground Forces, the engineering formations now split amongst the service branches and the quartermaster formations today form part of the Joint Logistics Forces.

Navy Headquarters controls the North Sea Fleet, East Sea Fleet, and South Sea Fleet.
Air Force Headquarters generally exercised control through the commanders of the five theater commands.
Nuclear forces were directly subordinate to the Joint Staff Department through the Rocket Forces commander and political commissar.
Conventional main, regional, and militia units were controlled administratively by the theater commanders, but the Joint Staff Department in Beijing could assume direct operational control of any main-force unit at will.
Thus, broadly speaking, the Joint Staff Department exercises operational control of the main forces, and
the theater commanders controlled as always the regional forces and, indirectly, the militia.
The post of principal intelligence official in the top leadership of the Chinese military has been taken up by a number of people of several generations, from Li Kenong in the 1950s to Xiong Guangkai in the late 1990s; and their public capacity has always been assistant to the deputy chief of staff or assistant to the chief of staff.

Ever since the CCP officially established the system of "theater commands" for its army in the 2010s as a successor to the "major military regions" policy of the 1950s,
the intelligence agencies inside the Army have, after going through several major evolutions, developed into the present three major military intelligence setups:
The central level is composed of the Second and Third Departments under the Joint Staff Headquarters and the Liaison Department under the Political Work Department.

At the Theater Command level intelligence activities consist of the Second Bureau established at the same level as the Operation Department under the headquarters, and the Liaison Department established under the Political Work Department.

The third system includes a number of communications stations directly established in the garrison areas of all the theater commands by the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters.
The Second Bureau under the headquarters and the Liaison Department under the Political Work Departments of the theater commands are only subjected to the "professional leadership" of their "counterpart" units under the Central Military Commission and are still considered the direct subordinate units of the major military region organizationally.
Those entities whose names include the word "institute", all research institutes under the charge of the Second and the Third Departments of the Joint Staff Headquarters, including other research organs inside the Army, are at least of the establishment size of the full regimental level.
Among the deputy commanders of a major Theater command in China, there is always one who is assigned to take charge of intelligence work, and the intelligence agencies under his charge are directly affiliated to the headquarters and the political department of the corresponding theater command.

The Conference on Strengthening Intelligence Work held from 3 September 1996 – 18 September 1996 at the Xishan Command Center of the Ministry of State Security and the General Staff Department.
Chi Haotian delivered a report entitled "Strengthen Intelligence Work in a New International Environment To Serve the Cause of Socialist Construction."
The report emphasised the need to strengthen the following four aspects of intelligence work:

Efforts must be made to strengthen understanding of the special nature and role of intelligence work, as well as understanding of the close relationship between strengthening intelligence work on the one hand, and of the Four Modernizations of the motherland, the reunification of the motherland, and opposition to hegemony and power politics on the other.

The United States and the West have all along been engaged in infiltration, intervention, sabotage, and intelligence gathering against China on the political, economic, military, and ideological fronts.
The response must strengthen the struggle against their infiltration, intervention, sabotage, and intelligence gathering.

Consolidating intelligence departments and training a new generation of intelligence personnel who are politically reliable, honest and upright in their ways, and capable of mastering professional skills, the art of struggle, and advanced technologies.

Strengthening the work of organising intelligence in two international industrial, commercial, and financial ports—Hong Kong and Macau.
Although the four aspects emphasised by Chi Haotian appeared to be defensive measures, they were in fact both defensive and offensive in nature.

====
Second Department ====
The Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters is responsible for collecting military intelligence.
Activities include military attachés at Chinese embassies abroad, clandestine special agents sent to foreign countries to collect military information, and the analysis of information publicly published in foreign countries.
This section of the PLA Joint Staff Headquarters act in similar capacity to its civilian counterpart the Ministry of State Security.

The Second Department oversees military human intelligence (HUMINT) collection, widely exploits
open source (OSINT) materials, fuses HUMINT, signals intelligence (SIGINT), and imagery intelligence data, and disseminates finished intelligence products to the CMC and other consumers.
Preliminary fusion is carried out by the Second Department's Analysis Bureau which mans the National Watch Center, the focal point for national-level indications and warning.
In-depth analysis is carried out by regional bureaus.
Although traditionally the Second Department of the Joint Staff Department was responsible for military intelligence, it is beginning to increasingly focus on scientific and technological intelligence in the military field, following the example of Russian agencies in stepping up the work of collecting scientific and technological information.

The research institute under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters is publicly known as the Institute for International Strategic Studies; its internal classified publication "Foreign Military Trends" ("外军动态", Wai Jun Dongtai) is published every 10 days and transmitted to units at the division level.

The PLA Institute of International Relations at Nanjing comes under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Department and is responsible for training military attachés, assistant military attachés and associate military attachés as well as secret agents to be posted abroad.
It also supplies officers to the military intelligence sections of various military regions and group armies.
The institute was formed from the PLA "793" Foreign Language Institute, which moved from Zhangjiakou after the Cultural Revolution and split into two institutions at Luoyang and Nanjing.

The Institute of International Relations was known in the 1950s as the School for Foreign Language Cadres of the Central Military Commission, with the current name being used since 1964.
The training of intelligence personnel is one of several activities at the institute.
While all graduates of the Moscow Institute of International Relations were employed by the KGB, only some graduates of the Beijing Institute of International Relations are employed by the Ministry of State Security.
The former Institute of International Relations, since been renamed the Foreign Affairs College, is under the administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and is not involved in secret intelligence work.
The former Central Military Commission foreign language school had foreign faculty members who were either Communist Party sympathizers or were members of foreign communist parties.
But the present Institute of International Relations does not hire foreign teachers, to avoid the danger that its students might be recognised when sent abroad as clandestine agents.

Those engaged in professional work in military academies under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters usually have a chance to go abroad, either for advanced studies or as military officers working in the military attaché's office of Chinese embassies in foreign countries.
People working in the military attaché's office of embassies are usually engaged in collecting military information under the cover of "military diplomacy".
As long as they refrain from directly subversive activities, they are considered as well-behaved "military diplomats".

Some bureaus under the Second Department which are responsible for espionage in different regions, of which the First Bureau is responsible for collecting information in the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau, and also in Taiwan.
Agents are dispatched by the Second Department to companies and other local corporations to gain cover.

The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group assigned to Hong Kong and Macau in the mid-1980s mostly operated in the mass media, political, industrial, commercial, and religious circles, as well as in universities and colleges.
The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group was mainly responsible for the following three tasks:
Finding out and keeping abreast of the political leanings of officials of the Hong Kong and Macau governments, as well as their views on major issues, through social contact with them and through information provided by them.

Keeping abreast of the developments of foreign governments' political organs in Hong Kong, as well as of foreign financial, industrial, and commercial organisations.

Finding out and having a good grasp of the local media's sources of information on political, military, economic, and other developments on the mainland, and deliberately releasing false political or military information to the media to test the outside response.
The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group was awarded a Citation for Merit, Second Class, in December 1994.
It was further awarded another Citation for Merit, Second Class, in 1997.
Its current status is not publicly known.
During the 2008 Chinese New Year celebration CCTV held for Chinese diplomatic establishments, the head of the Second Department of the Joint Headquarters was revealed for the first time to the public: the current head was Major General Yang Hui (杨晖).

====
Third Department ====
The Third Department of the Joint Staff Department is responsible for monitoring the telecommunications of foreign armies and producing finished intelligence based on the military information collected.

The communications stations established by the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters are not subject to the jurisdiction of the provincial military district and the major theater command of where they are based.
The communications stations are entirely the agencies of the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters which have no affiliations to the provincial military district and the military region of where they are based.
The personnel composition, budgets, and establishment of these communications stations are entirely under the jurisdiction of the Third Department of the General PLA General Staff Headquarters, and are not related at all with local troops.

China maintains the most extensive SIGINT network of all the countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
As of the late 1990s, SIGINT systems included several dozen ground stations, half a dozen ships, truck-mounted systems, and airborne systems.
Third Department headquarters is in the vicinity of the GSD First Department (Operations Department), AMS, and NDU complex in the hills northwest of the Summer Palace.
As of the late 1990s, the Third Department was allegedly manned by approximately 20,000 personnel, with most of their linguists trained at the Luoyang Institute of Foreign Languages.

Ever since the 1950s, the Second and Third Departments of the Joint Staff Headquarters have established a number of institutions of secondary and higher learning for bringing up "special talents.
"
The PLA Foreign Language Institute at Luoyang comes under the Third Department of the Joint Staff Department and is responsible for training foreign language officers for the monitoring of foreign military intelligence.
The institute was formed from the PLA "793" Foreign Language Institute, which moved from Zhangjiakou after the Cultural Revolution and split into two institutions at Luoyang and Nanjing.

Though the distribution order they received upon graduation indicated the "Joint Staff Headquarters", many of the graduates of these schools found themselves being sent to all parts of the country, including remote and uninhabited backward mountain areas.
The reason is that the monitoring and control stations under the Third Department of the PLA General Staff Headquarters are scattered in every corner of the country.

The communications stations located in the Shenzhen base of the PLA Hong Kong Garrison started their work long ago.
In normal times, these two communications stations report directly to the Central Military Commission and the Joint Staff Headquarters.
Units responsible for co-ordination are the communications stations established in the garrison provinces of the military regions by the Third Department of the PLA General Staff Headquarters.

By taking direct command of military communications stations based in all parts of the country, the CCP Central Military Commission and the Joint Staff Headquarters can not only ensure a successful interception of enemy radio communications, but can also make sure that none of the wire or wireless communications and contacts among major military regions can escape the detection of these communications stations, thus effectively attaining the goal of imposing a direct supervision and control over all the theater commands, all provincial military districts, and all group armies.

=====
Monitoring stations =====
China's main SIGINT effort is in the Third Department of the Joint Staff Department of the Central Military Commission, with additional capabilities, primarily domestic, in the Ministry of State Security (MSS).
SIGINT stations, therefore, are scattered through the country, for domestic as well as international interception.
Prof. Desmond Ball, of the Australian National University, described the largest stations as the main Technical Department SIGINT net control station on the northwest outskirts of Beijing, and the large complex near Lake Kinghathu in the extreme northeast corner of China.

As opposed to other major powers, China focuses its SIGINT activities on its region rather than the world.
Ball wrote, in the eighties, that China had several dozen SIGINT stations aimed at the Soviet Union, Japan, Taiwan, Southeast Asia and India, as well as internally.
Of the stations apparently targeting Russia, there are sites at Jilemutu and Jixi in the northeast, and at Erlian and Hami near the Mongolian border.
Two Russian-facing sites in Xinjiang, at Qitai and Korla may be operated jointly with resources from the US CIA's Office of SIGINT Operations, probably focused on missile and space activity.
Other stations aimed at South and Southeast Asia are on a net controlled by Chengdu, Sichuan.
There is a large facility at Dayi, and, according to Ball, "numerous" small posts along the Indian border.
Other significant facilities are located near Shenyang, near Jinan and in Nanjing and Shanghai.
Additional stations are in the Fujian and Guangdong military districts opposite Taiwan.

On Hainan Island, near Vietnam, there is a naval SIGINT facility that monitors the South China sea, and a ground station targeting US and Russian satellites.
China also has ship and aircraft platforms in this area, under the South Sea Fleet headquarters at Zhanjiang immediately north of the island.
Targeting here seems to have an ELINT as well as COMINT flavor.
There are also truck-mounted mobile ground systems, as well as ship, aircraft, and limited satellite capability.
There are at least 10 intelligence-gathering auxiliary vessels.

As of the late nineties, the Chinese did not appear to be trying to monitor the United States Pacific Command to the same extent as does Russia.
In future, this had depended, in part, on the status of Taiwan.

====
Fourth Department ====
The Fourth Department (ECM and Radar) of the Joint Staff Headquarters Department has the electronic intelligence (ELINT) portfolio within the PLA's SIGINT apparatus.
This department is responsible for electronic countermeasures, requiring them to collect and maintain data bases on electronic signals.
25 ELINT receivers are the responsibility of the Southwest Institute of Electronic Equipment (SWIEE).
Among the wide range of SWIEE ELINT products is a new KZ900 airborne ELINT pod.
The GSD 54th Research Institute supports the ECM Department in development of digital ELINT signal processors to analyse parameters of radar pulses.

===
Special forces ===
China's special ground force is called PLASF (People's Liberation Army Special Operations Forces).
Typical units include consist of highly trained soldiers, a team commander, assistant commander, sniper, spotter, machine-gun support, bomber, and a pair of assault groups.
China's counter terrorism unit members are drawn from the public security apparatus rather than the military.
The name of such units change frequently.
As of 2020, it is known as the Immediate Action Unit (IAU).China has reportedly developed a force capable of carrying out long-range airborne operations, long-range reconnaissance, and amphibious operations.
Formed in China's Guangzhou military region and known by the nickname "South Blade", the force supposedly receives army, air force, and naval training, including flight training, and is equipped with "hundreds of high-tech devices", including global-positioning satellite systems.
All force members officers are military staff college graduates, and 60 percent are said to have university degrees.
Soldiers are reported to be cross-trained in various specialties, and training encompassing a wide range of operating environments.
It is far from clear whether this unit is considered operational by the Chinese.
It is also not clear how such a force would be employed.
Among the missions stated missions include: "responding to contingencies in various regions" and "cooperating with other services in attacks on islands".
According to the limited reporting, the organisation appears to be in a phase of testing and development and may constitute an experimental unit.
While no size for the force has been revealed, there have been Chinese media claims that "over 4,000 soldiers of the force are all-weather and versatile fighters and parachutists who can fly airplanes and drive terrain vehicles and amphibious boats".
===
Other branches ===
The Third Department and the Navy co-operate on shipborne intelligence collection platforms.

PLAAF Sixth Research Institute:
Air Force SIGINT collection is managed by the PLAAF Sixth Research Institute in Beijing.

== Weapons and equipment ==
According to the United States Defense Department, China is developing kinetic-energy weapons, high-powered lasers, high-powered microwave weapons, particle-beam weapons, and electromagnetic pulse weapons with its increase of military fundings.
The PLA has said of reports that its modernisation is dependent on sales of advanced technology from American allies, senior leadership have stated "Some have politicized China's normal commercial cooperation with foreign countries, damaging our reputation.
"
These contributions include advanced European diesel engines for Chinese warships, military helicopter designs from Eurocopter, French anti-submarine sonars and helicopters, Australian technology for the Houbei class missile boat, and Israeli supplied American missile, laser and aircraft technology.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute's data, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–14, an increase of 143 percent from the period 2005–2009.
SIPRI also calculated that China surpassed Russia to become the world's second largest arms exporter by 2020.
China's share of global arms exports hence increased from 3 to 5 percent.
China supplied major arms to 35 states in 2010–14.
A significant percentage (just over 68 percent) of Chinese exports went to three countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh and Myanmar.
China also exported major arms to 18 African states.
Examples of China's increasing global presence as an arms supplier in 2010–14 included deals with Venezuela for armoured vehicles and transport and trainer aircraft, with Algeria for three frigates, with Indonesia for the supply of hundreds of anti-ship missiles and with Nigeria for the supply of a number of unmanned combat aerial vehicles.
Following rapid advances in its arms industry, China has become less dependent on arms imports, which decreased by 42 percent between 2005–2009 and 2010–14.
Russia accounted for 61 percent of Chinese arms imports, followed by France with 16 percent and Ukraine with 13 per cent.
Helicopters formed a major part of Russian and French deliveries, with the French designs produced under licence in China.
Over the years, China has struggled to design and produce effective engines for combat and transport vehicles.
It continued to import large numbers of engines from Russia and Ukraine in 2010–14 for indigenously designed combat, advanced trainer and transport aircraft, and for naval ships.
It also produced British-, French- and German-designed engines for combat aircraft, naval ships and armoured vehicles, mostly as part of agreements that have been in place for decades.

===
Cyberwarfare ===
There is a belief in the Western military doctrines that the PLA have already begun engaging countries using cyber-warfare.
There has been a significant increase in the number of presumed Chinese military initiated cyber events from 1999 to the present day.
Cyberwarfare has gained recognition as a valuable technique because it is an asymmetric technique that is a part of Chinese Information Operations.

As is written by two PLAGF Colonels, Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui in the book 'Unrestricted Warfare', "Methods that are not characterised by the use of the force of arms, nor by the use of military power, nor even by the presence of casualties and bloodshed, are just as likely to facilitate the successful realisation of the war's goals, if not more so.
While China has long been suspected of cyber spying, on 24 May 2011 the PLA announced the existence of having 'cyber capabilities'.
In February 2013, the media named "Comment Crew" as a hacker military faction for China's People's Liberation Army.
In May 2014, a Federal Grand Jury in the United States indicted five Unit 61398 officers on criminal charges related to cyber attacks on private companies based in the United States after alleged investigations by the FBI who exposed their identities in collaboration with US intelligence agencies such as the CIA.In February 2020, the United States government indicted members of China's People's Liberation Army for the 2017 Equifax data breach, which involved hacking into Equifax and plundering sensitive data as part of a massive heist that also included stealing trade secrets, though the Chinese Communist Party denied these claims.
===
Nuclear capabilities ===
In 1955, China decided to proceed with a nuclear weapons program.
The decision was made after the United States threatened the use of nuclear weapons against China
should it take action against Quemoy and Matsu, coupled with the lack of interest of the Soviet Union for using its nuclear weapons in defence of China.

After their first nuclear test (China claims minimal Soviet assistance before 1960) on 16 October 1964, China was the first state to pledge no-first-use of nuclear weapons.
On 1 July 1966, the Second Artillery Corps, as named by Premier Zhou Enlai, was formed.
In 1967, China tested a fully functional hydrogen bomb, only 32 months after China had made its first fission device.
China thus produced the shortest fission-to-fusion development known in history.

China became a major international arms exporter during the 1980s.
Beijing joined the Middle East arms control talks, which began in July 1991 to establish global guidelines for conventional arms transfers, and later announced that it would no longer participate because of the US decision to sell 150 F-16A/B aircraft to Taiwan on 2 September 1992.

It joined the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1984 and pledged to abstain from further atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons in 1986.
China acceded to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1992 and supported its indefinite and unconditional extension in 1995.
Nuclear weapons tests by China ceased in 1996, when it signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and agreed to seek an international ban on the production of fissile nuclear weapons material.

In 1996, China committed to provide assistance to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
China attended the May 1997 meeting of the NPT Exporters (Zangger) Committee as an observer and became a full member in October 1997.
The Zangger Committee is a group which meets to list items that should be subject to IAEA inspections if exported by countries, which have, as China has, signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
In September 1997, China issued detailed nuclear export control regulations.
China began implementing regulations establishing controls over nuclear-related dual-use items in 1998.
China also has decided not to engage in new nuclear co-operation with Iran (even under safeguards), and will complete existing co-operation, which is not of proliferation concern, within a relatively short period.
Based on significant, tangible progress with China on nuclear nonproliferation, President Clinton in 1998 took steps to bring into force the 1985 US–China Agreement on Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation.

Beijing has deployed a modest ballistic missile force, including land and sea-based intermediate-range and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
It was estimated in 2007 that China has about 100–160 liquid fuelled ICBMs capable of striking the United States with approximately 100–150 IRBMs able to strike Russia or Eastern Europe, as well as several hundred tactical SRBMs with ranges between 300 and 600 km.

Currently, the Chinese nuclear stockpile is estimated to be between 50 and 75 land and sea based ICBMs.
China's nuclear program follows a doctrine of minimal deterrence, which involves having the minimum force needed to deter an aggressor from launching a first strike.
The current efforts of China appear to be aimed at maintaining a survivable nuclear force by, for example, using solid-fuelled ICBMs in silos rather than liquid-fuelled missiles.
China's 2006 published deterrence policy states that they will "uphold the principles of counterattack in self-defense and limited development of nuclear weapons", but "has never entered, and will never enter into a nuclear arms race with any country".
It goes on to describe that China will never undertake a first strike, or use nuclear weapons against a non-nuclear state or zone.
US strategists, however, suggest that the Chinese position may be ambiguous, and nuclear weapons may be used both to deter conventional strikes/invasions on the Chinese mainland, or as an international political tool – limiting the extent to which other nations can coerce China politically, an inherent, often inadvertent phenomenon in international relations as regards any state with nuclear capabilities.

===
Space ===
The PLA has deployed a number of space-based systems for military purposes, including the imagery intelligence satellite systems like the ZiYan series, and the militarily designated JianBing series, synthetic aperture satellites (SAR) such as JianBing-5, BeiDou satellite navigation network, and secured communication satellites with FENGHUO-1.The PLA is responsible for the Chinese space program.
To date, all the participants have been selected from members of the PLA Air Force.
China became the third country in the world to have sent a man into space by its own means with the flight of Yang Liwei aboard the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft on 15 October 2003 and the flight of Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng aboard Shenzhou 6 on 12 October 2005 and Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng aboard Shenzhou 7 on 25 September 2008.

The PLA started the development of an anti-ballistic and anti-satellite system in the 1960s, code named Project 640, including ground-based lasers and anti-satellite missiles.
On 11 January 2007, China conducted a successful test of an anti-satellite missile, with an SC-19 class KKV.
Its anti ballistic missile test was also successful.

The PLA has tested two types of hypersonic space vehicles, the Shenglong Spaceplane and a new one built by Chengdu Aircraft Corporation.
Only a few pictures have appeared since it was revealed in late 2007.
Earlier, images of the High-enthalpy Shock Waves Laboratory wind tunnel of the CAS Key Laboratory of high-temperature gas dynamics (LHD) were published in the Chinese media.
Tests with speeds up to Mach 20 were reached around 2001.

==
Budget and Expenditure ==
Military spending for the People's Liberation Army has grown about 10 percent annually over the last 15 years.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI, estimated China's military expenditure for 2013 to US$188.5bn.
China's military budget for 2014 according to IHS Jane's, a defence industry consulting and analysis company, will be US$148bn, which is the second largest in the world.
The United States military budget for 2014 in comparison, is US$574.9bn, which is down from a high of US$664.3bn in 2012.
According to SIPRI, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–2014, an increase of 143 per cent from the period 2005–2009.
China supplied major arms to 35 states in 2010–2014.
A significant percentage (just over 68 per cent) of Chinese exports went to three countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar.
China also exported major arms to 18 African states.
Examples of China's increasing global presence as an arms supplier in 2010–2014 included deals with Venezuela for armoured vehicles and transport and trainer aircraft, with Algeria for three frigates, with Indonesia for the supply of hundreds of anti-ship missiles and with Nigeria for the supply of a number of unmanned combat aerial vehicles.
Following rapid advances in its domestic arms industry, China has become less dependent on arms imports, which decreased by 42 per cent between 2005–2009 and 2010–2014.
China's rise in military spending come at a time when there are tensions along the South China Sea with territorial disputes involving the Philippines, Vietnam, and Taiwan, as well as escalating tensions between China and Japan involving the disputed Diaoyu (Chinese spelling) and Senkaku (Japanese spelling) islands.
Former-United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has urged China to be more transparent about its military capabilities and intentions.
The years 2018 and 2019 both saw significant budget increases as well.
China announced 2018's budget as 1.11 trillion yuan (US$165.5bn), an 8.1% increase on 2017, and 2019's budget as 1.19 trillion yuan (US$177.61bn), an increase of 7.5 per cent on 2018.

===
Military spending ===
March 2000
: The budget was announced to be $14.6 billion
March 2001: The budget was announced to be $17.0 billion
March 2002: The budget was announced to be $20.0 billion
March 2003: The budget was announced to be $22.0 billion
March 2004: The budget was announced to be $24.6 billion
March 2005: The budget was announced to be $29.9 billion
March 2006: The budget was announced to be $35.0 billion
March 2007:
The budget was announced to be $44.9 billion
March 2008: The budget was announced to be $58.8 billion
March 2009: The budget was announced to be $70.0 billion
March 2010: The budget was announced to be $76.5 billion
March 2011: The budget was announced to be $90.2 billion
March 2012: The budget was announced to be $103.1 billion
March 2013: The budget was announced to be $116.2 billion
March 2014: The budget was announced to be $131.2 billion
March 2015: The budget was announced to be $142.4 billion
March 2016: The budget was announced to be $143.7 billion
March 2017: The budget was announced to be $151.4 billion
March 2018: The budget was announced to be $165.5 billion
March 2019: The budget was announced to be  $177.6 billion
May 2020:
The budget was annouced to be $183.5 billion
March 2021: The budget was annouced to be $209.4
billionBudget
figures are published on the website of the State Council via a document named 'Central and Local Budgets' followed by the preceding year of the publication.

==
Commercial Activities ==


===
Historical ===
Until the mid-1990s the PLA had extensive commercial enterprise holdings in non-military areas, particularly real estate.
Almost all of these holdings were supposedly spun off in the mid-1990s.
In most cases, the management of the companies remained unchanged, with the PLA officers running the companies simply retiring from the PLA to run the newly formed private holding companies.
The history of PLA involvement in commercial enterprises began in the 1950s and 1960s.
Because of the socialist state-owned system and from a desire for military self-sufficiency, the PLA created a network of enterprises such as farms, guest houses, and factories intended to financially support its own needs.
One unintended side effect of the Deng-era economic reforms was that many of these enterprises became very profitable.
For example, a military guest house intended for soldier recreation could be easily converted into a profitable hotel for civilian use.
There were two main factors which increased PLA commercial involvement in the 1990s.
One was that running profitable companies decreased the need for the state to fund the military from the government budget.
The second was that in an environment where legal rules were unclear and political connections were important, PLA influence was very useful.
By the early 1990s party officials and high military officials were becoming increasingly alarmed at the military's commercial involvement for a number of reasons.
The military's involvement in commerce was seen to adversely affect military readiness and spread corruption.
Further, there was great concern that having an independent source of funding would lead to decreased loyalty to the party.
The result of this was an effort to spin off the PLA's commercial enterprises into private companies managed by former PLA officers, and to reform military procurement from a system in which the PLA directly controls its sources of supply to a contracting system more akin to those of Western countries.
The separation of the PLA from its commercial interests was largely complete by the year 2000.
It was met with very little resistance, as the spinoff was arranged in such a way that few lost out.

==
Anthem and Insignia ==
The military anthem of the PLA is the Military Anthem of the People's Liberation Army (simplified Chinese: 中国人民解放军军歌;
traditional Chinese: 中國人民解放軍軍歌
; pinyin:
Zhōngguó Rénmín Jiěfàngjūn Jūngē)
(Chinese People's Liberation Army Song).
The Central Military Commission (CMC) adopted the song as the official anthem on 25 July 1988.
The lyrics of the anthem were written by composer Gong Mu
(real name: Zhang Yongnian; Chinese: 张永年) and
the music was composed by Korea born Chinese composer Zheng Lücheng.

The PLA's insignia consists of a roundel with a red star bearing the two Chinese characters "八一"(literally "eight-one"), referring to the Nanchang uprising (A pivotal moment in Chinese history in which the Chinese Communist Party decided to take up armed struggle against the Nationalist Kuomintang party in response to the Shanghai massacre ordered by nationalist generalissimo and KMT party leader and founding father of Taiwan Chiang Kai Shek) which began on 1 August 1927
(The first day of the eighth month).
The inclusion of the two characters "八一" (Eight-One) being symbolic of the party's revolutionary history carrying strong emotional connotations of the political power which it shed blood to obtain.

==
Flags ==
The flag of the Chinese People's Liberation Army is the war flag of the People's Liberation Army; the layout of the flag has a golden star at the top left corner and "八一" to the right of the star,
placed on a red field.
Each service branch also have their own individual flags: The top ​5⁄8 of the flags is the same as the PLA flag; the bottom ​3⁄8 are occupied by the colors of the branches.
The flag of the Ground Forces has a forest green bar at the bottom, the naval ensign has stripes of blue and white at the bottom, the Air Force uses a sky blue bar and the Rocket Force uses a yellow bar at the bottom.
The forest green represents the earth, the blue and white stripes represent the seas, the sky blue represents the air and
the yellow represents the flare of missile launching.

==
See also ==
2015 People's Republic of China military reform
Chinese espionage in the United States
Chinese information operations and information warfare
Military Power of the People's Republic of China
Republic of China Armed Forces
Timeline of the Cox Report controversy
Titan Rain
Type 07


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Ministry of National Defense
The People's Republic of China
PLA Daily News sponsored by the PLA.
(
in Chinese)
The 3M-54 Kalibr, (Калибр, caliber), also referred to it as 3M54-1 Kalibr, 3M14 Biryuza (Бирюза, turqoise), (NATO codenames
SS-N-27 Sizzler and SS-N-30A),  91R1, 91RT2 is a group of Russian surface ship-, submarine-launched and airborne anti-ship and coastal anti ship (AShM), land attack cruise missiles (LACM) and anti-submarine missiles developed by the Novator Design Bureau (OKB-8).
Derived export versions are the 3M54E, 3M54E1, 3M14E, 91RE1, 91RTE2.
The 3M54T, 3M54K, 3M54A, 3M54E (3M54TE), 3M54KE and 3M54AE have a second stage that performs a supersonic sprint in the terminal approach to the target, reducing the time that target's defense systems have to react.
The 3M54T1, 3M54K1, 3M54A1, 3M54E1 (3M54T/K/AE1) only travel at subsonic speeds, although their range is accordingly greater than those of the supersonic versions.

Club is the designation used for the export versions.

== Design ==
The missile is a modular system with five versions: two anti-shipping types, one for land attack and two anti-submarine types.
The missile is designed to share common parts between the surface and submarine-launched variants but each missile consists of different components, for example, the booster.
The missile can be launched from a surface ship using a Vertical Launch System (VLS).
It has a booster with thrust vectoring capability.
The missile launched from a submarine torpedo tube has no need for such an addition but has a conventional booster instead.
The air launched version is held in a container that is dropped as the missile launches, detaching from the container.

The US has made several claims about the maximum range of Kalibr land attack versions in use by Russia.
The U.S. Department of Defense estimates its range at 1,400 km (870 mi), and Russian Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu put its range at "almost 1,500 km (930 mi).
"
Following its first operational firing in October 2015, Russian Ministry of Defence statements suggested a range of 2,000 km (1,200 mi), while a December 2015 Office of Naval Intelligence report gathered a number of Russian statements projecting ranges between 1,500-2,500 km (1,600 mi).
Discrepancies in range values may be attributed to poor understanding of the Russian defence industry, political declarations for strategic effect, or potentially longer 2,500 km-range claims could be associated with a thermonuclear armed variant while shorter 1,500 km-range estimates are for the conventionally armed missile.
===
Terminal supersonic flight ===
The Russian domestic variant (3M54T / 3M54K) and export variants (3M54TE/3M54KE) fly at sub-sonic speeds while achieving supersonic speed as they near their target.
They are also capable of performing very high angled defensive high speed maneuvers in contrast to the common linear flight path of other anti-ship cruise missiles.

==
Operational history ==
On 7 October 2015, a Gepard class frigate and three Buyan-M class Russian Navy corvettes, part of the Caspian Flotilla launched 26 Kalibr-NK system cruise missiles 3M14T from the Caspian Sea at 11 targets in Syria during the Syrian Civil War.
The missiles traveled 1,500 km (932 mi) through Iranian and Iraqi airspace and struck targets in Raqqa and Aleppo provinces (controlled by the Islamic State) but primarily in Idlib province (controlled by the Free Syrian Army and Nusra Front).
Anonymous US DoD officials alleged that four missiles crashed in Iran.
The US officials offered no evidence while Russian and Iranian governments denied the claim of missile crash.
Pentagon and State Department officials refused to comment on the reports.
Russia posted video footage of 26 Kalibr missile launches as well as several videos of missile impacts without time or location information.

On 20 November 2015 Russia launched 18 3M14T cruise missiles from the Caspian Sea onto targets in Syria, the targets were in Raqqa, Idlib and Aleppo.

On 9 December 2015 Russia fired a group of 3M14K cruise missiles from Kalibr-PL system at positions occupied by Daesh from the Improved Kilo-class submarine B-237 Rostov-on-Don deployed in the Mediterranean.

On 19 August 2016
Russia launched three Kalibr-NK cruise missiles from
Buyan-class corvette Zelenyy Dol and Serpukhov deployed in the eastern Mediterranean, and struck al-Nusra targets in the Aleppo province.

On 20 September 2016 Russian state media reported that Russian warships in the Mediterranean fired three Kalibr-NK missiles at western Aleppo, near Mount Simeon.
The Russians claimed that the missile strike killed "30 Israeli and Western officers directing the terrorists' attacks in Aleppo and Idlib".

On 15 November 2016 Russian frigate Admiral Grigorovich fired at least three missiles against targets in Idlib and Homs provinces, Syria.

On 31 May 2017 the Russian frigate Admiral Essen and submarine Krasnodar launched four missiles against targets east of Palmyra, Syria.

On 23 June 2017 Russian frigates Admiral Grigorovich and Admiral Essen, and the submarine Krasnodar fired six Kalibr missiles at Daesh arms depot targets in Hama.

On 5 September 2017 the Russian frigate Admiral Essen fired some Kalibr missiles on Daesh targets (command posts, a communications center, a facility repairing armored vehicles, and arms and ammunition depots) as part of an operation to take Deir ez-Zor.

On 14 September 2017 the Russian submarines Veliky Novgorod and Kolpino fired seven Kalibr missiles on Daesh targets (command posts, communications centers and ammunition depots) in the south-east of Deir ez-Zor.

On 22 September 2017 the Russian submarine Veliky Novgorod fired at least three Kalibr missiles on al-Nusra in the Idlib province.
The missile strike destroyed command centers, training bases and armored vehicles.

On 5 October 2017
the Russian submarines
Veliky Novgorod and Kolpino launched 10 Kalibr missiles.
The strikes were to support Syrian troops conducting a ground offensive in Deir-ez-Zor province.

On 31 October 2017 the Russian submarine Veliky Novgorod launched 3 Kalibr missiles.
The strikes were again to support Syrian troops conducting a ground offensive in Deir-ez-Zor province.

On 3 November 2017
the Russian submarine Kolpino launched 6 Kalibr missiles from a submerged position.
Missiles hit terrorists' strongholds, weapon and ammunition depots, concentrations of militants, and important command centres near Abu Kamal, Deir-ez-Zor.

On 3 February 2018 Russian frigates and submarines active in the Mediterranean sea launched several Kalibr missiles on the positions of rebels in the Idlib province, Syria where the Sukhoi Su-25 attack aircraft of Major Roman Filipov was shot down, killing about 30.
==
Variants ==
Domestic variants are basic versions of this missile family; these are the 3M54 and 3M14.
The export model is called Club (formerly Klub).
There are two major launch platforms: the Kalibr-PL (export Club-S), designed for use from submarines, and the Kalibr-NK (export Club-N), designed for surface ships.
These two launch platforms can be equipped with the following warhead and guidance combinations:


===
Domestic variants ===
3M54K: A submarine-launched anti-shipping variant deployed by the Russian Navy.
Its length is 8.22 m (27.0 ft), with a 200 kg (440 lb) warhead.
Its range is 440–660 km (270–410 mi).
It is a Sea-skimmer with a final stage flight altitude of 4.6 metres (15 ft) and a supersonic terminal speed of Mach 2.9 (3,550 km/h; 2,210 mph).

3M54
T An anti-shipping variant deployed by the Russian Navy on surface ships.
It is launched with a VLS, has a Thrust vectoring booster, and is 8.9 m (29 ft) long.
Its warhead weight and other performances are the same as the
3M-54K.
3M14K (SS-N-30A)
An inertial guidance land attack variant deployed by the Russian Navy.
The submarine-launched weapon has a basic length of 6.2 m (20 ft), with a 450 kg (990 lb) warhead.
Its range is 2,500 km (1,600 mi), allowing the Russian Navy to strike targets throughout Central/Western Europe from beyond the GIUK gap.
Its subsonic terminal speed is Mach 0.8.

3M14T is the inertial guidance land attack variant which is deployed by the Russian Navy.
A surface ship with VLS launched missile, with thrust vectoring booster, its basic length is 8.9 m (29 ft),
its warhead weight and other performance are the same as the 3M14K.
Russia fired 26 3M14T cruise missiles from four surface ships in the Caspian Sea against 11 targets in Syria on 7 October 2015.

According to state television news (broadcast of 11.10.2015), launch of production took place in 2012.
Details of this version - a maximum speed of Mach 3, a range of 4,000 km, basing in the air, on land, on water and under water.
The missile can make in-flight maneuvers 147 times or more (in any direction), it has a minimum height of 10 meters, an average one of 20 – 50 meters (up to 1000 m), it will automatically follow terrain, it can be controlled in flight.

Russia has improved the targeting system of its ship- and submarine-launched Kalibr cruise missiles to improve their ability to conduct time sensitive attacks.
Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu revealed the development, which was initiated as a result of combat experience in Syria, in an interview with the Moskovsky Komsomolets newspaper on 22 September 2019.

Kalibr-M is a new version of Kalibr with larger warhead and extended range to 4,500 km.
The ship, submarine, air, and land-launched versions are in development.

===
Export variants ===


===
=
Club-S ====
3M-54E Club-S is the submarine-launched anti-shipping variant, Its basic length is 8.2 m (27 ft), with a 200 kg (440 lb) warhead.
Its range is 220 km; (note that its range is less than the 3M-54).
It is a sea-skimmer with a supersonic terminal speed and a flight altitude of 4.6 metres (15 ft) at its final stage
is 2.9 mach.

3M-54E1 is a submarine-launched anti-shipping variant, Its basic length is 6.2 m (20 ft), with a 200 kg (440 lb) warhead.
Its range is 300 km (190 mi).
It is a sea-skimmer with a subsonic terminal speed of 0.8 mach.

3M-14E
An inertially guided land attack variant; it is launched from a submarine.
Its basic length is 6.2 m (20 ft), with a 450 kg (990 lb) warhead.
Its range is 300 km (190 mi).
It has a subsonic terminal speed of 0.8 mach.

91RE1
A submarine-launched anti-submarine variant, it consists of two stages, one solid booster with four grid fins and one anti-submarine light torpedo.
Its basic length is 7.65 m (25.1 ft), it has a range of 50 km (31 mi).
It can reach supersonic speed.
The torpedo has a warhead weight of 76 kg (168 lb).
It is similar to the American ASROC/SUBROC missile/torpedo system.
It follows a ballistic path on the surface, with a speed of Mach 2.5.

==== Club-N ====
3M-54TE Club-N - A surface vessel with VLS launched anti-shipping variant; with a thrust vectoring booster.
Its basic length is 8.9 m, its warhead weight and other performance is the same as the 3M-54E.
Its range is less than the 3M-54.
It is a sea-skimmer with supersonic terminal speed and a flight altitude of 15 feet (4.6 m) at its final stage, when it has a speed of 2.9 mach, with a range of 220 km (140 mi) at supersonic speed.

3M-54TE1
- A surface ship with VLS anti-shipping variant, with thrust vectoring booster.
Its basic length is 8.9 m (29 ft), its warhead weight and other performance is the same as the 3M-54E1.
A sea-skimmer with a subsonic terminal speed of 0.8 mach.

3M-14TE - An inertially guided land attack variant.
It is a surface ship with VLS missile and a thrust vectoring booster.
Its basic length is 8.9 m (29 ft), its warhead weight and other performances are the same as the 3M-14E.
Its subsonic terminal speed is 0.8 mach, with a range of 300 km (190 mi) at supersonic speed.

91RTE2 -
A surface ship with the VLS launched anti-submarine variant; it consists of three stages, one booster with thrust vector nozzle, one conventional booster, and one anti-submarine light torpedo.
Its basic length is 8.9 m (29 ft), with a range of 40 km (25 mi) at supersonic speed.
The torpedo has a warhead weight of 76 kg (168 lb).
The lightest of all variants, with a launch weight of 1,300 kg (2,900 lb).
Speed is Mach 2.

==== Club-T ====
Land-based anti-ship (3M-54E2) and land-attack (3M-14E1) self-propelled missile system for coastal defense.
Both missile variants in the system arsenal weigh 1,700 kg and feature a 450 kg warhead and flight speed of 240 m/s.
According to the manufacturer, in land-attack mode, the system has a CEP of 50 m.


====
Club-A ====
3M-54AE - Air-launched anti-ship variant.
Two stages, terminal supersonic speed.
Weight 1950 kg.
Warhead 200 kg.
Range 300 km.

3M-54AE1 - Air-launched anti-ship variant.
Subsonic.

3M-14AE - Air-launched land attack variant.
Subsonic.
INS+satellite guidance.
Length
6.2 m. Weight 1400 kg.
Warhead 450 kg.
Range 300 km.

==
Launch platforms ==

 'Club-K'  - a Russian container complex of missile weapons, placed in the standard
20- and 40-foot sea container.
Designed to defeat surface and ground targets.
The complex can be mounted on shorelines, vessels of various classes, rail platforms and trucks.
It is a modification of the Kalibr missile system.

The Russian Kilo class, Lada class, Akula class, Yasen class, and Borei class are the submarine launch platforms for the missiles.

The Russian Admiral Gorshkov class, Admiral Grigorovich class, and Gepard class frigates are able to carry these missiles.
Also the Indian Talwar class frigate is another shipborne launch platform for the Club missile system.

The Russian Gremyashchy class, Buyan-M class, the second batch of Steregushchy class corvettes and the Karakurt class are low displacement platforms with Kalibr system ability.

In addition, it is believed by some analysts that an air-launched variant will be developed to arm the Tu-142s currently in service with the Russian navy.
A truck mounted version is planned for development by the Novator Design Bureau.
A Club-K variant, which is disguised as a shipping container that can be placed on a truck, train, or merchant vessel, was advertised in 2010 and was shown for the first time at the MAKS 2011 air show.
Putting the launcher system into a standard shipping container allows the missiles to be moved and stored without arousing suspicion, which in turn renders pre-emptive strikes against the launcher very difficult.

In MAKS 2007, the 3M-54AE was placed beside a Su-35.
This suggests that the aircraft will likely have the ability to launch the Club-A variants.
The lighter 3M-14AE was also beside MiG-35.

==
Operators ==
Russia:
Russian Navy uses the 3M14, 3M54, 3M54-1, 91R1, 91RT2.
Submarine-launched variants (entered service in 2016) are used by Kilo-class submarine, Lada-class submarine, Akula-class submarine, Oscar II-class submarine and the Yasen-class submarine.
Surface ship launched variants are used by the Gremyashchy class, Karakurt class, Buyan-M class corvettes, Gepard class, Admiral Gorshkov class and the Admiral Grigorovich class frigates.

Algeria:
The Algerian National Navy uses the 'Club-S' variant for their Kilo class submarines.

India:
The Indian Navy uses both 'Club-S' and 'Club-N' variants for the Kilo class submarines (known as the Sindhughosh Class in Indian service), the Talwar class frigates respectively.

Vietnam: The Vietnam People's navy uses the 'Club-S' variant for its six Kilo class submarines.

China: The People's Liberation Army Navy uses the 'Club-S' variant for its Kilo class submarines.

Iran: Contradictory sources indicate that the Iranian Navy is thought to have purchased or is about to purchase 'Club-S' missiles for its three Kilo class submarines.

== See also ==
P-800 Oniks
Qader
Atmaca
Babur
SOM
Noor ASCM
Zafar
Khalij Fars
Ra'ad
3M-51 Alfa
YJ-18
BGM-109 Tomahawk
RK-55
Brahmos


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Graphics Illustration
CSIS Missile Threat - SS-N-30
Producer, corporate WWW
"3M-54 Klub".
Federation of American Scientists.
Archived from the original on 5 February 2007.
Retrieved 2007-02-27.

"Klub (SS-N-27) ASCN".
Bharat Rakshak Monitor.
Archived from the original on 2007-02-05.
Retrieved 2007-02-27.

"3M-54 Klub".
Globalsecurity.org.
Archived from the original on 20 February 2007.
Retrieved 2007-02-27.

"Navy Systems".
Globalsecurity.org (Navy Systems).
Archived from the original on 14 March 2007.
Retrieved 2007-03-23.
The P-800 Oniks (Russian: П-800 Оникс; English: Onyx), also known in export markets as Yakhont (Russian: Яхонт; English: ruby), is a Soviet / Russian supersonic anti-ship cruise missile developed by NPO Mashinostroyeniya as a ramjet version of P-80 Zubr.
Its GRAU designation is 3M55, the air launched Kh-61
variant also exists.
The missile has the NATO reporting codename SS-N-26 "Strobile".
Development officially started in 1983, and in the 1990s the anti-ship missile was tested on the Project 1234.7 ship.
In 2002 the missile passed the whole range of trials and was commissioned.
It is reportedly a replacement of the P-270 Moskit, but possibly also of the P-700 Granit.
The P-800 was used as the basis for the joint Russian-Indian supersonic missile BrahMos.
== Description ==
The missile is carried in flight by aerodynamic lift.
The solid-propellant booster is located in the ramjet's combustion chamber and is ejected by the airflow after it has burned out.

===
Advantages ===
Over-the-horizon firing range
Full autonomy of combat use
("fire and forget")
A set of flexible ("low-profile sea-skimming", "high-low") trajectories
High supersonic speed in all phases of flight
Full harmonization for a wide range of platforms (surface ships, submarines and land-based launchers)
Possible use of the missile in electronic countermeasures environment and under enemy fire


==
Operational history ==


===
Syria ===
In 2010 Sergei Prikhodko, senior adviser to the Russian President, has said that Russia intends to deliver P-800 to Syria based on the contracts signed in 2007.
Syria received 2 Bastion missile systems with 36 missiles each (72 in total).
The missiles' test was broadcast by Syrian state TV.In
May 2013, Russia continued the contract delivery to the Syrian government supplying missiles with an advanced radar to make them more effective to counter any future foreign military invasion.
The warehouse containing the Bastion Missile was destroyed in an Israeli air strike on Latakia on 5 July 2013, but US intelligence analysts believe that some missiles had been removed before the attack.
Oniks missiles were reportedly used in 2016 against ISIL targets.

==
Specifications ==
Length: 8.9 m
Diameter: 0.7 m
Wingspan: 1.7 m
Weight: 3,100 kg
Speed at altitude: 750 m/s (Mach 2.6)
Surface speed:
Mach 2
Engine: ramjet,
weight 200 kg, 4 tons of thrust
Range: 120–300 km / 600 km for Russian ship/sub deployed non-export model
for the combined trajectory (hi-lo) –
300 km
for low-altitude trajectory (lo-lo) – 120 km
Flight altitude of 10,000–14,000 m
Warhead:
national version:
300 kg semi-armour piercing HE, thermonuclear; export version: 200 kg
HE
Fuel: kerosene T-6Radar homing head

all-weather monopulse active-passive, with frequency hopping
Immunity: high, from active spoofing, dipole clouds
Range: 50 km active
Launchable sea state – up to 7 points
Warm-up time from power on: no more than 2 min
Current consumption at 27 V circuit: up to 38
A
Maximum angle of the target search: ± 45 °
Homing weight: 85 kg


==
Variants ==
3M55 Oniks – Base version for Russia.

P-800 Yakhont – Export version of Oniks.

P-800 Bolid - Submarine-launched version of Yakhont.

Brahmos – Co-developed by Russia and India, based on Oniks, produced by BrahMos Aerospace Private Limited in India.
BrahMos-II, a hypersonic version is also being developed.

Bastion-P – Coast mobile missile system.
Officially it entered service in 2015.

Kh-61 - Air launched air to surface version.

Oniks-M - version of Oniks with improved range (up to 800 km), accuracy and ECCM capabilities.

==
Platforms ==


===
Naval ===
CurrentAdmiral Grigorovich-class frigate
Buyan-M-class corvette
Karakurt-class corvette
Steregushchiy-class corvette (export version)
Yasen-class submarine
Ahmad Yani-class frigate
Admiral Gorshkov-class frigateFutureKuznetsov-class aircraft carrier
Kirov-class battlecruiser
Lider-class destroyer
Gremyashchiy-class corvette
Oscar-class submarine


===
Land ===
Standard batteries of the K-300 Bastion-P (Бастион-П-Подвижный):

4 self-propelled launchers K-340P with 2 "Yakhont" missiles (crew of 3 persons)
1–2 Command and Control vehicles (ASBU)
PBRK (crew of 5 persons)
1 security alert car (MOBD)
4 Transportation and loading vehicles (TLV K342P)


==
Operators ==
Hezbollah – 12 Missiles with diverse launching platforms.

Indonesia – 4 VLS (vertical launching system) mounted on Ahmad Yani class frigate KRI Oswald Siahaan (354).

Russia – 3 "Bastion-P" complexes delivered in 2010, all the complexes taken into service with the Russian Black Sea Fleet's 11th Independent Coastal Missile-Artillery Brigade stationed near Anapa and the Project 1234.7 Nakat, a one-off Nanuchka IV-class corvette commissioned in 1987 with 2x6 Oniks.
The "Bastion-P" is deployed by Russian forces in Crimea.
One more Bastion-P was delivered in 2015.
2 Bastion systems are in service with the Northern Fleet and at least one with Western Military District (Baltic Fleet).
Two more systems entered service in 2016 with Pacific Fleet.
Newest class of Russian nuclear-powered attack submarines, Yasen-class submarine, can also launch the missile.
Submarine-launched variant entered service in 2016.
Two Bastion missile systems delivered in 2017 and one more in 2018.
Totally 4 Bal and Bastion systems in 2018.
One more system delivered for the Pacific Fleet in early 2019.
Totally 3 Bastion systems and 55 Oniks were delivered in 2019.
The Russian Defense Ministry concluded a contract at the Army-2020 forum for purchasing cruise missiles 3M55N Oniks.

Syria – 2 "Bastion-P" complexes delivered in 2011, 72 missiles.

Vietnam – 2 "Bastion-P" land-based coastal defense systems delivered, 40 missiles.

== See also ==
3M-54 Kalibr
3M-51
Alfa


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SS-N-26 (Federation of American Scientists)
Sunburns, Yakhonts, Alfas and the Region (Australian Aviation, Sept 2000) (PDF)
www.dtig.org
Russian/Sovjet Sea-based Anti-Ship Missiles (pdf)
Russia would supply Syria with P-800 Yakhont cruise missiles
Riding shotgun was used to describe the bodyguard who rides alongside a stagecoach driver, typically armed with a shotgun to ward off bandits or hostile Native Americans.
In modern use, it refers to the practice of sitting alongside the driver in a moving vehicle.
The phrase has been used metaphorically to mean giving actual or figurative support or aid to someone in a situation.
The coining of this phrase dates to 1905 at latest.

==
Etymology ==
The expression "riding shotgun" is derived from "shotgun messenger", a colloquial term for "express messenger", when stagecoach travel was popular during the American Wild West and the Colonial period in Australia.
The person rode alongside the driver.
The first known use of the phrase "riding shotgun" was in the 1905 novel The Sunset Trail by Alfred Henry Lewis.

Wyatt and Morgan Earp were in the service of The Express Company.
They went often as guards—"riding shotgun," it was called—when the stage bore unusual treasure.

It was later used in print and especially film depiction of stagecoaches and wagons in the Old West in danger of being robbed or attacked by bandits.
A special armed employee of the express service using the stage for transportation of bullion or cash would sit beside the driver, carrying a short shotgun (or alternatively a rifle),[1] to provide an armed response in case of threat to the cargo, which was usually a strongbox.
Absence of an armed person in that position often signaled that the stage was not carrying a strongbox, but only passengers.

==
Historical examples ==


===
Tombstone, Arizona Territory ===
On the evening of March 15, 1881, a Kinnear & Company stagecoach carrying US$26,000 in silver bullion (equivalent to $689,000 in 2019) was en route from the boom town of Tombstone, Arizona Territory to Benson, Arizona, the nearest freight terminal.
Bob Paul, who had run for Pima County Sheriff and was contesting the election he lost due to ballot-stuffing, was temporarily working once again as the Wells Fargo shotgun messenger.
He had taken the reins and driver's seat in Contention City because the usual driver, a well-known and popular man named Eli "Budd" Philpot, was ill.
Philpot was riding shotgun.

Near Drew's Station, just outside Contention City, a man stepped into the road and commanded them to "Hold!"
Three Cowboys attempted to rob the stage.
Paul, in the driver's seat, fired his shotgun and emptied his revolver at the robbers, wounding a Cowboy later identified as Bill Leonard in the groin.
Philpot, riding shotgun, and passenger Peter Roerig, riding in the rear dickey seat, were both shot and killed.
The horses spooked and Paul wasn't able to bring the stage under control for almost a mile, leaving the robbers with nothing.
Paul, who normally rode shotgun, later said he thought the first shot killing Philpot had been meant for him.
When Wyatt Earp first arrived in Tombstone in December 1879, he initially took a job as a stagecoach shotgun messenger for Wells Fargo, guarding shipments of silver bullion.
When Wyatt Earp was appointed Pima County Deputy Sheriff on July 27, 1881, his brother Morgan Earp took over his job.

===
Historical weapon ==
=
When Wells, Fargo & Co. began regular stagecoach service from Tipton, Missouri to San Francisco, California in 1858, they issued shotguns to its drivers and guards for defense along the perilous 2,800 mile route.
The guard was called a shotgun messenger and they were issued a Coach gun, typically a 10-gauge or 12-gauge, short, double-barreled shotgun.

==
Modern usage ==
More recently, the term has been applied to a game, usually played by groups of friends to determine who rides beside the driver in a car.
Typically, this involves claiming the right to ride shotgun by being the first person to call out "shotgun".
The game creates an environment that is fair by forgetting and leaving out most seniority except that mothers and significant others automatically get shotgun, and this meanwhile leaves out any conflicts that may have previously occurred when deciding who gets to ride shotgun.

== See also ==
Coach gun
Shotgun messenger
Drive-by shooting


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
What's the origin of "riding shotgun"?

Rules of shotgun, Shotgunrules.com, Retrieved March 27, 2015.

The Shotgun Rules, version 1.1 by the Airborne Early Warning Association, Retrieved March 27, 2015.

Rules of shotgun:
The 25 Universal Rules of Order for Riding Shotgun By David A. Tomar, Retrieved March 27, 2015.
A shotgun house is a narrow rectangular domestic residence, usually no more than about 12 feet (3.5 m) wide, with rooms arranged one behind the other and doors at each end of the house.
It was the most popular style of house in the Southern United States from the end of the American Civil War (1861–1865) through the 1920s.

Alternate names include shotgun shack, shotgun hut, shotgun cottage, and in the case of a multihome dwelling, shotgun apartment; the design is similar to that of railroad apartments.

A longstanding theory is that the style can be traced from Africa to Haitian influences on house design in New Orleans, but the houses can be found as far away as Key West and Ybor City in Florida, and Texas, and as far north as Chicago, Illinois.
Though initially as popular with the middle class as with the poor, the shotgun house became a symbol of poverty in the mid-20th century.

Urban renewal has led to the destruction of many shotgun houses; however, in areas affected by gentrification, historic preservation efforts have led to the renovation of such houses.

Several variations of shotgun houses allow for additional features and space, and many have been updated to the needs of later generations of owners.
The oldest shotgun houses were built without indoor plumbing, but this was often added later, often on the back of the house (sometimes crudely). "
Double-barrel" or "double" shotgun houses are a semi-detached configuration, consisting of two houses sharing a central wall, allowing more houses to be fit into an area.
"
Camelback" shotgun houses include a second floor at the rear of the house.
In some cases the entire floor plan is changed during remodeling to create hallways.

==
History ==
The origins of both the term and the architectural form and development of the shotgun house are controversial, even more so in the wake of conflicting preservation and redevelopment efforts since Hurricane Katrina.

New Orleans architectural historian Samuel Wilson, Jr. influentially suggested that shotgun-style houses originated in the Creole suburbs (faubourgs) of New Orleans in the early 1800s.
He also stated that the term "shotgun" is a reference to the idea that if all the doors are opened, a shotgun blast fired into the house from the front doorway will fly cleanly to the other end and out at the back.
Alternatively, folklorist and professor John Michael Vlach has suggested that the origin of the building style and the name itself may trace back to Haiti and Africa during the 18th century and earlier.
Vlach claimed the name may have originated from a Dahomey Fon area term 'to-gun', which means "place of assembly".
The description, probably used in New Orleans by Afro-Haitian slaves, may have been misunderstood and reinterpreted as "shotgun".
Citing Vlach, James Deetz claimed archaeological support for an African origin in his dig at Parting Ways, a 1790s community of freed black slaves in Plymouth, Massachusetts; his shotgun interpretation of the extremely limited evidence – two rooms that "may or may not have been unified" – has been challenged as "premature".

Vlach's theory behind the earlier African origin is tied to the history of New Orleans.
In 1803 there were 1,355 free blacks in the city.
By 1810 blacks outnumbered whites 10,500 to 4,500.
This caused a housing boom.
As many of both the builders and inhabitants were Africans by way of Haiti, Vlach maintained it was only natural they modeled the new homes after ones they left behind in their homeland.
Many surviving Haitian dwellings of the period, including about 15 percent of the housing stock of Port-au-Prince, resemble the single shotgun houses of New Orleans.
The shotgun house was popularized in New Orleans, and, as Fred Kniffen documented in a statewide survey of Louisiana house types in the 1930s, the greatest number are  found dispersed from there in a manner that supports the diffusion theory.
The style was definitely built there by 1832, though there is evidence that houses sold in the 1830s were built 15 to 20 years earlier.
A simpler theory is that they are the typical one-room-deep floor plan popular in the rural south, rotated to accommodate narrow city lots.

Such houses were built throughout hot urban areas in the South, since the style's length and outside doors at each end allowed for excellent airflow, while its narrow frontage increased the number of lots that could be fitted along a street.
It was used so frequently that some southern cities estimate that, even today, 10% or more of their housing stock is composed of shotgun houses.
The earliest known use of "shotgun house" as a name for these dwellings is in a classified advertisement in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, August 30, 1903: "Two 3-room houses near the railroad yards at Simpson st.
crossing, rent $12 a month to good tenants who pay in advance; price $1,200 on terms or $100 cash, balance $15 a month; a combination of investment and savings bank: these are not shacks, but good shot-gun houses in good repair.
"
While this advertisement seems to present shotgun houses as a desirable working-class housing alternative, by 1929 a Tennessee court noted that shotgun houses could not be rented to any other than a very poor class of tenants.

After the Great Depression few shotgun houses were built, and existing ones went into decline.
By the late 20th century shotgun houses in some areas were being restored as housing and for other uses.
Shotgun houses were often initially built as rental properties, located near manufacturing centers or railroad hubs, to provide housing for workers.
Owners of factories frequently built the houses to rent specifically to employees, usually for a few dollars a month.
However, by the late 20th century shotguns were often owner-occupied.
For example, 85% of the houses (many of them shotgun) in New Orleans' Lower Ninth Ward were owner-occupied.
Shotgun houses were most popular before widespread ownership of the automobile allowed people to live farther from businesses and other destinations.
Building lots were small, 30 feet (9 m) wide at most.
An influx of people to cities, both from rural areas in America and from foreign countries, all looking to fill emerging manufacturing jobs, created the high demand for housing in cities.
Shotgun houses were built to fulfill the same need as rowhouses in Northeastern cities.
Several were often built at a time by a single builder, contributing to their similar appearance.

== Characteristics ==
The rooms of a shotgun house are lined up one behind the other, typically a living room is first, then one or two bedrooms, and finally a kitchen in back.
Early shotgun houses were not built with bathrooms, but in later years a bathroom with a small hall was built before the last room of the house, or a side addition was built off the kitchen.
Some shotguns have only two rooms.
Chimneys tended to be built in the interior, allowing the front and middle rooms to share a chimney with a fireplace opening in each room.
The kitchen usually has its own chimney.
Other than the basic floor layout, shotgun houses have many standard features in common.
The house is almost always close to the street, sometimes with a very short front yard.
In some cases, the house has no setback and is actually flush with the sidewalk.
The original steps were wood, but were often replaced with permanent concrete steps.

A sign of its New Orleans heritage, the house is usually raised two to three feet (60 to 90 cm) off the ground.
There is a single door and window in the front of the house, and often a side door leading into the back room, which is slightly wider than the rest of the house.
The front door and window often were originally covered by decorative shutters.
Side walls may or may not have windows; rooms adjoining neither the front nor back door will generally have at least one window even when the houses are built very close together.
Typically, shotgun houses have a wood-frame structure and wood siding, although some examples exist in brick and even stone.
Many shotguns, especially older or less expensive ones, have flat roofs that end at the front wall of the house.
In houses built after 1880, the roof usually overhangs the front wall, and there is usually a gable above the overhang.
The overhang is usually supported by decorative wooden brackets, and sometimes contains cast iron ventilators.
The rooms are well-sized, and have relatively high ceilings for cooling purposes, as when warm air can rise higher, the lower part of a room tends to be cooler.
The lack of hallways allows for efficient cross-ventilation in every room.

Rooms usually have some decoration such as moldings, ceiling medallions, and elaborate woodwork.
In cities like New Orleans, local industries supplied elaborate but mass-produced brackets and other ornaments for shotgun houses that were accessible even to homeowners of modest means.

== Variations ==
The double shotgun requires less land per household than the traditional shotgun and was used extensively in poorer areas because it could be built with fewer materials and use less land per occupant.
It was first seen in New Orleans in 1854.A camelback house, also called humpback, is a variation of the shotgun that has a partial second floor over the rear of the house.
Camelback houses were built in the later period of shotgun houses.
The floor plan and construction is very similar to the traditional shotgun house, except there are stairs in the back room leading up to the second floor.
The second floor, or "hump", contains one to four rooms.
Because it was only a partial second story, most cities only taxed it as a single-story house – this was a key reason for their construction.
A combination, the Double Camelback shotgun, also exists.
A minor variation is a side door allowing access to the kitchen, or a porch along the side extending almost the length of the house.
"North
shore" houses are shotgun houses with wide verandas on three sides.
They were so named because most were built on the north shore of New Orleans' Lake Pontchartrain as summer homes for wealthy whites.

== Decline and legacy ==
The construction of shotgun houses slowed and eventually stopped during the early 20th century.
The increased affordability of two technological innovations, the car and consumer air conditioning units, made the key advantages of the shotgun house obsolete to home buyers.
After World War II, shotgun houses had very little appeal to those building or buying new houses, as car-oriented modern suburbs were built en masse.
Few shotgun houses have been built in America since the war, although the concept of a simple, single-level floor plan lived on in ranch-style houses.
The surviving urban shotgun houses suffered problems related to those typically facing the inner city neighborhoods in which they were located.
The flight of affluent residents to the suburbs, absentee owners, and a shortage of mortgage lenders for inner-city residents led to the deterioration of shotgun houses in the mid- and late 20th century.
Confusing ownership, passed down within a family over several generations, also contributed to many houses sitting vacant for years.

Though shotguns are sometimes perceived as being prevalent in poor African American neighborhoods, many originally constituted much of the housing stock of segregated white neighborhoods.
Many of these neighborhoods became predominantly black during the 1950s and 1960s, but many others did not and remain predominantly white.

Regardless of who was living in them, from World War II until the 1980s shotguns came to be widely viewed as substandard housing and a symbol of poverty, and they were demolished by many urban renewal projects.
This thinking is no longer so prevalent, with such cities as Charlotte establishing "Shotgun Historic Districts".
Shotgun houses have even been praised as quality and cost-effective cultural assets that promote a distinctive urban life.
Other cities, such as Macon, Georgia, experimented with renovating shotgun houses for low-income residents and, though there was indecision on whether it would be cheaper to tear them down and build new housing, some were rebuilt.
There are many large neighborhoods in older American cities of the south which still contain a high concentration of shotgun houses today.
Examples include Third Ward in Houston; Bywater in New Orleans; The Hill in St. Louis; Portland, Butchertown and Germantown in Louisville;  Cabbagetown in Atlanta and Village West of Coconut Grove in Miami where the last remaining 25 shotgun homes have been designated as historic structures.
Their role in the history of the south has become recognized; for example, in October 2001 Rice University sponsored an exhibition called "Shotguns 2001".
This three-day event featured lectures on and artistic paintings of the houses, as well as presentations and panel discussions in a neighborhood of restored shotguns.
In some shotgun-dominated neighborhoods, property value has become quite high, leading to gentrification.
Sometimes, a new owner will buy both homes of a double-barreled shotgun structure and combine them, to form a relatively large single house.
Shotguns are also often combined to renovate them into office or storage space.

==
A limited revival ==
Elements of the shotgun style have recently been seen in a number of the compact, low-occupancy structures employed in the Solar Decathlon contests held periodically in Washington, DC.
While some are erected from panels brought to the site, many such structures consist of enclosed single or multiple units designed specifically for road transports, with multiple modules connected on site, and compact linear structures often employ multiple-use "zones" rather than specifically private areas, while retaining a linear progression of spaces.
In 2011 Louisville's daily newspaper, The Courier-Journal, reported that a local nonprofit agency devoted to building and renovating affordable housing was building new shotgun houses in a development in southwest Louisville.

==
Popular and Southern culture ==
The shotgun house plays a large role in the folklore and culture of the south.
Superstition holds that ghosts and spirits are attracted to shotgun houses because they may pass straight through them, and that some houses were built with doors intentionally misaligned to deter these spirits.
They also often serve as a convenient symbol of life in the south.
Elvis Presley was born in a shotgun house, Aaron Neville of The Neville Brothers grew up in one,
and according to bluesman David Honeyboy Edwards, Robert Johnson died in one.

Shortly before his death in May 1997, Jeff Buckley rented a shotgun house in Memphis and was so enamoured with it
he contacted the owner about the possibility of buying it.
Dream Brother, David Browne's biography of Jeff and Tim Buckley, opens with a description of this shotgun house and Jeff's fondness of it.
One of the more widely known references to a shotgun house is in the 1980 Talking Heads song "
Once In A Lifetime".
The first line of the song is "And you may find yourself living in a shotgun shack".
The John Mellencamp song "Pink Houses" was inspired when he was driving along an overpass on the way home to Bloomington, Indiana from the Indianapolis airport.
There was an old black man sitting outside his little pink shotgun house with his cat in his arms, completely unperturbed by the traffic speeding along the highway in his front yard.
“
He waved, and I waved back,” Mellencamp said in an interview with Rolling Stone.
“
That's how 'Pink Houses' started.”.
In Bruce Springsteen's song "We Take Care of Our Own", from the album Wrecking Ball, he refers to shotgun houses, singing "We take care of our own, from the shotgun shack to the Super Dome".
Springsteen also references "shotgun shack" in "Reason to Believe" from his 1982 album Nebraska, with the line, "In a whitewashed shotgun shack, an old man passes away /
they take his body to the graveyard, and over him, they pray."

==
See also ==
Culture of the Southern United States
Enfilade (architecture) – similar design in grand European architecture of the Baroque period
List of house types
Railroad apartment
Terraced house


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Shotgun House (at Bywater Neighborhood Association) (includes many example photos)
Shotgun House Project for New Orleans Discussion of appropriateness of new shotguns for rebuilding NOLA
A New Orleans shotgun converted into a two-story three-bedroom house (the Spring 2008
This Old House project)
Project
Row Houses -
An example of art and social activism, based on 22 shotgun houses rescued and renovated in Houston's Third Ward
Shotgun House Preservation in Miami Commissioner Ken Russell Moves to Save West Grove’s Shotgun Homes
Miami Today article
As an added note, some say the Shotgun House design circumvented Property Tax laws.
Houses were taxed per room.
When the doors are open a Shotgun House is one room.
A shotgun (also known as a scattergun, or historically as a fowling piece) is a long-barreled firearm designed to shoot a straight-walled cartridge known as a shotshell, which usually discharges numerous small pellet-like spherical sub-projectiles called shot, or sometimes a single solid projectile called a slug.
Shotguns are most commonly smoothbore firearms, meaning that their gun barrels have no rifling on the inner wall, but rifled barrels for shooting slugs (slug barrels) are also available.

Shotguns come in a wide variety of calibers and gauges ranging from 5.5 mm (.22 inch) to up to 5 cm (2.0 in), though the 12-gauge (18.53 mm or 0.729 in) and 20-gauge (15.63 mm or 0.615 in) bores are by far the most common.
Almost all are breechloading, and can be single-barreled, double-barreled or in the form of combination guns.
Like rifles, shotguns also come in a range of different action types, both single-shot and repeating.
For non-repeating designs, over-and-under break action shotguns are by far the most common variant.
Although revolving shotguns did exist, most modern repeating shotguns are either pump-action or semi-automatic, and also fully automatic, lever-action or bolt-action to a lesser extent.

Preceding smoothbore firearms (such as the musket) were widely used by armies in the 18th century.
The muzzleloading blunderbuss, the direct ancestor of the shotgun, was also used in similar roles from self-defense to riot control.
Shotguns were often favored by cavalry troops in the early to mid-19th century because of its ease of use and generally good effectiveness on the move, as well as by coachmen for its substantial power.
However by the late 19th century, these weapons became largely replaced on the battlefield by breechloading rifled firearms shooting spin-stabilized cylindro-conoidal bullets, which were far more accurate with longer effective ranges.
The military value of shotguns was rediscovered in the First World War, when American forces used the pump-action Winchester Model 1897s in trench fighting to great effect.
Since then, shotguns have been used in a variety of close-quarter roles in civilian, law enforcement and military applications.

The smoothbore shotgun barrel generates less resistance and thus allows greater propellant loads for heavier projectiles without as much risk of overpressure or a squib load, and are also easier to clean.
The shot pellets from a shotshell are propelled indirectly through a wadding inside the shell and scatter upon leaving the barrel, which is usually choked at the muzzle end to control the projectile scatter.
This means each shotgun discharge will produce a cluster of impact points instead of a single point of impact like other firearms.
Having multiple projectiles also means the muzzle energy is divided among the pellets, leaving each individual projectile with less penetrative kinetic energy.
The lack of spin stabilization and the generally suboptimal aerodynamic shape of the shot pellets also make them less accurate and decelerate quite quickly in flight due to drag, giving shotguns short effective ranges.
In a hunting context, this makes shotguns useful primarily for hunting fast-flying birds and other agile small/medium-sized games without risking overpenetration and stray shots to distant bystander and objects.
However, in a military or law enforcement context, the high short-range blunt knockback force and large number of projectiles makes the shotgun useful as a door breaching tool, a crowd control or close-quarters defensive weapon.
Militants or insurgents may use shotguns in asymmetric engagements, as shotguns are commonly owned civilian weapons in many countries.
Shotguns are also used for target-shooting sports such as skeet, trap and sporting clays, which involve flying clay disks, known as "clay pigeons", thrown in various ways by a dedicated launching device called a "trap".

== Characteristics ==
Shotguns come in a wide variety of forms, from very small up to massive punt guns, and in nearly every type of firearm operating mechanism.
The common characteristics that make a shotgun unique center on the requirements of firing shot.
These features are the features typical of a shotgun shell, namely a relatively short, wide cartridge, with straight walls, and operating at a relatively low pressure.

Ammunition for shotguns is referred to in the US as shotgun shells, shotshells, or just shells (when it is not likely to be confused with artillery shells).
The term cartridges is standard usage in the United Kingdom.

The shot is usually fired from a smoothbore barrel; another configuration is the rifled slug barrel, which fires more accurate solitary projectiles.

== Uses ==
The typical use of a shotgun is against small and fast moving targets, often while in the air.
The spreading of the shot allows the user to point the shotgun close to the target, rather than having to aim precisely as in the case of a single projectile.
The disadvantages of shot are limited range and limited penetration of the shot, which is why shotguns are used at short ranges, and typically against smaller targets.
Larger shot sizes, up to the extreme case of the single projectile slug load, result in increased penetration, but at the expense of fewer projectiles and lower probability of hitting the target.

Aside from the most common use against small, fast moving targets, the shotgun has several advantages when used against still targets.
First, it has enormous stopping power at short range, more than nearly all handguns and many rifles.
Though many believe the shotgun is a great firearm for inexperienced shooters, the truth is, at close range, the spread of shot is not very large at all, and competency in aiming is still required.
A typical self-defense load of buckshot contains 8–27 large lead pellets, resulting in many wound tracks in the target.
Also, unlike a fully jacketed rifle bullet, each pellet of shot is less likely to penetrate walls and hit bystanders (though in the case of traditional 00-Buck, overpenetration of soft and hard targets may be an issue).
It is favored by law enforcement for its low penetration and high stopping power.

On the other hand, the hit potential of a defensive shotgun is often overstated.
The typical defensive shot is taken at very close ranges, at which the shot charge expands no more than a few centimeters.
This means the shotgun must still be aimed at the target with some care.
Balancing this is the fact that shot spreads further upon entering the target, and the multiple wound channels are far more likely to produce a disabling wound than a rifle or handgun.

===
Sporting ===
Some of the most common uses of shotguns are the sports of skeet shooting, trap shooting, and sporting clays.
These involve shooting clay discs, also known as clay pigeons, thrown in by hand and by machine.
Both skeet and trap competitions are featured at the Olympic Games.

===
Hunting ===
The shotgun is popular for bird hunting (called "game-shooting" in the UK, where "hunting" refers to hunting mammals with a pack of hounds), it is also used for more general forms of hunting especially in semi-populated areas where the range of rifle bullets may pose a hazard.
Use of a smoothbore shotgun with a rifled slug or, alternatively, a rifled barrel shotgun with a sabot slug, improves accuracy to 100 m (110 yd) or more.
This is well within the range of the majority of kill shots by experienced hunters using shotguns.

However, given the relatively low muzzle velocity of slug ammunition, typically around 500 m/s (about 1600 feet per second), and the blunt, poorly streamlined shape of typical slugs (which cause them to lose velocity very rapidly, compared to rifle bullets), a hunter must pay close attention to the ballistics of the particular ammunition used to ensure an effective and humane kill shot.

At any reasonable range, shotgun slugs make effective lethal wounds due to their tremendous mass, reducing the length of time that an animal might suffer.
For example, a typical 12-gauge shotgun slug is a blunt piece of metal that could be described as an 18 mm (.729 inch) caliber that weighs 28 grams (432 grains).
For comparison, a common deer-hunting rifle round is a 7.62 mm (.308 inch) slug weighing 9.7 grams (150 grains), but the dynamics of the rifle cartridge allow for a different type of wound, and a much further reach.

Shotguns are often used with rifled barrels in locations where it is not lawful to hunt with a rifle.
Typically, a sabot slug is used in these barrels for maximum accuracy and performance.
Shotguns are often used to hunt whitetail deer in the thick brush and briers of the Southeastern and upper Midwestern United States, where, due to the dense cover, ranges tend to be close – 25m or less.

Sabot slugs are essentially very large hollow point bullets, and are streamlined for maximum spin and accuracy when shot through a rifled barrel.
They have greater ranges than older Foster and Brenneke-type slugs.

People often use semiautomatic or pump action shotguns for hunting waterfowl to small game.
===
Law enforcement ===
In the US and Canada, shotguns are widely used as a support weapon by police forces.
One of the rationales for issuing shotguns is that, even without much training, an officer will probably be able to hit targets at close to intermediate range, due to the "spreading" effect of buckshot.
This is largely a myth, as the spread of buckshot at 25 feet averages 8 inches, which is still very capable of missing a target.
Some police forces are replacing shotguns in this role with carbine rifles such as AR-15s.
Shotguns are also used in roadblock situations, where police are blocking a highway to search cars for suspects.
In the US, law enforcement agencies often use riot shotguns, especially for crowd and riot control where they may be loaded with less-lethal rounds such as rubber bullets or bean bags.
Shotguns are also often used as breaching devices to defeat locks.

===
Military ===
Shotguns are common weapons in military use, particularly for special purposes.
Shotguns are found aboard naval vessels for shipboard security, because the weapon is very effective at close range as a way of repelling enemy boarding parties.
In a naval setting, stainless steel shotguns are often used, because regular steel is more prone to corrosion in the marine environment.
Shotguns are also used by military police units.
U.S. Marines have used shotguns since their inception at the squad level, often in the hands of NCOs, while the U.S. Army often issued them to a squad's point man.
Shotguns were modified for and used in the trench warfare of WWI, in the jungle combat of WWII and the Vietnam War.
Shotguns were also used in the Iraq War, being popular with soldiers in urban combat environments.
Some U.S. units in Iraq used shotguns with special frangible breaching rounds to blow the locks off doors when making a surprise entry into a dwelling.

===
Home and personal defense ===
Shotguns are a popular means of home defense for many of the same reasons they are preferred for close-quarters tasks in law enforcement and the military.

==
Design features for various uses ==
Compared to handguns
, shotguns are heavier, larger, and not as maneuverable in close quarters (which also presents a greater retention problem), but do have these advantages:

They are generally much more powerful.

The average shooter can engage multiple targets faster than with a handgun.

They are generally perceived as more intimidating.

On average, a quality pump-action shotgun is generally less expensive than a quality handgun (self-loading shotguns are generally more expensive than their pump-action counterparts).

When loaded with smaller shot, a shotgun will not penetrate walls as readily as rifle and pistol rounds, making it safer for non-combatants when fired in or around populated structures.
This comes at a price, however, as smaller shot may not penetrate deeply enough to cause an immediately incapacitating wound; those who recommend birdshot for minimizing wall penetration also suggest backing it up with a larger buckshot if the first shot fails to stop the threat.

== Types ==
The wide range of forms the shotgun can take leads to some significant differences between what is technically a shotgun and what is legally considered a shotgun.
A fairly broad attempt to define a shotgun is made in the United States Code (18 USC 921), which defines the shotgun as "a weapon designed or redesigned, made or remade, and intended to be fired from the shoulder, and designed or redesigned and made or remade to use the energy of the explosive in a fixed shotgun shell to fire through a smoothbore either a number of ball shot or a single projectile for each single pull of the trigger.
"
It is even more broadly defined in English law: "a smooth bore gun not being an air gun"
(s.1(3)(a) Firearms Act 1968).

A rifled slug, with finned rifling designed to enable the projectile to be safely fired through a choked barrel, is an example of a single projectile.
Some shotguns have rifled barrels and are designed to be used with a "saboted" bullet, one which is typically encased in a two-piece plastic ring (sabot) designed to peel away after it exits the barrel, leaving the bullet, now spinning after passing through the rifled barrel, to continue toward the target.
These shotguns, although they have rifled barrels, still use a shotgun-style shell instead of a rifle cartridge and may in fact still fire regular multipellet shotgun shells, but the rifling in the barrel will affect the shot pattern.
The use of a rifled barrel blurs the distinction between rifle and shotgun.
Hunting laws may differentiate between smooth barreled and rifled barreled guns.

Combat shotgun is a shotgun designed for offensive purposes, typically for the military.

Riot shotgun has long been a synonym for a shotgun, especially a short-barrelled shotgun.
During the 19th and early 20th century, these were used to disperse protesters, rioters and revolutionaries.
The wide spray of the shot ensured a large group would be hit, but the light shot would ensure more wounds than fatalities.
When the ground was paved, police officers would often ricochet the shot off the ground, slowing down the shot and spreading pattern even further.
To this day specialized police and defensive shotguns are called riot shotguns.
The introduction of rubber bullets and bean bag rounds ended the practice of using shot for the most part, but riot shotguns are still used to fire a variety of less-lethal rounds for riot control.

A sawed-off shotgun (or "sawn-off") refers to a shotgun whose barrel has been shortened, leaving it more maneuverable, easier to use at short range and more readily concealed.
Many countries establish a legal minimum barrel length that precludes easy concealment (this length is 18 inches (460 mm) in the U.S. and 24 inches in the UK).
The sawed-off shotgun is sometimes known as a "lupara" (in Italian a generic reference to the word "lupo" ("wolf")) in Southern Italy and Sicily.

Coach guns are similar to sawn-off shotguns, except they are manufactured with a 46 cm (18") barrel and are legal for civilian ownership in some jurisdictions.
Coach guns are also more commonly associated with the American Old West or Australian Colonial period, and often used for hunting in bush, scrub, or marshland where a longer barrel would be unwieldy or impractical.

Snake Charmer shotguns are commonly used by gardeners and farmers for pest control.
They have short barrels and either a full-size stocks or pistol grips, depending on legislation in intended markets.
The overall length of these weapons is frequently less than 90 cm (35 in), with some measuring up at less than 63 cm (25 in).
These weapons are typically single-shot break-action .410 "gauge" (caliber), which may or may not hold extra shot-shells in the butt-stock.
They typically have a cylinder bore and sometimes are available in modified choke as well.
Snake Charmers are popular for "home defense" purposes and as "survival" weapons.

Other examples include a variety of .410 / rifle "survival" guns manufactured in over/under designs.
In the combination gun arrangement, a rimfire or centrefire rifle barrel is located beneath the barrel of a .410 gauge shotgun.
Generally, there is one manually cocked external hammer and an external selection lever to select which caliber of cartridge to fire.
A notable example is the Springfield Armory M6 Scout, a .410 / .22 issued to United States Air Force personnel as a "survival" gun in the event of a forced landing or accident in a wilderness area.
Variants have been used by Israeli, Canadian, and American armed forces.
Shotgun-rifle combination guns with two, three, and occasionally even four barrels are available from a number of makers, primarily European.
These provided flexibility, enabling the hunter to effectively shoot at flushing birds or more distant small mammals while only carrying one gun.

==
History ==
Most early firearms, such as the blunderbuss, arquebus, and musket had large diameter, smoothbore barrels, and could fire shot as well as solid balls.
A firearm intended for use in wing shooting of birds was known as a fowling piece.
The 1728 Cyclopaedia defines a fowling piece as:

Fowling Piece, a portable Fire Arm for the shooting of Birds.
See Fire Arm.

Of Fowling Pieces, those are reputed the best, which have the longest Barrel, vis.
from 5​1⁄2 foot to 6; with an indifferent Bore, under Harquebus
: Tho' for different Occasions
they shou'd be of different Sorts, and Sizes.
But in all, 'tis essential the Barrel be well polish'd and smooth within; and the Bore all of a Bigness, from one End to another...
For example, the Brown Bess musket, in service with the British army from 1722 to 1838, had a 19 mm (.75 inch) smoothbore barrel, roughly the same as a 10-gauge shotgun, and was 157 cm (62 in)
long, just short of the above recommended 168 cm (5​1⁄2 feet).
On the other hand, records from the Plymouth colony show a maximum length of 137 cm (4​1⁄2 feet) for fowling pieces, shorter than the typical musket.

Shot was also used in warfare;
the buck and ball loading, combining a musket ball with three or six buckshot, was used throughout the history of the smoothbore musket.
The first recorded use of the term shotgun was in 1776 in Kentucky.
It was noted as part of the "frontier language of the West" by James Fenimore Cooper.

With the adoption of smaller bores and rifled barrels, the shotgun began to emerge as a separate entity.
Shotguns have long been the preferred method for sport hunting of birds, and the largest shotguns, the punt guns, were used for commercial hunting.
The double-barreled shotgun has changed little since the development of the boxlock action in 1875.
Modern innovations such as interchangeable chokes and subgauge inserts make the double-barreled shotgun the shotgun of choice in skeet, trap shooting, and sporting clays, as well as with many hunters.

As wing shooting has been a prestige sport, specialty gunsmiths such as Krieghoff or Perazzi have produced fancy double-barrel guns for wealthy European and American hunters.
These weapons can cost US$5,000 or more; some elaborately decorated presentation guns have sold for up to US$100,000.During its long history, the shotgun has been favored by bird hunters, guards, and law enforcement officials.
The shotgun has fallen in and out of favor with military forces several times in its long history.
Shotguns and similar weapons are simpler than long-range rifles, and were developed earlier.
The development of more accurate and deadlier long-range rifles minimized the usefulness of the shotgun on the open battlefields of European wars.
But armies have "rediscovered" the shotgun for specialty uses many times.
===
19th century ===
During the 19th century, shotguns were mainly employed by cavalry units.
Both sides of the American Civil War employed shotguns.
U.S. cavalry used the shotgun extensively during the Indian Wars in the latter half of the 19th century.
Mounted units favored the shotgun for its moving target effectiveness, and devastating close-range firepower.
The shotgun was also favored by citizen militias and similar groups.

With the exception of cavalry units, the shotgun saw less and less use throughout the 19th century on the battlefield.
As a defense weapon it remained popular with guards and lawmen, however, and the shotgun became one of many symbols of the American Old West.
Lawman Cody Lyons killed two men with a shotgun; his friend Doc Holliday's only confirmed kill was with a shotgun.
The weapon both these men used was the short-barreled version favored by private strongbox guards on stages and trains.
These guards, called express messengers, became known as shotgun messengers, since they rode with the weapon (loaded with buckshot) for defense against bandits.
Passenger carriages carrying a strongbox usually had at least one private guard armed with a shotgun riding in front of the coach, next to the driver.
This practice has survived in American slang; the term "riding shotgun" is used for the passenger who sits in the front passenger seat.
The shotgun was a popular weapon for personal protection in the American Old West, requiring less skill on the part of the user than a revolver.

===
Hammerless shotguns ===
The origins of the hammerless shotgun are European but otherwise obscure.
The earliest breechloading shotguns originated in France and Belgium in the early 19th century (see also the history of the Pinfire) and a number of them such as those by Robert and Chateauvillard from the 1830s and 1840s did not use hammers.
In fact during these decades a wide variety of ingenious weapons, including rifles, adopted what is now often known as a 'needle-fire' method of igniting the charge, where a firing pin or a longer sharper needle provided the necessary impact.
The most widely used British hammerless needle-fire shotgun was the unusual hinged-chamber fixed-barrel breech-loader by Joseph Needham, produced from the 1850s.
By the 1860s hammerless guns were increasingly used in Europe both in war and sport although hammer guns were still very much in the majority.
The first significant encroachment on hammer guns was a hammerless patent which could be used with a conventional side-lock.
This was British gunmaker T. Murcott's 1871 action nicknamed the 'mousetrap' on account of its loud snap action.
However, the most successful hammerless innovation of the 1870s was Anson and Deeley's boxlock patent of 1875.
This simple but ingenious design only used four moving parts allowing the production of cheaper and reliable shotguns.

Daniel Myron LeFever is credited with the invention of the American hammerless shotgun.
Working for Barber & LeFever in Syracuse, New York, he introduced his first hammerless shotgun in 1878.
This gun was cocked with external cocking levers on the side of the breech.
He went on to patent the first truly automatic hammerless shotgun in 1883.
This gun automatically cocked itself when the breech was closed.
He later developed the mechanism to automatically eject the shells when the breech was opened.

===
John Moses Browning ===
One of the men most responsible for the modern development of the shotgun was prolific gun designer John Browning.
While working for Winchester Firearms, Browning revolutionized shotgun design.
In 1887, Browning introduced the Model 1887 Lever Action Repeating Shotgun, which loaded a fresh cartridge from its internal magazine by the operation of the action lever.
Before this time most shotguns were the 'break open' type.

This development was greatly overshadowed by two further innovations he introduced at the end of the 19th century.
In 1893, Browning produced the Model 1893 Pump Action Shotgun, introducing the now familiar pump action to the market.
And in 1900, he patented the Browning Auto-5, America's first semi-automatic shotgun.
The first semi-automatic shotgun in the world was patented in 1891-1893 by the Clair brothers of France.
The Browning Auto-5 remained in production until 1998.

===
World wars ===
The decline in military use of shotguns reversed in World War I. American forces under General Pershing employed 12-gauge pump action shotguns when they were deployed to the Western Front in 1917.
These shotguns were fitted with bayonets and a heat shield so the barrel could be gripped while the bayonet was deployed.
Shotguns fitted in this fashion became known as trench guns by the United States Army.
Those without such modifications were known as riot guns.
After World War I, the United States military began referring to all shotguns as riot guns.

Due to the cramped conditions of trench warfare, the American shotguns were extremely effective.
Germany even filed an official diplomatic protest against their use, alleging they violated the laws of warfare.
The judge advocate general reviewed the protest, and it was rejected because the Germans protested use of lead shot (which would have been illegal) but military shot was plated.
This is the only occasion the legality of the shotgun's use in warfare has been questioned.

During World War II, the shotgun was not heavily used in the war in Europe by official military forces.
However, the shotgun was a favorite weapon of Allied-supported partisans, such as the French Resistance.
By contrast, in the Pacific theater, thick jungles and heavily fortified positions made the shotgun a favorite weapon of the United States Marines.
Marines tended to use pump shotguns, since the pump action was less likely to jam in the humid and dirty conditions of the Pacific campaign.
Similarly, the United States Navy used pump shotguns to guard ships when in port in Chinese harbors (e.g., Shanghai).
The United States Army Air Forces also used pump shotguns to guard bombers and other aircraft against saboteurs when parked on airbases across the Pacific and on the West Coast of the United States.
Pump and semi-automatic shotguns were used in marksmanship training, particularly for bomber gunners.
The most common pump shotguns used for these duties were the 12-gauge Winchester Model 97 and Model 12.
The break-open action, single barrel shotgun was used by the British Home Guard and U.S. home security forces.
Notably, industrial centers (such as the Gopher State Steel Works) were guarded by National Guard soldiers with Winchester Model 37 12-gauge shotguns.

===
Late 20th century to present
===
Since the end of World War II, the shotgun has remained a specialty weapon for modern armies.
It has been deployed for specialized tasks where its strengths were put to particularly good use.
It was used to defend machine gun emplacements during the Korean War, American and French jungle patrols used shotguns during the Vietnam War, and shotguns saw extensive use as door breaching and close quarter weapons in the early stages of the Iraq War, and saw limited use in tank crews.
Many modern navies make extensive use of shotguns by personnel engaged in boarding hostile ships, as any shots fired will almost certainly be over a short range.
Nonetheless, shotguns are far less common in military use than rifles, carbines, submachineguns, or pistols.

On the other hand, the shotgun has become a standard in law enforcement use.
A variety of specialty less-lethal or non-lethal ammunitions, such as tear gas shells, bean bags, flares, explosive sonic stun rounds, and rubber projectiles, all packaged into 12-gauge shotgun shells, are produced specifically for the law enforcement market.
Recently, Taser International introduced a self-contained electronic weapon which is fired from a standard 12-gauge shotgun.
The shotgun remains a standard firearm for hunting throughout the world for all sorts of game from birds and small game to large game such as deer.
The versatility of the shotgun as a hunting weapon has steadily increased as slug rounds and more advanced rifled barrels have given shotguns longer range and higher killing power.
The shotgun has become a ubiquitous firearm in the hunting community.

==
Design factors ==


===
Action ===
The action is the operating mechanism of a gun.
There are many types of shotguns, typically categorized by the number of barrels or the way the gun is reloaded.

====
Break-action ====
For most of the history of the shotgun, the breechloading break-action shotgun was the most common type, and double-barreled variants are by far the most commonly seen in modern days.
These are typically divided into two subtypes: the traditional "side-by-side" shotgun features two barrels mounted horizontally beside each other (as the name suggests), whereas the "over-and-under" shotgun has the two barrels mounted vertically one on top of the other.
Side-by-side shotguns were traditionally used for hunting and other sporting pursuits (early long-barreled side-by-side shotguns were known as "fowling pieces" for their use hunting ducks and other waterbirds as well as some landfowls), whereas over-and-under shotguns are more commonly associated with recreational use (such as clay pigeon shooting).
Both types of double-barrel shotgun are used for hunting and sporting use, with the individual configuration largely being a matter of personal preference.

Another, less commonly encountered type of break-action shotgun is the combination gun, which is an over-and-under design with one smoothbore barrel and one rifle barrel
(more often rifle on top, but rifle on bottom was not uncommon).
There is also a class of break-action guns called drillings, which contain three barrels, usually two smoothbore barrels of the same gauge and a rifled barrel,
though the only common theme is that at least one barrel be smoothbore.
The most common arrangement was essentially a side-by-side shotgun with the rifled barrel below and centered.
Usually a drilling containing more than one rifled barrel would have both rifled barrels in the same caliber, but examples do exist with different caliber barrels, usually a .22 long rifle and a centerfire cartridge.
Although very rare, drillings with three and even four (a vierling) shotgun barrels were made.

====
Pump-action ====
In pump-action shotguns, a linearly sliding fore-end handguard (i.e. pump) is manually moved back-and-forth like a hand pump to work the action, extracting the spent shell and inserting a new round, while cocking the hammer or striker.
A pump gun is typically fed from a tubular magazine underneath the barrel, which also serves as a guide rail for the pump.
The rounds are fed in one by one through a port in the receiver, where they are lifted by a lever called the elevator and pushed forward into the chamber by the bolt.
A pair of latches at the rear of the magazine hold the rounds in place and facilitate feeding of one shell at a time.
If it is desired to load the gun fully, a round may be loaded through the ejection port directly into the chamber, or cycled from the magazine, which is then topped off with another round.
Well-known examples include the Winchester Model 1897, Remington 870 and Mossberg 500/590.

Pump-action shotguns are common hunting, fowling and sporting shotguns.
Hunting models generally have a barrel between 600 and 700 mm (24"-28").
Tube-fed models designed for hunting often come with a dowel rod or other stop that is inserted into the magazine and reduces the capacity of the gun to three shells (two in the magazine and one chambered) as is mandated by U.S. federal law when hunting migratory birds.
They can also easily be used with an empty magazine as a single-shot weapon, by simply dropping the next round to be fired into the open ejection port after the spent round is ejected.
For this reason, pump-actions are commonly used to teach novice shooters under supervision, as the trainer can load each round more quickly than with a break-action, while unlike a break-action the student can maintain his grip on the gun and concentrate on proper handling and firing of the weapon.

Pump-action shotguns with shorter barrels and little or no barrel choke are highly popular for use in home defense, military and law enforcement, and are commonly known as riot guns.
The minimum barrel length for shotguns in most of the U.S. is 18 inches (460 mm), and this barrel length (sometimes 18.5–20 in (470–510 mm) to increase magazine capacity and/or ensure the gun is legal regardless of measuring differences) is the primary choice for riot shotguns.
The shorter barrel makes the weapon easier to maneuver around corners and in tight spaces, though slightly longer barrels are sometimes used outdoors for a tighter spread pattern or increased accuracy of slug projectiles.
Home-defense and law enforcement shotguns are usually chambered for 12-gauge shells, providing maximum shot power and the use of a variety of projectiles such as buckshot, rubber, sandbag and slug shells, but 20-gauge (common in bird-hunting shotguns) or .410
(common in youth-size shotguns) are also available in defense-type shotgun models allowing easier use by novice shooters.

A riot shotgun has many advantages over a handgun or rifle.
Compared to "defense-caliber" handguns (chambered for 9mm Parabellum, .38 Special, .357 Magnum, .40 S&W, .45 ACP and similar), a shotgun has far more power and damage potential (up to 10 times the muzzle energy of a .45 ACP cartridge), allowing a "one-shot stop" that is more difficult to achieve with typical handgun loads.
Compared to a rifle, riot shotguns are easier to maneuver due to the shorter barrel, still provide better damage potential at indoor distances (generally 3–5 meters/yards), and reduce the risk of "overpenetration"; that is, the bullet or shot passing completely through the target and continuing beyond, which poses a risk to those behind the target through walls.
The wide spread of the shot reduces the importance of shot placement compared to a single projectile, which increases the effectiveness of "point shooting" – rapidly aiming simply by pointing the weapon in the direction of the target.
This allows easy, fast use by novices.

====
Lever-action ====
Early attempts at repeating shotguns invariably centred around either bolt-or lever-action designs, drawing inspiration from contemporary repeating rifles, with the earliest successful repeating shotgun being the lever-action Winchester M1887, designed by John Browning at the behest of the Winchester Repeating Arms Company.

Lever shotguns, while less common, were popular in the late 19th century with the Winchester Model 1887 and Model 1901 being prime examples.
Initially very popular, demand waned after the introduction of pump-action shotguns around the start of the 20th century, and production was eventually discontinued in 1920.

One major issue with lever-actions (and to a lesser extent pump-actions) was that early shotgun shells were often made of paper or similar fragile materials (modern hulls are plastic or metal).
As a result, the loading of shells, or working of the action of the shotgun, could often result in cartridges getting crushed and becoming unusable, or even damaging the gun.

Lever shotguns have seen a return to the gun market in recent years, however, with Winchester producing the Model 9410 (chambering the .410 gauge shotgun shell and using the action of the Winchester Model 94 series lever-action rifle, hence the name), and a handful of other firearm manufacturers (primarily Norinco of China and ADI Ltd. of Australia) producing versions of the Winchester Model 1887/1901 designed for modern 12-gauge smokeless shotshells with more durable plastic casings.
There has been a notable uptick in lever-action shotgun sales in Australia since 1997, when pump-actions were effectively outlawed.

====
Bolt-action ====
Bolt-action shotguns, while uncommon, do exist.
One of the best-known examples is a 12-gauge manufactured by Mossberg featuring a 3-round magazine, marketed in Australia just after changes to the gun laws in 1997 heavily restricted the ownership and use of pump-action and semi-automatic shotguns.
They were not a huge success, as they were somewhat slow and awkward to operate, and the rate of fire was noticeably slower (on average) than a double-barrelled gun.
The Rifle Factory Ishapore in India also manufactured a single-shot .410 bore shotgun based on the SMLE Mk III* rifle.
The Russian Berdana shotgun was effectively a single-shot bolt-action rifle that became obsolete, and was subsequently modified to chamber 16-gauge shotgun shells for civilian sale.
The U.S. military M26 is also a bolt-action weapon.
Bolt-action shotguns have also been used in the "goose gun" application, intended to kill birds such as geese at greater range.
Typically, goose guns have long barrels (up to 36 inches), and small bolt-fed magazines.
Bolt-action shotguns are also used in conjunction with slug shells for the maximum possible accuracy from a shotgun.
In Australia, some straight-pull bolt-action shotguns, such as the Turkish-made Pardus BA12 and Dickinson T1000, the American C-More Competition M26, as well as the indigenous-designed SHS STP 12, have become increasingly popular alternatives to lever-action shotguns, largely due to the better ergonomics with less stress on the shooter's trigger hand and fingers when cycling the action.

====
Revolver ====
Colt briefly manufactured several revolving shotguns that were met with mixed success.
The Colt Model 1839 Shotgun was manufactured between 1839 and 1841.
Later, the Colt Model 1855 Shotgun, based on the Model 1855 revolving rifle, was manufactured between 1860 and 1863.
Because of their low production numbers and age they are among the rarest of all Colt firearms.
The Armsel Striker was a modern take on the revolving shotgun that held 10 rounds of 12-gauge ammunition in its cylinder.
It was copied by Cobray as the Streetsweeper.
Taurus manufactures a carbine variant of the Taurus Judge revolver along with its Australian partner company, Rossi known as the Taurus/Rossi Circuit Judge.
It comes in the original combination chambering of .410 bore and .45 Long Colt, as well as the .44 Remington Magnum chambering.
The rifle has small blast shields attached to the cylinder to protect the shooter from hot gases escaping between the cylinder and barrel.

The MTs255 (Russian:
МЦ255) is a shotgun fed by a 5-round internal revolving cylinder.
It is produced by the TsKIB SOO, Central Design and Research Bureau of Sporting and Hunting Arms.
They are available in 12, 20, 28 and 32 gauges, and .410 bore.

====
Semi-automatic ====

Recoil/inertia-driven or gas-operated actions are other popular methods of increasing the rate of fire of a shotgun; these self-loading shotguns are generally referred to as autoloaders.
Instead of having the action manually operated by a pump or lever, the action automatically cycles each time the shotgun is fired, ejecting the spent shell and reloading a fresh one into the chamber.
The first successful semi-automatic shotgun was John Browning's Auto-5, first produced by Fabrique Nationale beginning in 1902.
Other well-known examples include the Remington 1100, Benelli M1, and Saiga-12.
Some, such as the Franchi SPAS-12 and Benelli M3, are capable of switching between semi-automatic and pump action.
These are popular for two reasons; first, some jurisdictions forbid the use of semi-automatic actions for hunting, and second, lower-powered rounds, like "reduced-recoil" buckshot shells and many less-lethal cartridges, have insufficient power to reliably cycle a semi-automatic shotgun.

====
Automatic ====
Fully automatic shotguns, such as Auto Assault-12 (AA-12) also exist, but they're still rare.

====
Other ====
In addition to the commonly encountered shotgun actions already listed, there are also shotguns based on the Martini-Henry rifle design, originally designed by British arms maker W.W. Greener.

Some of the more interesting advances in shotgun technology include the versatile NeoStead 2000 and fully automatics such as the Pancor Jackhammer or Auto-Assault 12.

In 1925, Rodolfo Cosmi produced the first working prototype hybrid semi-automatic shotgun, which had an 8-round magazine located in the stock.
While it reloaded automatically after each shot like a semi-automatic, it had a break-action to load the first shell.
This design has only been repeated once, by Beretta with their UGB25 automatic shotgun.
The user loads the first shell by breaking the gun in the manner of a break-action shotgun, then closes it and inserts the second shell into a clip on the gun's right side.
The spent hulls are ejected downwards.
The guns combine the advantages of the break action (they can be proven to be safe by breaking open, there are no flying hulls) with those of the semi-automatic (low recoil, low barrel axis position hence low muzzle flip).

The Italian firearms manufacturer Benelli Armi SpA also makes the Benelli M3, a dual-mode hybrid shotgun that allows the user the choice of semi-automatic or pump-action operation.
Pump-action operation is employed when shooting less energetic shells (such as baton rounds) that do not generate enough recoil to operate the semi-automatic mechanism.
Conversely, the semi-automatic mode can be employed with more powerful shells, absorbing some of the recoil.
Switching between the two modes is done by manipulating the ring located at the front of the foregrip.

The French firearm manufacturer Verney-Carron produces the Véloce shotgun, a "lever-release blowback firearm" using bolt catch mechanism like its similarly designed SpeedLine rifle.
The Véloce is in essence a modified inertia-driven semi-automatic shotgun, but after blowback the bolt is trapped by a bolt stop and cannot return to battery unless it is manually released by depressing a thumb lever near the tang of the grip.
Because the gun will not chamber a new round without manual actuation, the design is technically not really a self-loading, and Verney-Carron described it as a "manual repeating shotgun".
When Australian firearm dealers tried to import the Véloce shotgun in 2018, Greens' David Shoebridge and anti-gun groups such as Gun Control Australia caused a moral panic on the mainstream media, calling it "semi-semi-automatic" that needed to be prohibited as a "rapid-fire weapon".

===
Gauge ===
The gauge number is determined by the weight, in fractions of a pound, of a solid sphere of lead with a diameter equal to the inside diameter of the barrel.
So, a 10-gauge shotgun nominally should have an inside diameter equal to that of a sphere made from one-tenth of a pound of lead.
Each gauge has a set caliber.
By far the most common gauges are 12 (0.729 in, 18.5 mm diameter) and 20 (0.614 in, 15.6 mm), although 67 (.410 in diameter), 32, 28, 24, 16, and 10 (19.7 mm)
gauge also exist.

Different gauges have different typical applications.
12-gauge shotguns are common for hunting geese, large ducks, or other big larger gamebirds; professional skeet and trap shooting; military applications; and home-defense applications.
16-gauge shotguns were once common for hunters who wanted to use only a single shotgun for gamebirds normally pursued with 12 or 20-gauge shotguns, but have become rarer in recent years.
20-gauge shotguns are often used for gamebirds such as doves, smaller ducks, and quail.
28-gauge shotguns are not common, but are classic quail-hunting guns.
.410
gauge shotguns are typically used for squirrel hunting or for sportsmen seeking the challenge of killing game with a smaller load.

Other, less common shotgun cartridges have their own unique uses.
Ammunition manufacturer CCI produces 9 mm (.355 in.)
and several other popular pistol calibers up to .45 ACP as well as .22 (5.5 mm) for firing from handguns.
These are commonly called snake shot cartridges.
Larger gauges, up to 4 bore, too powerful to shoulder, have been built, but were generally affixed to small boats and referred to as punt guns.
These were used for commercial waterfowl hunting, to kill large numbers of birds resting on the water.

Handguns have also been produced that are capable of firing either .45
(Long) Colt or .410
shotgun shells from the same chamber
; they are commonly known as "snake guns".
Derringers such as the "Snake Slayer and Cowboy Defender" are popular among some outdoors-men in the South and Southwest regions of the United States.
There are also some revolvers, such as the Taurus Judge and Smith & Wesson Governor, that are capable of shooting the .45LC/.410 rounds; but as with derringers they are not considered shotguns.

The .410 bore (10.4 mm) is unusual, being measured in inches, and would be approximately 67 "real" gauge, though its short hull versions are nominally called 36-gauge in Europe.
It uses a relatively small charge of shot.
It is used for hunting and for skeet.
Because of its very light recoil (approx 10 N), it is often used as a beginner's gun.
However, the small charge and typically tight choke make it more difficult to hit targets.
It is also frequently used by expert shooters because of the difficulty, especially in expensive side by side and over/under models for hunting small bird game such as quail and doves.
Inexpensive bolt-action .410
shotguns are a very common first hunting shotgun among young pre-teen hunters, as they are used mostly for hunting squirrels, while additionally teaching bolt-action manipulation skills that will transfer easily later to adult-sized hunting rifles.
Most of these young hunters move up to a 20-gauge within a few years, and to 12-gauge shotguns and full-size hunting rifles by their late teens.
Still, many who are particularly recoil-averse choose to stay with 20-gauge shotguns all their adult life, as it is a suitable gauge for many popular hunting uses.

A recent innovation is the back-boring of barrels, in which the barrels are bored out slightly larger than their actual gauge.
This reduces the compression forces on the shot when it transitions from the chamber to the barrel.
This leads to a slight reduction in perceived recoil, and an improvement in shot pattern due to reduced deformation of the shot.

=== Shot ===
Most shotguns are used to fire "a number of ball shot", in addition to slugs and sabots.
The ball shot or pellets is for the most part made of lead but this has been partially replaced by bismuth, steel, tungsten-iron, tungsten-nickel-iron and even tungsten polymer loads.
Non-toxic loads are required by Federal law for waterfowl hunting in the US, as the shot may be ingested by the waterfowl, which some authorities believe can lead to health problems due to the lead exposure.
Shot is termed either birdshot or buckshot depending on the shot size.
Informally, birdshot pellets have a diameter smaller than 5 mm (0.20 in) and buckshot are larger than that.
Pellet size is indicated by a number; for bird shot this ranges from the smallest 12 (1.2 mm, 0.05 in) to 2 (3.8 mm, 0.15 in) and then BB (4.6 mm, 0.18 in).For buckshot, the numbers usually start at 4 (6.1 mm, 0.24 in) and go down to 1, 0, 00 ("double aught"), 000, and finally 0000 (
9.7 mm, .38 in).
A different informal distinction is that "bird shot" pellets are small enough that they can be measured into the cartridge by weight, and simply poured in, whereas "buckshot" pellets are so large they must be stacked inside the cartridge in a fixed geometric arrangement in order to fit.
The diameter in hundredths of an inch of bird shot sizes from #9 to #1 can be obtained by subtracting the shot size from 17.
Thus, #4 bird shot is 17 – 4 = 13 = 0.13 inches (3.3 mm) in diameter.
Different terminology is used outside the United States.
In England and Australia, for example, 00 buckshot cartridges are commonly referred to as "S.G." (small game) cartridges.

===
Pattern and choke ===
Shot, small and round and delivered without spin, is ballistically inefficient.
As the shot leaves the barrel it begins to disperse in the air.
The resulting cloud of pellets is known as the shot pattern, or shotgun shot spread.
The ideal pattern would be a circle with an even distribution of shot throughout, with a density sufficient to ensure enough pellets will intersect the target to achieve the desired result, such as a kill when hunting or a break when shooting clay targets.
In reality the pattern is closer to a Gaussian, or normal distribution, with a higher density in the center that tapers off at the edges.
Patterns are usually measured by firing at a 30-inch (76 cm) diameter circle on a large sheet of paper placed at varying distances.
The hits inside the circle are counted, and compared to the total number of pellets, and the density of the pattern inside the circle is examined.
An "ideal" pattern would put nearly 100% of the pellets in the circle and would have no voids—any region where a target silhouette will fit and not cover
3 or more holes is considered a potential problem.

A constriction in the end of the barrel known as the choke is used to tailor the pattern for different purposes.
Chokes may either be formed as part of the barrel at the time of manufacture, by squeezing the end of the bore down over a mandrel, or by threading the barrel and screwing in an interchangeable choke tube.
The choke typically consists of a conical section that smoothly tapers from the bore diameter down to the choke diameter, followed by a cylindrical section of the choke diameter.
Briley Manufacturing, a maker of interchangeable shotgun chokes, uses a conical portion about three times the bore diameter in length, so the shot is gradually squeezed down with minimal deformation.
The cylindrical section is shorter, usually 0.6 to 0.75 inches (15 to 19 millimetres).
The use of interchangeable chokes has made it easy to tune the performance of a given combination of shotgun and shotshell to achieve the desired performance.

The choke should be tailored to the range and size of the targets.
A skeet shooter shooting at close targets might use 127 micrometres (0.005 inches) of constriction to produce a 76 cm (30 in) diameter pattern at a distance of 19 m (21 yd).
A trap shooter shooting at distant targets might use 762 micrometres (0.030 inches) of constriction to produce a 76 cm (30 in) diameter pattern at 37 m (40 yd).
Special chokes for turkey hunting, which requires long range shots at the small head and neck of the bird, can go as high as 1500 micrometres (0.060 inches).
The use of too much choke and a small pattern increases the difficulty of hitting the target, whereas the use of too little choke produces large patterns with insufficient pellet density to reliably break targets or kill game.
"
Cylinder barrels" have no constriction.

Other specialized choke tubes exist as well.
Some turkey hunting tubes have constrictions greater than "Super Full", or additional features like porting to reduce recoil, or "straight rifling" that is designed to stop any spin that the shot column might acquire when traveling down the barrel.
These tubes are often extended tubes, meaning they project beyond the end of the bore, giving more room for things like a longer conical section.
Shot spreaders or diffusion chokes work opposite of normal chokes—they are designed to spread the shot more than a cylinder bore, generating wider patterns for very short range use.
A number of recent spreader chokes, such as the Briley "Diffusion" line, actually use rifling in the choke to spin the shot slightly, creating a wider spread.
The Briley Diffusion uses a 1 in 36 cm twist, as does the FABARM Lion Paradox shotgun.

Oval chokes, which are designed to provide a shot pattern wider than it is tall, are sometimes found on combat shotguns, primarily those of the Vietnam War era.
They were available for aftermarket addition in the 1970s from companies like A & W Engineering.
Military versions of the Ithaca 37 with duckbill choke were used in limited numbers during the Vietnam War by US Navy Seals.
It arguably increased effectiveness in close range engagements against multiple targets.
Two major disadvantages plagued the system.
One was erratic patterning.
The second was that the shot would spread too quickly providing a limited effective zone.

Offset chokes, where the pattern is intentionally slightly off of center, are used to change the point of impact.
For instance, an offset choke can be used to make a double barrelled shotgun with poorly aligned barrels hit the same spot with both barrels.

=== Barrel length ===
Shotguns generally have longer barrels than modern rifles.
Unlike rifles, however, the long shotgun barrel is not for ballistic purposes; shotgun shells use small powder charges in large diameter bores, and this leads to very low muzzle pressures (see internal ballistics) and very little velocity change with increasing barrel length.
According to Remington, modern powder in a shotgun burns completely in 25 (9.8425 in) to 36 (14.173 in) cm barrels.

Since shotguns are generally used for shooting at small, fast moving targets, it is important to lead the target by firing slightly ahead of the target, so that when the shot reaches the range of the target, the target will have moved into the pattern.

Shotguns made for close ranges, where the angular speed of the targets is great (such as skeet or upland bird hunting), tend to have shorter barrels, around 24 to 28 inches (610 to 710 millimetres).
Shotguns for longer range shooting, where angular speeds are small (trap shooting; quail, pheasant, and waterfowl hunting), tend to have longer barrels, 28 to 36 inches (910 mm).
The longer barrels have more angular momentum, and will therefore swing more slowly but more steadily.
The short, low angular momentum barrels swing faster, but are less steady.
These lengths are for pump or semi-auto shotguns; break open guns have shorter overall lengths for the same barrel length, and so will use longer barrels.
The break open design saves between 9 and 15 cm (3.5 and 5.9 in) in overall length, but in most cases pays for this by having two barrels, which adds weight at the muzzle.
Barrels for shotguns have been getting longer as modern steels and production methods make the barrels stronger and lighter; a longer, lighter barrel gives the same inertia for less overall weight.

Shotguns for use against larger, slower targets generally have even shorter barrels.
Small game shotguns, for hunting game like rabbits and squirrels, or shotguns for use with buckshot for deer, are often 56 to 61 cm (22 to 24 in).

Shotguns intended for all-round hunting are a compromise, but a 72 to 74 cm (28 to 29 in)
barrel pump-action 12-gauge shotgun with a modified choke can serve admirably for use as one gun intended for general all-round hunting of small-game such as quails, rabbits, pheasants, doves, and squirrels in semi-open wooded or farmland areas in many parts of the eastern US (Kentucky, Indiana, Tennessee) where dense brush is less of a hindrance and the ability to have more reach is important.
For hunting in dense brush, shorter barrel lengths are often preferred when hunting the same types of game.

===
Caliber conversion sleeves ===
Shotguns are well suited for the use caliber conversion sleeves, allowing most single- and double-barrel shotguns to fire a wide range of ammunition.
The X Caliber system consists of eight adapter sleeves that allow the 12-gauge models to fire: .380
ACP, 9mm Luger, .38 Special, .357 Magnum, .40 S&W, .44
Special, .44
Magnum, .45 ACP, .45
Long Colt, .410 gauge and 20-gauge ammunition.
The X caliber 12-gauge adapter sleeves also come in .22
Long Rifle, .223
Remington, 7.62x39mm and .308 Winchester as well.
They even make four adapter sleeves that allow the 20-gauge models to fire:
9mm Luger, .38 Special, .357 Magnum, .45 ACP, .45
Long Colt, and .410 gauge ammunition.

== Ammunition ==
The extremely large caliber of shotgun shells has led to a wide variety of different ammunition.

Shotshells are the most commonly used round, filled with lead or lead substitute pellets.

Of this general class, the most common subset is birdshot, which uses a large number (from dozens to hundreds) of small pellets, meant to create a wide "kill spread" to hunt birds in flight.
Shot shells are described by the size and number of the pellets within, and numbered in reverse order (the smaller the number, the bigger the pellet size, similar to bore gauge).
Size nine (#9) shot is the smallest size normally used for hunting and is used on small upland game birds such as dove and quail.
Larger sizes are used for hunting larger upland game birds and waterfowl.

Buckshot is similar to but larger than birdshot, and was originally designed for hunting larger game, such as deer (hence the name).
While the advent of new, more accurate slug technologies is making buckshot less attractive for hunting, it is still the most common choice for police, military, and home defense uses.
Like birdshot, buckshot is described by pellet size, with larger numbers indicating smaller shot.
From the smallest to the largest, buckshot sizes are: #4, (called "number four"), #1, 0 ("one-aught"), 00 ("double-aught"), 000 ("triple-aught") and 0000 ("four-aught").
A typical round for defensive use would be a 12-gauge 2 3⁄4 inches (7.0 cm) length 00 buck shell, which contains 9 pellets roughly 8.4 millimetres (0.33 in) in diameter, each comparable to a .38 Special bullet in damage potential.
New "tactical" buckshot rounds, designed specifically for defensive use, use slightly fewer shot at lower velocity to reduce recoil and increase controllability of the shotgun.
There are some shotgun rounds designed specifically for police use that shoot effectively from 50 yards (46 m) with a 20" diameter grouping of the balls.

Slug rounds are rounds that fire a single solid slug.
They are used for hunting large game, and in certain military and law enforcement applications.
Modern slugs are moderately accurate, especially when fired from special rifled slug barrels.
They are often used in "shotgun-only" hunting zones near inhabited areas, where rifles are prohibited due to their greater range.

Sabots are a common type of slug round.
While some slugs are exactly that—a 12-gauge metal projectile in a cartridge—a sabot is a smaller but more aerodynamic projectile surrounded by a "shoe" of some other material.
This "sabot" jacket seals the barrel, increasing pressure and acceleration, while also inducing spin on the projectile in a rifled barrel.
Once the projectile clears the barrel, the sabot material falls away, leaving an unmarked, aerodynamic bullet to continue toward the target.
The advantages over a traditional slug are increased shot power, increased bullet velocity due to the lighter-mass bullet, and increased accuracy due to the velocity and the reduction in deformation of the slug itself.
Disadvantages versus a traditional slug include lower muzzle momentum due to reduced mass, reduced damage due to smaller bullet diameter, and significantly higher per-unit cost.

===
Specialty ammunition ===
The unique properties of the shotgun, such as large case capacity, large bore, and the lack of rifling, has led to the development of a large variety of specialty shells, ranging from novelties to high tech military rounds.

====
Hunting, defensive, and military ====
Brenneke and Foster type slugs have the same basic configuration as normal slugs, but have increased accuracy.
The hollowed rear of the Foster slug improves accuracy by placing more mass in the front of the projectile, therefore inhibiting the "tumble" that normal slugs may generate.
The Brenneke slug takes this concept a bit further, with the addition of a wad that stays connected to the projectile after discharge, increasing accuracy.
Both slugs are commonly found with fins or rib, which are meant to allow the projectile to safely squeeze down during passage through chokes, but they do not increase stability in flight.

Flechette rounds contain aerodynamic darts, typically from 8 to 20 in number.
The flechette provide greatly extended range due to their aerodynamic shape, and improved penetration of light armor.
American troops during the Vietnam War packed their own flechette shotgun rounds, called beehive rounds, after the similar artillery rounds.
However, terminal performance was poor due to the very light weight of the flechettes, and their use was quickly dropped.

Grenade rounds use exploding projectiles to increase long range lethality.
These are currently experimental, but the British FRAG-12, which comes in High Explosive (HE),
High Explosive Armor-piercing (HEAP) and High Explosive Fragmenting Antipersonnel (HEFA) forms, is under consideration by military forces.

====
Less-lethal rounds, for riot and animal control ====
Flexible baton rounds, commonly called bean bags, fire a fabric bag filled with birdshot or a similar loose, dense substance.
The "punch" effect of the bag is useful for knocking down targets; the rounds are used by police to subdue violent suspects.
The bean bag round is by far the most common less-lethal round used.
Due to the large surface area of these rounds, they lose velocity rapidly, and must be used at fairly short ranges to be effective, though use at extremely short ranges, under 3 m (9.8 ft), can result in broken bones or other serious or lethal injuries.
The rounds can also fly in a frisbee-like fashion and cut the person or animal being fired at.
For this reason, these types of rounds are referred to as less-lethal, as opposed to less-than-lethal.
Gas shells spray a cone of gas for several meters.
These are primarily used by riot police.
They normally contain pepper gas or tear gas.
Other variations launch a gas-grenade-like projectile.

Rock salt shells are hand loaded with coarse rock salt crystals, replacing the standard lead or steel shot.
Rock salt shells could be seen as the forerunners of modern less-lethal rounds.
In the United States, rock salt shells were and are sometimes still used by rural civilians to defend their property.
The brittle salt was unlikely to cause serious injury at long ranges, but would cause painful stinging injuries and served as a warning.
British gamekeepers have used rock salt shells to deter poachers.
Rather than get into a physical confrontation, they stalk the poachers, making themselves known by a loud shout of "Run!"
just before firing, to avoid hitting the now-fleeing subject in the eyes.

Rubber slugs or rubber buckshot are similar in principle to the bean bag rounds.
Composed of flexible rubber or plastic and fired at low velocities, these rounds are probably the most common choice for riot control.

Taser International announced in 2007 a new 12-gauge eXtended Range Electronic Projectile or XREP, which contains a small electroshock weapon unit in a carrier that can be fired from a standard 12-gauge shotgun.
The XREP projectile is fin stabilized, and travels at an initial velocity of 100 m/s (300 ft/s).
Barbs on the front attach the electroshock unit to the target, with a tassel deploying from the rear to widen the circuit.
A twenty-second burst of electrical energy is delivered to the target.
This product was expected to be released to market in 2008.
They were used—despite still being subject to testing, in breach of the supplier's license—by Northumbria police in their standoff with Raoul Moat in 2010.

Breaching rounds, often called frangible, Disintegrator, or Hatton rounds, are designed to destroy door locking mechanisms without risking lives.
They are constructed of a very brittle substance that transfers most of the energy to the primary target but then fragment into much smaller pieces or dust so as not to injure unseen targets such as hostages or non-combatants that may be standing behind a breached door.

Bird bombs are low-powered rounds that fire a firecracker that is fused to explode a short time after firing.
They are designed to scare animals, such as birds that congregate on airport runways.

Screechers fire a pyrotechnic whistle that emits a loud whistling sound for the duration of its flight.
These are also used to scare animals.

Blank shells contain only a small amount of powder and no actual load.
When fired, the blanks provide the sound and flash of a real load, but with no projectile.
These may be used for simulation of gunfire, scaring wildlife, or as power for a launching device such as the Mossberg #50298 marine line launcher.
Stinger is a type of shotgun shell which contains sixteen 00-buck balls made of Zytel, and is designed as a non-lethal ammunition ideally used in small spaces.

====
Novelty and other ===
=
Bolo rounds are made of two or more slugs molded onto steel wire.
When fired, the slugs separate, pulling the wire taut creating a flying blade, which could theoretically decapitate people and animals or amputate limbs.
However, many active shotgun users consider this to be overstated, and view bolo shells as being less effective than conventional ammunition.
Bolo shell rounds are banned in many locations (including the US states of Florida and Illinois) due to concerns about their potential lethality.
The round is named in reference to bolas, which use two or more weighted balls on a rope to trap cattle or game.

Dragon's breath usually refers to a zirconium-based pyrotechnic shotgun round.
When fired, a gout of flame erupts from the barrel of the gun (up to 20 feet or 6 metres).
The visual effect it produces is impressive, similar to that of a short ranged flamethrower.
However, it has few tactical uses, mainly distraction/disorientation.

Flare rounds are sometimes carried by hunters for safety and rescue purposes.
They are available in low and high altitude versions.
Some brands claim they can reach a height of up to 200 m (660 ft).

==
Legal issues ==
Globally, shotguns are generally not as heavily regulated as rifles or handguns, likely because they lack the range of rifles and are not easily concealable as handguns are; thus, they are perceived as a lesser threat by legislative authorities.
The one exception is a sawed-off shotgun, especially a lupara, as it is more easily concealed than a normal shotgun.

===
Australia ===
Within Australia, all shotguns manufactured after 1 January 1901 are considered firearms and are subject to registration and licensing.
Most shotguns (including break-action, bolt-action and lever-action shotguns) are classed as "Category A" weapons and, as such, are comparatively easy to obtain a licence for, given a legally recognised "legitimate reason" (compare to the British requirement for "good reason" for a FAC), such as sport shooting or hunting.
However, pump-action and semi-automatic shotguns are classed as "Category C" (magazine capacity no more than 5 rounds) or "Category D" (magazine capacity more than 5 rounds) weapons; a licence for this type of firearm is, practically speaking, unavailable to the average citizen due to the difficulty and red tape of acquiring one.
For more information, see Gun politics in Australia.

===
Canada ===
Canada has three classifications of firearms: non-restricted, restricted, and prohibited.
Shotguns are found in all three classes.

All non-restricted shotguns must have an overall length of at least 660 mm (26 in).
Semi-automatic shotguns must also have a barrel length of more than 469.9 mm (18.50 in) and have a capacity of 5 shells or less in the magazine to remain non-restricted.
All other shotgun action types (pump/slide, break open, lever, bolt) do not have a magazine limit restriction or a minimum barrel length provided the overall length of the firearm remains more than 660 mm (26 in) and the barrel was produced by an approved manufacturer.
Shotgun barrels may only be reduced in length to a minimum of 457 mm (18.0 in).
Non-restricted shotguns may be possessed with any Possession and Acquisition Licence (PAL) or Possession-Only License (POL) and may be transported throughout the country without special authorization and may be used for hunting certain species at certain times of the year.

Semi-automatic shotguns with a barrel length of less than 469.9 mm (18.50 in) are considered restricted and any shotgun that has been altered so its barrel length is less than 457 mm (18.0 in) or if its overall length is less than 660 mm (26 in) is considered prohibited.
Restricted and prohibited shotguns may be possessed with a PAL or POL that has been endorsed for restricted or prohibited grandfathered firearms.
These shotguns require special Authorization to Transport
(ATT).The Canadian Firearms Registry was a government-run registry of all legally owned firearms in Canada.
The government provided amnesty from prosecution to shotgun and rifle owners if they fail to register non-restricted shotguns and rifles.
The long gun portion of the registry was scrapped in 2011.

See online for an official Canadian list of non-restricted and restricted and prohibited firearms.

===
United Kingdom ===
In the United Kingdom, a Shotgun Certificate (SGC) is required to possess a "Section 2" shotgun.
These cost £50 and can only be denied if the chief of police in the area believes and can prove that the applicant poses a real danger to the public, or if the applicant has been convicted of a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term of three years or more or if the applicant cannot securely store a shotgun (gun clamps, wire locks and locking gun cabinets are considered secure).
The round number restrictions apply only to the magazine, not the chamber, so it is legal to have a single-barreled semi-auto or pump-action shotgun that holds three rounds in total, or a shotgun with separate chambers (which would need to also be multi-barrelled).
For a shotgun to qualify as a section 2 shotgun, it must meet the following criteria:
(a) has a barrel not less than 24 inches (610 mm) in length and does not have any barrel with a bore more than 2 inches (51 mm) in diameter;
(b) either has no magazine or has a non-detachable magazine not capable of holding more than two cartridges;
(c) is not a revolver gun.

Prior to a SGC being issued an interview is conducted with the local Firearms Officer, in the past this was a duty undertaken by the local police although more recently this function has been "contracted out" to civilian staff.
The officer will check the location and suitability of the gun safe that is to be used for storage and conduct a general interview to establish the reasons behind the applicant requiring a SGC.

An SGC holder can own any number of shotguns meeting these requirements so long as he/she can store them securely.
No certificate is required to own shotgun ammunition, but one is required to buy it.
There is no restriction on the amount of shotgun ammunition that can be bought or owned.
There are also no rules regarding the storage of ammunition.

However, shotgun ammunition which contains fewer than 6 projectiles requires a section 1 Firearms Certificate (FAC).
Shotguns with a magazine capacity greater than 2 rounds are also considered to be section 1 firearms and, as such, require an FAC to own.
An FAC costs £50 but is much more restrictive than an SGC.
The applicant must nominate two referees who are known to the applicant to vouch for his or her character; a new 'variation' is required for each new caliber of gun to be owned; limits are set on how much ammunition a person can own at any one time; and an FAC can be denied if the applicant does not have sufficient 'good reason'. '
Good reason' generally means hunting, collecting, or target shooting – though other reasons may be acceptable.
Personal defense is not an acceptable reason.

Any pump-action or semi-automatic smoothbore gun (such as a shotgun) with a barrel length of less than 24 inches or total length of less than 40 inches is considered to be a section 5 firearm, that is, one that is subject to general prohibition, unless it is chambered for .22 caliber rimfire ammunition.

===
United States ===
In the US, federal law prohibits shotguns from being capable of holding more than three shells including the round in the chamber when used for hunting migratory gamebirds such as doves, ducks, and geese.
For other uses, a capacity of any number of shells is generally permitted.
Most magazine-fed shotguns come with a removable magazine plug to limit capacity to 2, plus one in the chamber, for hunting migratory gamebirds.
Certain states have restrictions on magazine capacity or design features under hunting or assault weapon laws.

Shotguns intended for defensive use have barrels as short as 18 inches (46 cm) for private use (the minimum shotgun barrel length allowed by law in the United States without federal registration.
Barrel lengths of less than 18 inches (46 cm) as measured from the breechface to the muzzle when the weapon is in battery, or have an overall length of less than 26 inches (66 cm) are classified as short barreled shotguns (SBS) under the 1934 National Firearms Act and are regulated.
A similar short barreled weapon having a pistol grip may be classified as an AOW or "Any Other Weapon" or "Firearm," depending on barrel length.
A shotgun is defined as a weapon (with a buttstock) designed to be fired from the shoulder.
The classification varies depending on how the weapon was originally manufactured.

Shotguns used by military, police, and other government agencies are regulated under the National Firearms Act of 1934; however, they are exempt from transfer taxes.
These weapons commonly have barrels as short as 12 to 14 inches (30 to 36 centimetres) so that they are easier to handle in confined spaces.
Non-prohibited private citizens may own short-barreled shotguns by passing extensive background checks (state and local laws may be more restrictive) as well as paying a $200 federal tax and being issued a stamp.
Defensive shotguns sometimes have no buttstock or will have a folding stock to reduce overall length even more when required.
AOWs transfer with a $5 tax stamp from the BATFE.

== See also ==
Antique guns
Gun safety
List of shotguns
Double-barreled shotgun
Riding shotgun
Shotgun wedding
Military 12-gauge cartridges
Shotgun (shooting sports)


==
References ==
Notes
BibliographyBob Brister (1976).
Shotgunning, The Art and the Science.
New Jersey:
New Win Publishing.
ISBN 978-0-8329-1840-7.

Elmer Keith (1950).
Shotguns.
Pennsylvania:
The Stackpole Company.
ISBN 978-0-935632-58-3.

Michael McIntosh (1999).
Best Guns.
Alabama:
Countrysport Press.
ISBN 978-0-924357-79-4.

Jack O'Connor (1965)
[1949].
The Shotgun Book.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
ISBN 978-0-394-50138-3.
==
External links ==
Shotgun FAQ
Shotgun sabot separation photography
"
Shotgun Chokes and Gauges."
Popular Mechanics, October 1947, p. 196–200.
Excellent diagrams and drawings.
Angel Has Fallen is a 2019 American action thriller film directed by Ric Roman Waugh.
It is the third installment in the Has Fallen film series, following Olympus
Has Fallen (2013) and London Has Fallen (2016).
The film stars are Gerard Butler, Morgan Freeman, Jada Pinkett Smith, Lance Reddick, Tim Blake Nelson, Piper Perabo, Nick Nolte, and Danny Huston.
The plot again follows United States Secret Service agent Mike Banning as he races against time to clear his name after being framed for a drone attack on the President of the United States, Allan Trumbull.

The film was officially announced in October 2016, and Roman Waugh was hired in July 2017.
New members of the cast were added in early 2018, and filming began in February of that year around Bulgaria and the United Kingdom.

The film was released in the United States on August 23, 2019, by Lionsgate.
It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $146 million worldwide.
Plans for future sequels and TV spin-offs are in development.

==
Plot ==
Secret Service agent Mike Banning (Gerard Butler) undergoes training at a military facility in Virginia, owned by his former Army Ranger commanding officer Wade Jennings
(Danny Huston), now CEO of private military company Salient Global.
He is recommended for the position of Secret Service Director by President Allan Trumbull (Morgan Freeman), to replace retiring Director David Gentry (Lance Reddick), but hides the fact that he suffers from migraines and insomnia and takes painkillers to cope with chronic back pain from injuries sustained in Iraq.

While Trumbull is on a private fishing trip at Queen's Lake in Williamsburg, Virginia, a swarm of armed drones attack and overwhelm his protection detail, with only Banning surviving and saving the president.
Both men are incapacitated, but Banning recovers while Trumbull is left in a coma.
FBI special agent Helen Thompson (Jada Pinkett Smith) is presented with evidence implicating Banning in the attack, including traces of his hair and DNA found in the discarded van used to transport the drones, leading to his arrest.
En route to a detention facility, Banning's transport is ambushed, but he escapes after killing the assailants and unmasking them as mercenaries from Salient Global with whom he partook in the training exercise.
Realizing that Jennings has betrayed and framed him, he calls his wife Leah (Piper Perabo), letting her know he is alive and determined to expose the real perpetrator.
The call alerts Thompson to Banning's location, leading to a car chase by numerous police officers.
Banning manages to slip away into the night again, setting out the next morning to his Vietnam veteran father's cabin in the backwoods of White Hall, West Virginia.

At the White House, Vice President Martin Kirby (Tim Blake Nelson), now acting president, reveals to the press that Banning is responsible for the assassination attempt with support from the Russian government.
Banning and his father Clay
(Nick Nolte) observe Salient mercenaries approaching the house on surveillance cameras.
Clay detonates multiple explosives around the perimeter, killing the would-be attackers as he and Banning escape.
Banning reveals to Clay that he has a wife and daughter.
Leah and her daughter are on the verge of being kidnapped by Salient commandos when Clay saves them.
Finding the bodies of Jennings' gunmen lined up against Clay's cabin, Thompson deduces that Banning may have been set up after all.
Trumbull awakens from his coma and Kirby is revealed to be Jennings' secret co-conspirator, planning to retaliate for Trumbull's "attempted assassination" by declaring Cold War II.
Thompson and another agent Ramirez (Joseph Millson) meet Jennings on an airfield, but Jennings kills both of them.

Banning reaches the hospital and gives himself up, but Trumbull orders his release.
Banning leads Trumbull to safety with help from Gentry and other loyal agents as Jennings destroys the hospital's ICU by increasing the oxygen and nitrogen supply to unstable levels, causing a massive explosion that levels the hospital.
Banning hides Trumbull and Gentry as Jennings' men pursue them.
In an extended gun battle, Salient Global kills most of Trumbull's security detail, but Banning ambushes a flanking attempt and eventually the mercenaries are forced to retreat after government reinforcements arrive.
A handful of them, led by Jennings, are gathering on the rooftop to escape in a helicopter, when Banning blows up the helicopter with a grenade launcher.
Only Jennings survives the explosion, leaving the two of them to fight it out.
They engage in hand-to-hand combat ending with Banning fatally stabbing Jennings.
The remainder of Jennings' men are either killed in the firefight or arrested by U.S. federal law enforcement officers.

Banning is exonerated while Trumbull and Gentry arrest Kirby for treason, revealing that Jennings had kept detailed records of Kirby's involvement, as an insurance policy, and which is uncovered by Thompson.
Clay decides to live with Banning and his family.
Feeling guilty over his failure to protect Trumbull and concealing his ailments, Banning offers his resignation, but Trumbull forgives him and offers Banning the promotion to Director of the Secret Service, which he proudly accepts.

In the mid-credits scene, Banning convinces his father to try therapy at the Zero Gravity Center together.
There, they are placed in pools and float in water, exchanging comments until (and after) the lights go out.

== Cast ==
Gerard Butler as Secret Service Agent Mike Banning, Clay's son and Leah's husband.

Morgan Freeman as President Allan Trumbull
Jada Pinkett Smith as FBI Agent Helen Thompson
Lance Reddick as Secret Service Director David Gentry
Tim Blake Nelson as Vice President Martin Kirby
Piper Perabo as Leah Banning, Mike's wife.
Perabo replaced Radha Mitchell, who played the role in the previous films, due to Mitchell's scheduling conflicts.

Nick Nolte as Clay Banning, a Vietnam veteran Army Ranger/Tunnel Rat and Mike's estranged father who abandoned him at a young age.
Since then, he has taken up living in the woods all over the U.S.
Danny Huston as Wade Jennings, Mike's former Ranger commanding officer and the leader of Salient Global.

Frederick Schmidt as Travis Cole, head of security of Salient Global and Jennings' right-hand man.

Joseph Millson as FBI Agent Ramirez
Ori Pfeffer as Secret Service Agent Murphy
Mark Arnold as CIA Director James Haskell
Michael Landes as White House Chief of Staff Sam Wilcox
Chris Browning as Militia man
Jessica Cobley as Lynne Banning, Mike and Leah's daughter
Rocci Williams as Bruno, one of Jennings' soldiers


==
Production ==
On October 28, 2016, it was announced that a third Fallen installment, titled Angel Has Fallen, was in development, with Gerard Butler reprising his roles of both lead actor and producer.
On July 25, 2017, Ric Roman Waugh was announced as director.
On January 10, 2018, Holt McCallany was set to play Wade Jennings, an ex-military turned head of a technology company.
However, he later had to drop out of his role due to scheduling conflicts with the show Mindhunter, and was replaced by Danny Huston.
A week later, Jada Pinkett Smith and Tim Blake Nelson were confirmed added, and filming was scheduled to start on February 7, 2018.
On February 13, 2018, Piper Perabo joined the cast.
On March 12, 2018, Lance Reddick was set to play Secret Service Director Gentry.
Aaron Eckhart, who had played president Benjamin Asher in the first two films, announced he would not return in his role.
On March 21, 2018, Michael Landes was cast as White House Chief of Staff Sam Wilcox.
On January 22, 2019, David Buckley was announced as the film's composer, replacing Trevor Morris, who scored the previous two films.
Filming on Angel Has Fallen commenced at Virginia Water Lake, and continued throughout the United Kingdom and Bulgaria.
Filming also took place at Pinewood Studios, Bray Studios, Longcross Studios and Nu Boyana Film Studios.

==
Release ==
The film was released in the United States on August 23, 2019.
===
Box office ==
=
Angel Has Fallen grossed $69 million in the United States and Canada, and $78.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $147.5 million.
In the United States and Canada, the film was projected to gross $13–15 million from 3,286 theaters in its opening weekend.
It made $7.9 million on its first day.
This included $1.5 million from Thursday night previews, the highest of the series.
It went on to debut to $21.3 million, finishing first and over-performing.
It was Butler's first time atop the box office since 300 (2007), and was just below the opening of London Has Fallen ($21.6 million).
The film remained in first place the following weekend, grossing $11.8 million, as well as $3 million on Labor Day.
The film was finally dethroned in its third weekend, grossing $6 million and finishing second, behind newcomer
It Chapter Two.
===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 38% based on 186 reviews, with an average rating of 5.00/10.
The website's critical consensus reads: "
Cut from the same rough cloth as its predecessors, Angel Has Fallen rounds out a mostly forgettable action trilogy in fittingly mediocre fashion.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews."
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score earned by its predecessors, while those at PostTrak gave it an average 4.5 out of 5 stars and a 64% "definite recommend.
"Todd
McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that the film, "may not be appreciably better than the first two installments ..., but it's actually more fun — first and foremost because of a vastly amusing turn by Nick Nolte as Gerard Butler's eccentric Vietnam vet old coot father."
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club gave the film a grade C, and called it a "dramatic improvement" though was critical of the action sequences, saying, "they all fall victim to having too much repetitive editing and not enough kinetic energy, a problem that no amount of onscreen firepower, twisted wreckage, or offbeat overhead camera angles can solve."
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a "D+", specifying that "[w]ith Nolte as his bonkers dad, Gerard Butler's mediocre action franchise and his mediocre American accent find a mediocre conclusion."
==
Future ==
In November 2019, series producer Alan Siegel announced plans for a fourth, fifth and sixth film, as well as local-language TV spin-offs that would tie-in with the theatrical features.
In November 2020 it was revealed at the American Film Market that a fourth film was in development with Butler returning titled Night
Has Fallen.

== See also ==
Olympus Has Fallen
London Has Fallen
List of films featuring drones


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Angel Has Fallen at IMDb
Angel Has Fallen at Box Office Mojo
A combat shotgun is a shotgun that is intended to be used in armed conflicts, typically by a military force.
The earliest shotguns specifically designed for combat were the trench guns or trench shotguns issued in World War I.
While limited in range, the multiple projectiles typically used in a shotgun shell provide increased hit probability unmatched by other small arms.

==
History ==
While the sporting shotgun traces its ancestry back to the fowling piece, which was a refinement of the smoothbore musket, the combat shotgun bears more kinship to the shorter blunderbuss.
Invented in the 16th century by the Dutch, the blunderbuss was used through the 18th century in warfare by British, Austrian, Spanish (like the Escopeteros Voluntarios de Cadiz, formed in 1804 or the Compañía de Escopeteros de las Salinas, among others) and Prussian regiments, as well as in the American colonies.
As use of the blunderbuss declined, the United States military began loading smaller lead shot (buckshot) in combination with their larger bullets, a combination known as "buck and ball".
The buck and ball load was used extensively by Americans at the Battle of New Orleans in 1814 and was partially responsible for the disparate casualty rates between American and British forces.
The advantage of this loading was that it had a greater chance of hitting the enemy, thus taking wounded soldiers out of a fight.
The disadvantage of this load was that the buckshot did not cause as severe wounds at longer ranges, and contemporary accounts show many of the British wounded recovering quickly as they had been struck by the buckshot rather than the ball.
Fowling pieces were commonly used by militias, for example during the Texas Revolution.
However, buck and ball worked as well or better in standard or even rifled muskets.
Buck and ball loads were used by both sides of the American Civil War, often by cavalry units.
The development of the repeating pump-action shotguns in the 1890s led to their use by the US Marines in the Philippines insurrections and by General "Black Jack" Pershing's pursuit of Pancho Villa, and
"riot" shotguns quickly gained favor with civilian police units, but the modern concept of the combat shotgun was fully developed by the American Expeditionary Forces during World War I.
The trench gun, as it was called, was a short-barreled pump action shotgun loaded with 6 rounds containing antimony hardened 00 buckshot, and equipped with a bayonet.
The M1897 and M1912 also could be slam fired: the weapon having no trigger disconnector, shells could be fired one after the other simply by working the slide if the trigger was held down, though in the heat of combat one could easily short-stroke the weapon and jam it.
When fighting within a trench, the shorter shotgun could be rapidly turned and fired in both directions along the trench axis.
The shotguns elicited a diplomatic protest from the German government, claiming the shotguns caused excessive injury, and that any troops found in possession of them would be subject to execution.
The US Government rejected the claims, and threatened reprisals in kind if any US troops were executed for possession of a shotgun.

The shotgun was used by Allied forces and Allied supported partisans in all theaters of combat in World War II, and both pump and semi-automatic shotguns are currently issued to all branches of the US military; they have also been used in subsequent conflicts by French, British, Australian, and New Zealand forces, as well as many guerrillas and insurgents throughout sub-Saharan Africa, Latin and South America, and Southeast Asia.
Six different model of shotguns were accepted in the US army during World War II, the most popular being the M97 and M1912.
One disadvantage of using a shotgun in the Pacific Theatre was the way of carrying the shotshells.
The standard rifle pouches that carried shotshells were small, only about 30 rounds if carried vertically.
Some Marines carried the shells in SL-3 grenade vests from World War I, but these vests were hard to come by.
Also used were modified bandoliers and whatever came to hand or could be improvised.

Another disadvantage was paper-hulled shotshells, which would swell when they became damp in a rainy or humid environment, and would not fit into the chamber even after drying out.
Commercial paper hulls were later impregnated with wax to make them water resistant, but in combat the heat from rapid firing would cause the wax to melt, often resulting in a jammed gun.
Military-issue shotshells were usually made entirely of brass to avoid these issues, until the introduction of plastic hulls in the early 1960s.

General Alexander Patch was seen being armed with a Winchester shotgun when he personally led an attack in Guadalcanal.
In the jungle warfare during the Malayan Emergency, the British Army and local forces of Malaya used shotguns to great effect due to limited space in the jungles and frequent close combat.
In the Vietnam War, the shotgun was used as an individual weapon in the American army during jungle patrol and urban warfare like the Tet Offensive.

During the Somalian conflict in 1992, the US task forces tested out a new type of Remington shotgun called Ciener Ultimate
Over/Under, which was an under-barrel attachment for the standard M16 variants during Operation Gothic Serpent.
The idea was for a soldier in an entry team to be able to breach a locked door with the shotgun and then immediately switch to the assault rifle to clear the room.
According to the Army Rangers, their verdict was positive for this new type of breaching gun.

In operations in post-invasion Iraq, US forces used their combat shotguns to clear out suspected insurgent hideouts in house to house fighting.
One notable experimental shotgun used in limited numbers during Operation Enduring Freedom is the XM26 for breaching doors or close-quarter battle (CQB).

== Characteristics ==
The most common type of shotgun used for this purpose is the manually operated, slide-action/pump-action type like the Remington M870 or Mossberg 590A1, the latter of which is currently the pump-action of choice for US armed forces and both have seen service with other militaries, because it is less prone to malfunction (particularly when dirty) than semi-automatic designs.
Pump-action shotguns are also less expensive than their semi-automatic counterparts.
Even so, semi-automatic shotguns such as the Benelli M1014 are currently seeing service in NATO-aligned armed forces.

Combat shotguns typically have much shorter barrels than shotguns used for hunting and usually, though not always, have magazines of modified design to hold more than the 3 to 5 shots normal with sporting or hunting shotguns.
Most combat shotguns have tubular magazines to hold the cartridges, mounted underneath the barrel, identical to those of hunting shotguns except for being longer to hold more ammunition, though some recent designs have detachable box magazines.

Combat shotguns for military use are mostly similar to the police riot shotgun; but the military versions may have provisions to mount a bayonet and may be fitted with ventilated steel or plastic hand guards over the barrel to reduce the danger of a soldier burning his hand on the hot barrel during rapid fire.
Riot shotguns are also more likely to trade off the increased magazine capacity for the decreased size that entails; for example, a combat model would be more likely to have a 51 cm (20 inch) barrel and up to a 10-round capacity, while riot shotguns are often found with barrels of 35 to 46 cm (14 to 18 inches) and a capacity of 5 to 8 rounds.

==
Combat use ==
The combat shotgun has evolved from its original role as a short range combat weapon into a wider role in modern times.
With proper configuration, ammunition and training, the modern combat shotgun plays three roles:
Offensive weapon
Breaching system
Less-lethal crowd
controlEffective range of the shotgun with standard buckshot is limited to about 20–30 meters with a full stock (depending on the sights on the gun), and 10 meters when equipped only with a pistol grip due to the difficulty in accurately aiming without a full stock.
Slug rounds, if available, can extend the effective range of the shotgun to 100 meters (although this is also dependent on the shotgun's sighting system; rifle sights and ghost ring sights will allow the average shooter to effectively engage human-sized targets at considerably greater distances than with a bead sight).Less lethal rounds vary, with ranges from 10 meters for rubber buckshot to 75 meters for rubber slugs.
These less lethal munitions are the same type as used by police, and have served well in riot control situations, such as that in Kosovo in 2001.When used as a door breaching system, the shotgun may be provided with a muzzle extension to allow it to be pressed firmly against the door while providing the correct standoff distance for optimum performance.
While there are specialized rounds for breaching doors with minimal hazard to any occupants of the room, any type of round will do the job, though with some degradation of effectiveness and increased risk of collateral damage.
In operations in Iraq, the shotgun was the preferred method of door breaching by infantry units, ideally with a frangible breaching slug.
For the breaching role, shorter barrels are preferred, as they are more easily handled in tight quarters.

Limited ammunition capacity is one of the primary downsides of the combat shotgun.
While box magazines are available in some models (such as shotgun derivatives of the AK-47 design, like the Saiga-12), the tubular magazine is still dominant.
This limits capacities; the current US pump shotgun issued, the Mossberg 590, has a 5 or 8 shot capacity depending on barrel length.
The tubular magazine does allow easy "topping off" (a tube-fed pump shotgun can be kept shouldered and aimed at a target and ready to fire while being loaded), so training emphasizes the need to load the magazine to full capacity whenever the opportunity presents itself.
A common doctrine is "shoot one, load one": load a shell immediately after every shot (when this does not jeopardize the operator's safety), to ensure that the shotgun is fully loaded at all times; this ensures that the operator has a full magazine at their disposal in case of emergencies when they may not be able to reload in between shots.
A pistol is also advised as a backup weapon, should the operator empty the magazine and not have time to reload.
A sling to carry the shotgun is essential if it is to be used in conjunction with another weapon, so that the shotgun may be readily accessible.
The bulk and weight of shotgun ammunition also limits its utility as a general-issue weapon.
Weight per 100 rounds of an average 12-gauge 00 Buck 2-3/4" shell is 10.25 lbs; for an average .223/5.56 round, weight per 100 rounds is about 2.69 lbs or a 3.8:1 weight ratio of 12-gauge buckshot and 5.56×45mm.
This means just seven 12-gauge buckshot shells weigh approximately the same (.45 kilos/one pound) as thirty 5.56×45mm rifle cartridges.
While an individual soldier can easily carry several hundred rifle or pistol cartridges in box magazines, only a few dozen shotshells can be carried practically.

== Effectiveness ==
A Joint Service Combat Shotgun Program report on the lethality of shotguns in war states, in support of the use of the shotgun in warfare, "the probability of hitting a man-sized target with a shotgun was superior to that of all other weapons", and goes on to support this with statistics compiled by the British from the conflict in Borneo in the 1960s.
The buckshot typically used in a combat shotgun spreads out to a greater or lesser degree depending on the barrel choke, and can be effective at ranges as far as 70 m (75 yards).
The delivery of the large number of projectiles simultaneously makes the shotgun the most effective short range weapon commonly used, with a hit probability 45% greater than a sub-machine gun (5-round burst), and twice as great as an assault rifle (3-round burst).
While each pellet is only roughly as effective as a small caliber handgun round, and offers very poor penetration against an armored target, the multiple projectiles increases the likelihood of one or more peripheral wounds.

A number of compromises are involved in choosing a shot size:
Smaller pellets lose velocity more rapidly and penetrate the target less
Larger pellets means fewer pellets, resulting in a reduced probability of hits
Heavier loads produce more recoil and less velocity than lighter loads
Reduced recoil loads (less shot and/or lower velocity) may produce smaller patterns, which may decrease hit probability


==
Ammunition ==
The most common type of ammunition used in combat shotguns, whether for military or law enforcement purposes, is buckshot, typically a 70 mm (2​3⁄4 inch) 12-gauge shell loaded with 9 hardened 00 buckshot, with a diameter of about 8.4 mm (.33 inch).
Buckshot is brutally effective at close ranges against unarmored targets—enough so that Germany issued a protest against its use in 1918.
The only other types of ammunition currently in use in military shotguns are breaching rounds, which are either specially designed frangible rounds designed to destroy a door lock or hinge while minimizing the risk of damage to occupants of the room or very light (#9) birdshot, which accomplishes the same purpose.
Shotgun slugs are currently under consideration by the US military as an anti-materiel round; the tendency of typical commercial shotgun slugs to deform on impact would render them illegal under the Hague Convention of 1899 and so a jacketed, hardened or sabot slug may be adopted.
Less lethal rounds are used by U.S. troops serving as police forces in occupied territory; beanbag and rubber bullet rounds are commonly used to discourage looters and rioters.

In military use, flechette ammunition has also been used in shotguns (primarily by special forces, such as its use by the SEALs in the Vietnam War), but this is not common.
Other experimental shotgun ammunition has been created, such as SCMITR, but none have been successful enough to be adopted.

Due to the great flexibility of the shotgun, it is often used in non-offensive roles as well.
The US Infantry, for example, offers a number of less lethal varieties of ammunition for use in the riot control role, and for door breaching with #9 birdshot, shotgun slugs, and specialized breaching rounds.
Less-lethal options also include the use of grenade launching cups, special launching cartridges and a less-lethal grenade.

There are a number of experimental rounds currently under development and consideration by the US military, including explosive rounds and stand-off breaching rounds, which could further improve the range and flexibility of the combat shotgun.

==
Method of operation ==
There are two primary modes of operation for combat shotguns, the pump action, and various semi-automatic designs, mostly gas operation and recoil operation designs.
The SPAS-12, SPAS-15, and Benelli M3 shotguns, combine the two, offering pump action or, when the pump is locked forwards, autoloading operation.
There have also been a few fully automatic shotguns produced such as the AA-12 and Pancor Jackhammer.

The autoloading shotgun (semi or fully automatic) offers a higher rate of fire than a pump shotgun, though controlling a heavy recoiling shotgun in rapid fire is difficult.
The autoloading action is more suitable for firing from a prone position, as operation of a pump action moves the elbow normally used to support the shotgun, and it can more effectively be used one-handed, unlike pump actions which require two hands for effective cycling of the action.

The pump shotgun is more versatile than the semiautomatic, as it will fire low powered less lethal munitions which lack sufficient pressure to cycle the action in an autoloading design.
A pump shotgun, which does not rely on its ammunition for energy to cycle, operates normally with the lower powered ammunition, and provides utility in combat and riot control situations.
In addition, the pump shotgun has an advantage in situations such as door breaching, where the shotgun is immediately dropped (retained by a sling) and replaced by another weapon after the door has been breached.
By not cycling the action after firing the final breaching rounds (multiple rounds are often required) the pump shotgun is left without a loaded round in the chamber, unlike a semiautomatic shotgun.

== Use in asymmetric warfare ==
Due to the widespread use of the shotgun as a sporting firearm, it is used in guerrilla warfare and other forms of asymmetric warfare.
Che Guevara, in his 1961 book Guerrilla Warfare, notes that shotgun ammunition can be obtained by guerrillas even in times of war, and that shotguns loaded with heavy shot are highly effective against unarmored troop transport vehicles.
He recommends that suburban guerrilla bands should be armed with easily concealable weapons, such as handguns and a sawed-off shotgun or carbine.
Guevara also mentions an improvised weapon developed by guerrillas consisting of a sawed-off 16 gauge shotgun provided with a bipod to hold the barrel at a 45 degree angle.
Called the "M-16", this was loaded with a blank cartridge formed by removing the shot from a standard shotshell.
A wooden rod was then placed in the barrel, with a Molotov cocktail attached to the front.
This formed an improvised mortar capable of firing the incendiary device accurately out to a range of 100 meters.

== See also ==
Automatic shotgun
List of combat shotguns
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
List of shotguns
Riot shotgun
Semi-automatic shotgun


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
"Give Us More Shotguns!"
by Bruce N. Canfield, American Rifleman, May 2004
Bruce N. Canfield, A Collector's Guide to United States Combat Shotguns, Andrew Mowbray, 1992, ISBN 0-917218-53-1.

Fawcett, Bill.
Hunters & Shooters, An Oral History of the U.S. Navy SEALS in Vietnam.
New York:
Avon Books, 1995.
ISBN 0-380-72166-X, pp.
79–80, especially.

Leroy Thompson (2013).
US Combat Shotguns.
Weapon.
29.
Osprey Publishing.
ISBN 9781780960142.

==
External links ==
The Magnificent Mossberg, Guns & Ammo Magazine, April, 2007
The evolution of the army combat shotgun Military Police article by Bo Barbour
US Army combat shotgun training video
History of the Combat Shotgun in U.S Army
The following is a list of cruise missiles.

==
References ==
Armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS), long dart penetrator, or simply dart ammunition, is a type of kinetic energy penetrator ammunition used to attack modern vehicle armour.
As an armament for main battle tanks, it succeeds Armour-Piercing Discarding Sabot (APDS)
ammunition, which is still used in small or medium caliber weapon systems.

Improvements in powerful automotive propulsion and suspension systems following World War II allowed modern main battle tanks to incorporate progressively thicker and heavier armour protection systems, while maintaining considerable maneuverability and speed on the battlefield.

As a result, achieving deep armour penetration with gun-fired ammunition required even longer anti-armour projectiles fired at even higher muzzle velocity than could be achieved with stubbier APDS projectiles.

==
History ==
Armour-Piercing Discarding Sabot (APDS) was initially the main design of the kinetic energy (KE) penetrator.
The logical progression was to make the shot longer and thinner to concentrate the kinetic energy in a smaller area.
However, a long, thin rod is aerodynamically unstable; it tends to tumble in flight and is less accurate.
Traditionally, rounds were given stability in flight from the rifling of the gun barrel, which imparts a spin to the round.
Up to a certain limit, this is effective, but once the projectile's length is more than six or seven times its diameter, rifling becomes less effective.
Adding fins like the fletching of an arrow to the base gives the round stability.
The spin from standard rifling decreases the performance of these rounds
(rifling diverts some of the linear kinetic energy to rotational kinetic energy, thus decreasing the round's velocity and impact energy), and very high rotation on a fin-stabilized projectile can dramatically increase aerodynamic drag, further reducing impact velocity.
For these reasons, Armour-Piercing Fin-Stabilized Discarding Sabot (APFSDS) projectiles are generally fired from smoothbore guns, a practice that has been taken up for tank guns by China, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, France, Germany, Pakistan, Turkey, Russia, and the United States.

Nevertheless, in the early development of APFSDS ammunition, existing rifled barrel cannons were used, (and are still in use), such as the 105 mm M68 cannon mounted on the M60A3 main battle tank or the British 120 mm Royal Ordnance L30 of the Challenger 2 tank.

To reduce the spin rate when using a rifled barrel, a "slip obturator", (slip obturation ring), is incorporated that allows the high pressure propellant gasses to seal, yet not transfer the total spin rate of the rifling into the projectile.
The projectile still exits the barrel with some residual spinning, but at an acceptably low rate.
In addition, some spin rate is beneficial to a fin-stabilized projectile, averaging out aerodynamic imbalances and improving accuracy.
Even smooth-bore fired APFSDS projectiles incorporate fins that are slightly canted to provide some spin rate during flight; and very low twist rifled barrels have also been developed for the express purpose of firing APFSDS ammunition.

Another reason for the use of smoothbore, and very low twist rate guns is that the most effective precision shaped charge designs, High-Explosive Anti-Tank (HEAT) munitions, lose armour penetrating performance when rotating too quickly.
These deep penetrating shaped charges also require fin stabilization (although less precise and less effective "spin compensated" shaped charges can be designed to function properly in a spin-stabilized projectile).

== Design ==
KE penetrators for modern tanks are commonly 2–3 cm in diameter, and can approach 80 cm long; as more structurally efficient penetrator-sabot designs are developed, their length tends to increase, in order to defeat even greater line-of-sight armour depth.
The concept of armour defeat using a long rod penetrator is a practical application of the phenomenon of hydro-dynamic penetration, (see hydrodynamics).

===
Fluid penetration ===
Despite practical penetrator and target materials not being fluids before impact, at sufficiently high impact velocity even crystalline materials begin to behave in a highly plastic fluid-like manner, so many aspects of hydro-dynamic penetration do apply .Long
rod projectiles penetrate a fluid in the literal sense, based simply on the density of the target armour and the density and length of the penetrator.
The penetrator will continue to displace the target to a depth of the penetrator length times the square root of the penetrator to target densities.
One observes immediately that longer, denser penetrators will penetrate to deeper depths, and this forms the basis for the development of long-rod anti-armour projectiles.
The important parameters for an effective long-rod penetrator, therefore, are very high density with respect to the target, high hardness to penetrate hard target surfaces, very high toughness (ductility)
so the rod does not shatter on impact, and very high strength to survive gun launch accelerations, as well as the variabilities of target impact, such as hitting at an oblique angle and surviving counter-measures such as explosive-reactive armour.

===
Tungsten and Uranium ===
The development of heavy forms of reactive armour (such as the Soviet, later Russian, Kontakt-5), which are designed to shear and deflect long rod penetrators, has prompted the development of more complex kinetic energy penetrator designs, particularly in the newest U.S.-built anti-tank rounds.
Nevertheless, although penetrator geometry may adapt to reactive armour counter-measures, the materials of choice for deep-penetrating long rod kinetic energy projectiles remains Tungsten Heavy Alloy (WA) and Depleted Uranium (DU) Alloy.
Both materials are very dense, hard, tough, ductile, and very strong; all exceptional qualities suitable to deep armour penetration.
Nevertheless, each material exhibits its own unique penetration qualities that may, or may not, be the best choice for any one anti-armour application.

For example, depleted uranium alloy is pyrophoric; the heated fragments of the penetrator ignite after impact in contact with air, setting fire to fuel and / or ammunition in the target vehicle, contributing significantly to behind-armour lethality.
Additionally, DU penetrators exhibit significant adiabatic shear band formation.
A common misconception is that, during impact, fractures along these bands cause the tip of the penetrator to continuously shed material, maintaining the tip's conical shape, whereas other materials such as unjacketed tungsten tend to deform into a less effective rounded profile, an effect called "mushrooming".
Actually, the formation of adiabatic shear bands means that the sides of the "mushroom" tend to break away earlier, leading to a smaller head on impact, though it will still be significantly "mushroomed".

Tests have shown that the hole bored by a DU projectile is of a narrower diameter than for a similar tungsten projectile; and although both materials have nearly the same density, hardness, toughness and strength, due to these differences in their deformation process, depleted uranium tends to out-penetrate an equivalent length of tungsten alloy against steel targets.
Nevertheless, the use of depleted uranium, in spite of some superior performance characteristics, is not without political and humanitarian controversy, but remains the material of choice for some countries due to cost considerations and strategic availability compared to tungsten.

===
Sabot design ===
Complicating matters, when foreign deployment of military forces or export sales markets are considered, a sabot designed specifically to launch a DU penetrator cannot simply be used to launch a substitute WA penetrator, even of exactly the same manufactured geometry.

The two materials behave significantly different under high pressure, high launch acceleration forces, such that entirely different sabot material geometries, (thicker or thinner in some places, if even possible), are required to maintain in-bore structural integrity.
Typical velocities of APFSDS rounds vary between manufacturers and muzzle length/types.
As a typical example, the American General Dynamics KEW-A1 has a muzzle velocity of 1,740 m/s (5,700 ft/s).
This compares to 914 m/s (3,000 ft/s) for a typical rifle (small arms) round.
APFSDS rounds generally operate in the range of 1,400 to 1,800 m/s.
Above a certain minimum impact velocity necessary to overcome target material strength parameters significantly, penetrator length is more important than impact velocity; as exemplified by the fact that the base model M829 flies nearly 200 meters/sec faster than the newer model M829A3, but is only about one half the length, wholly inadequate for defeating state-of-the-art armour arrays.
Often the greater engineering challenge is designing an efficient sabot to successfully launch extremely long penetrators, now approaching 800 mm (2 ft 7 in) in length.
The sabot, necessary to fill the bore of the cannon when firing a long, slender flight projectile, is parasitic weight that subtracts from the potential muzzle velocity of the entire projectile.
Maintaining the in-bore structural integrity of such a long flight projectile under accelerations of tens of thousands of g's is not a trivial undertaking, and has brought the design of sabots from employing in the early 1980s readily available low cost, high strength aerospace-grade aluminums, such as 6061 and 6066-T6, to high strength and more expensive 7075-T6 aluminum, maraging steel, and experimental ultra-high strength
7090-T6 aluminum, to the current state-of-the-art and incredibly expensive graphite fiber reinforced plastics, in order to further reduce the parasitic sabot mass, that could be nearly half the launch mass of the entire projectile.
The discarding sabot petals travel at such a high muzzle velocity that, on separation, they may continue for many hundreds of metres at speeds that can be lethal to troops and damaging to light vehicles.
For this reason, even in combat, tank gunners have to be aware of danger to nearby troops.

The saboted flechette was the counterpart of APFSDS in rifle ammunition.
A rifle for firing flechettes, the Special Purpose Individual Weapon, was under development for the US Army, but the project was abandoned.

== See also ==
Compact Kinetic Energy Missile
Impact depth
Kinetic bombardment
MGM-166
LOSAT


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
The HSTDV is an unmanned scramjet demonstration aircraft for hypersonic speed flight.
It is being developed as a carrier vehicle for hypersonic and long-range cruise missiles, and will have multiple civilian applications including the launching of small satellites at low cost.
The HSTDV program is being run by the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO).
==
Introduction ==
India is pushing ahead with the development of ground and flight test hardware as part of an ambitious plan for a hypersonic cruise missile.
The Defense Research and Development Laboratory's Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle (HSTDV) is intended to attain autonomous scramjet flight for 20 seconds, using a solid rocket launch booster.
The research will also inform India's interest in reusable launch vehicles.
The eventual target is to reach Mach 6 at an altitude of 32.5 km (20 miles).Initial flight testing is aimed at validating the aerodynamics of the air vehicle, as well as its thermal properties and scramjet engine performance.
A mock-up of the HSTDV was shown at the Aero India exhibition in Bangalore in February (see photo), and S. Panneerselvam, the DRDL's project director, says engineers aim to begin flight testing a full-scale air-breathing model powered by a 1,300-lb.-thrust scramjet engine in near future.

== Design and development ==
The design for airframe attachment with the engine was completed in the year 2004.In
May 2008, Dr. Saraswat said:

The HSTDV project, through which we want to demonstrate the performance of a scram-jet engine at an altitude of 15 km to 20 km, is on.
Under this project, we are developing a hypersonic vehicle that will be powered by a scram-jet engine.
This is dual-use technology, which when developed, will have multiple civilian applications.
It can be used for launching satellites at low cost.
It will also be available for long-range cruise missiles of the future.

Israel has provided some assistance on the HSTDV program, including wind tunnel testing, as has Cranfield University of the U.K.
An unnamed third country is helping as well.
According to a report, Russia has provided critical help in the project.
India's main defense-industrial partner is Russia, which has carried out considerable research into hypersonic propulsion.

The 1-metric-ton, 5.6-meter
(18-ft.)-long air vehicle under construction features a flattened octagonal cross section with mid-body stub-wings and raked tail fins and a 3.7-meter rectangular section air intake.
The scramjet engine is located under the mid-body, with the aftbody serving as part of the exhaust nozzle.
Development work on the engine is also in progress.

Two parallel fences in the forebody are meant to reduce spillage and increase thrust.
Part span flaps are provided at the trailing edge of the wings for roll control.
A deflectable nozzle cowl at the combustor end can deflect up to 25° to ensure satisfactory performance during power-off and power-on phases.

Surfaces of the airframe's bottom, wings and tail are made of titanium alloy, while aluminum alloy comprises the top surface.
The inner surface of the double-wall engine is niobium alloy and the outer surface is nimonic alloy.

Due to technology denial of material for the scramjet engine, a new program was initiated and the materials were developed in-house.
This led to self-sufficiency in the area and the scramjet engine was ground tested successfully for 20s instead of the initial 3s.
In the 12 June 2019 test, the cruise vehicle was mounted on an Agni-I solid rocket motor to take it to the required altitude.
After the required altitude was reached and the Mach was achieved, the cruise vehicle was ejected out of the launch vehicle.
Mid-air the Scramjet engine was auto-ignited, and propelled the cruise vehicle at Mach 6.
DRDO spent $30 million during design and development phase while $4.5 million was spent on HSTDV prototype development.

==
Testing ==


===
Wind tunnel testing ===
A 1:16 scale model of the vehicle was tested at a hypersonic wind tunnel operated by Israel Aerospace Industries.
The isolated intake has been tested at a trisonic wind tunnel at India's National Aerospace Laboratory (NAL) in Bangalore.
During the lab testing the scramjet engine was tested twice for 20s.
A total of five to six tests are required before the test flight.
The test flight was expected to take place by the end of 2010.In November 2010, DRDO officials told press that they were in the process of opening four state-of-the-art facilities inside as well as in the vicinity of Hyderabad at a cost of more than ₹10 billion (US$140 million) over the next five years.
Reportedly, they will invest ₹3 to 4 billion (US$66 to 88 million) for setting up a much-needed hypersonic wind tunnel at Hyderabad's Missile Complex.
The advanced Hypersonic Wind Tunnel (HWT) test facility was finally commissioned at Dr APJ Abdul Kalam Missile Complex on 20 December 2020.The facility facilitate testing of various parameters of the Hypersonic Technology Development Vehicle (HSTDV), including engine performance.
"It is pivotal to test the [HSTDV] in the range of up to Mach 12.
This will be a unique installation in India," Saraswat told AW&ST on 22 November 2010.As of December 2011, the scientists had proved technologies for aerodynamics, aero-thermodynamics, engine and hot structures through design and ground testing. "
Ahead of the launch, we will have to now focus on the mechanical and electrical integration, control and guidance system along with their packaging, checkout system, HILS (hardware in loop simulation) and launch readiness," sources said.

===
Flight testing ===
In 2016, it was announced that the vehicle will be tested by December 2016.
In early 2019, the vehicle was cleared for tests and was expected to be tested in same year.

On 12 June 2019, it was tested from Abdul Kalam Island by the Defence Research and Development Organisation.
With the scramjet engine, it can cruise at Mach 6.
It was test-fired from launch pad number-4 of Integrated Test Range (ITR) at the Abdul Kalam Island in the Balasore district of Odisha at 11:27 IST.
According to some unconfirmed reports, the test was a partial success since, allegedly, the Agni-I ballistic carrier vehicle on which the HSTDV was to receive its altitude boost didn't complete the mission.
This was supposedly due to ‘weight issues’.
The rumours however, were unconfirmed.
According to the official statement by the Ministry of Defence, “the missile was successfully launched” and the data collected will be analysed to “validate critical technologies”.
===
Scramjet testing ===
On 7 September 2020 DRDO successfully tested the scramjet powered Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle (HSTDV).
Cruise vehicle was launched at 11:03 IST from Dr APJ Abdul Kalam Launch Complex at Wheeler Island atop a solid booster.
At 30 km altitude payload fairing separated, followed by separation of HSTDV cruise vehicle, air-intake opening, fuel injection and auto-ignition.
After sustaining hypersonic combustion for 20 seconds, cruise vehicle achieved velocity of nearly 2 km per second.
This test flight validated aerodynamic configuration of vehicle, ignition and sustained combustion of scramjet engine at hypersonic flow, separation mechanisms and characterised thermo-structural materials.
The HSTDV is set to serve as the building block for next-generation hypersonic cruise missiles.

== See also ==
Boeing X-51
BrahMos-II
HGV-202F
== References ==


==
External links ==
Hypersonic Flight and Ground Testing Activities in India
 Media related to DRDO Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle at Wikimedia Commons
Temperature is a physical quantity that expresses hot and cold.
It is the manifestation of thermal energy, present in all matter, which is the source of the occurrence of heat, a flow of energy, when a body is in contact with another that is colder or hotter.

Temperature is measured with a thermometer.
Thermometers are calibrated in various temperature scales that historically have used various reference points and thermometric substances for definition.
The most common scales are the Celsius scale (formerly called centigrade, denoted as °C), the Fahrenheit scale (denoted as °F), and the Kelvin scale (denoted as K), the last of which is predominantly used for scientific purposes by conventions of the International System of Units (SI).

The lowest theoretical temperature is absolute zero, at which no more thermal energy can be extracted from a body.
Experimentally, it can only be approached very closely (100 pK), but not reached, which is recognized in the third law of thermodynamics.

Temperature is important in all fields of natural science, including physics, chemistry, Earth science, astronomy, medicine, biology, ecology, material science, metallurgy, mechanical engineering and geography as well as most aspects of daily life.

== Effects ==
Many physical processes are related to temperature, some of them are given below:

the physical properties of materials including the phase (solid, liquid, gaseous or plasma), density, solubility, vapor pressure, electrical conductivity, hardness, wear resistance, thermal conductivity, corrosion resistance, strength
the rate and extent to which chemical reactions occur
the amount and properties of thermal radiation emitted from the surface of an object
the speed of sound which is a function of the square root of the absolute temperature.

==
Scales ==
Temperature scales differ in two ways: the point chosen as zero degrees and the magnitudes of incremental units or degrees on the scale.
===
Commonly used scales ===
The Celsius scale (°C) is used for common temperature measurements in most of the world.
It is an empirical scale that was developed by historical progress, which led to its zero points 0 °C being defined by the freezing point of water, and additional degrees defined so that 100 °C was the boiling point of water, both at sea-level atmospheric pressure.
Because of the 100-degree interval, it was called a centigrade scale.
Since the standardization of the kelvin in the International System of Units, it has subsequently been redefined in terms of the equivalent fixing points on the Kelvin scale, and so that a temperature increment of one degree
Celsius is the same as an increment of one kelvin, though they differ by an additive offset of approximately 273.15.

The United States commonly uses the Fahrenheit scale, on which water freezes at 32 °F and boils at 212 °F at sea-level atmospheric pressure.

===
Absolute zero ===
At the absolute zero of temperature, no energy can be removed from matter as heat, a fact expressed in the third law of thermodynamics.
At this temperature, matter contains no macroscopic thermal energy, but still has quantum-mechanical zero-point energy as predicted by the uncertainty principle, although this does not enter into the definition of absolute temperature.
Experimentally, absolute zero can be approached only very closely; it can never be reached (least temperature attained by experiment is 100 pK).
Theoretically, in a body at absolute zero temperature, all classical motion of its particles has ceased and they are at complete rest in this classical sense.
The absolute zero, defined as 0 K, is approximately equal to −273.15 °C, or −459.67 °
F.
===
Absolute scales ===
Referring to the Boltzmann constant, to the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, and to the Boltzmann statistical mechanical definition of entropy, as distinct from the Gibbs definition, for independently moving microscopic particles, disregarding interparticle potential energy,  by international agreement, a temperature scale is defined and said to be absolute because it is independent of the characteristics of particular thermometric substances and thermometer mechanisms.
Apart from the absolute zero, it does not have a reference temperature.
It is known as the Kelvin scale, widely used in science and technology.
The kelvin (the word is spelled with a lower-case k) is the unit of temperature in the International System of Units (SI).
The temperature of a body in its own state of thermodynamic equilibrium is always positive, relative to the absolute zero.

Besides the internationally agreed Kelvin scale, there is also a thermodynamic temperature scale, invented by Lord Kelvin, also with its numerical zero at the absolute zero of temperature, but directly relating to purely macroscopic thermodynamic concepts, including the macroscopic entropy, though microscopically referable to the Gibbs statistical mechanical definition of entropy for the canonical ensemble, that takes interparticle potential energy into account, as well as independent particle motion so that it can account for measurements of temperatures near absolute zero.
This scale has a reference temperature at the triple point of water, the numerical value of which is defined by measurements using the aforementioned internationally agreed Kelvin scale.
===
International Kelvin scale ===
Many scientific measurements use the Kelvin temperature scale (unit symbol: K), named in honor of the physicist who first defined it.
It is an absolute scale.
Its numerical zero point, 0 K, is at the absolute zero of temperature.
Since May, 2019, its degrees have been defined through particle kinetic theory, and statistical mechanics.
In the International System of Units (SI), the magnitude of the kelvin is defined through various empirical measurements of the average kinetic energies of microscopic particles.
It is numerically evaluated in terms of the Boltzmann constant, the value of which is defined as fixed by international convention.

===
Statistical mechanical versus thermodynamic temperature scales ===
Since May 2019, the magnitude of the kelvin is defined in relation to microscopic phenomena, characterized in terms of statistical mechanics.
Previously, since 1954, the International System of Units defined a scale and unit for the kelvin as a thermodynamic temperature, by using the reliably reproducible temperature of the triple point of water as a second reference point, the first reference point being 0 K at absolute zero.
Historically, the triple point temperature of the water was defined as exactly 273.16 units of the measurement increment.
Today it is an empirically measured quantity.
The freezing point of water at sea-level atmospheric pressure occurs at approximately 273.15 K = 0 °C.
==
Classification of scales ==
There is a variety of kinds of temperature scales.
It may be convenient to classify them as empirically and theoretically based.
Empirical temperature scales are historically older, while theoretically based scales arose in the middle of the nineteenth century.

===
Empirical scales ===
Empirically based temperature scales rely directly on measurements of simple macroscopic physical properties of materials.
For example, the length of a column of mercury, confined in a glass-walled capillary tube, is dependent largely on temperature and is the basis of the very useful mercury-in-glass thermometer.
Such scales are valid only within convenient ranges of temperature.
For example, above the boiling point of mercury, a mercury-in-glass thermometer is impracticable.
Most materials expand with temperature increase, but some materials, such as water, contract with temperature increase over some specific range, and then they are hardly useful as thermometric materials.
A material is of no use as a thermometer near one of its phase-change temperatures, for example, its boiling-point.

In spite of these limitations, most generally used practical thermometers are of the empirically based kind.
Especially, it was used for calorimetry, which contributed greatly to the discovery of thermodynamics.
Nevertheless, empirical thermometry has serious drawbacks when judged as a basis for theoretical physics.
Empirically based thermometers, beyond their base as simple direct measurements of ordinary physical properties of thermometric materials, can be re-calibrated, by use of theoretical physical reasoning, and this can extend their range of adequacy.
===
Theoretical scales ===
Theoretically based temperature scales are based directly on theoretical arguments, especially those of kinetic theory and thermodynamics.
They are more or less ideally realized in practically feasible physical devices and materials.
Theoretically based temperature scales are used to provide calibrating standards for practical empirically-based thermometers.

====
Microscopic statistical mechanical scale ====
In physics, the internationally agreed conventional temperature scale is called the Kelvin scale.
It is calibrated through the internationally agreed and prescribed value of the Boltzmann constant, referring to motions of microscopic particles, such as atoms, molecules, and electrons, a constituent in the body whose temperature is to be measured.
In contrast with the thermodynamic temperature scale invented by Kelvin, the presently conventional Kelvin temperature is not defined through comparison with the temperature of a reference state of a standard body, nor in terms of macroscopic thermodynamics.

Apart from the absolute zero of temperature, the Kelvin temperature of a body in a state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium is defined by measurements of suitably chosen of its physical properties, such as have precisely known theoretical explanations in terms of the Boltzmann constant.
That constant refers to chosen kinds of motion of microscopic particles in the constitution of the body.
In those kinds of motion, the particles move individually, without mutual interaction.
Such motions are typically interrupted by inter-particle collisions, but for temperature measurement, the motions are chosen so that, between collisions, the non-interactive segments of their trajectories are known to be accessible to accurate measurement.
For this purpose, interparticle potential energy is disregarded.

In an ideal gas, and in other theoretically understood bodies, the Kelvin temperature is defined to be proportional to the average kinetic energy of non-interactively moving microscopic particles, which can be measured by suitable techniques.
The proportionality constant is a simple multiple of the Boltzmann constant.
If molecules, atoms, or electrons, is emitted from material and their velocities are measured, the spectrum of their velocities often nearly obeys a theoretical law called the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution, which gives a well-founded measurement of temperatures for which the law holds.
There have not yet been successful experiments of this same kind that directly use the Fermi–Dirac distribution for thermometry, but perhaps that will be achieved in the future.
The speed of sound in a gas can be calculated theoretically from the molecular character of the gas, from its temperature and pressure, and from the value of Boltzmann's constant.
For a gas of known molecular character and pressure, this provides a relation between temperature and Boltzmann's constant.
Those quantities can be known or measured more precisely than can the thermodynamic variables that define the state of a sample of water at its triple point.
Consequently, taking the value of Boltzmann's constant as a primarily defined reference of exactly defined value, a measurement of the speed of sound can provide a more precise measurement of the temperature of the gas.
Measurement of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation from an ideal three-dimensional black body can provide an accurate temperature measurement because the frequency of maximum spectral radiance of black-body radiation is directly proportional to the temperature of the black body; this is known as Wien's displacement law and has a theoretical explanation in Planck's law and the Bose–Einstein law.

Measurement of the spectrum of noise-power produced by an electrical resistor can also provide accurate temperature measurement.
The resistor has two terminals and is in effect a one-dimensional body.
The Bose-Einstein law for this case indicates that the noise-power is directly proportional to the temperature of the resistor and to the value of its resistance and to the noise bandwidth.
In a given frequency band, the noise-power has equal contributions from every frequency and is called Johnson noise.
If the value of the resistance is known then the temperature can be found.

====
Macroscopic thermodynamic scale ====
Historically, till May 2019, the definition of the Kelvin scale was that invented by Kelvin, based on a ratio of quantities of energy in processes in an ideal Carnot engine, entirely in terms of macroscopic thermodynamics.
That Carnot engine was to work between two temperatures, that of the body whose temperature was to be measured, and a reference, that of a body at the temperature of the triple point of water.
Then the reference temperature, that of the triple point, was defined to be exactly 273.16 K.
Since May 2019, that value has not been fixed by definition but is to be measured through microscopic phenomena, involving the Boltzmann constant, as described above.
The microscopic statistical mechanical definition does not have a reference temperature.

====
Ideal gas ====
A material on which a macroscopically defined temperature scale may be based is the ideal gas.
The pressure exerted by a fixed volume and mass of an ideal gas is directly proportional to its temperature.
Some natural gases show so nearly ideal properties over suitable temperature range that they can be used for thermometry; this was important during the development of thermodynamics and is still of practical importance today.
The ideal gas thermometer is, however, not theoretically perfect for thermodynamics.
This is because the entropy of an ideal gas at its absolute zero of temperature is not a positive semi-definite quantity, which puts the gas in violation of the third law of thermodynamics.
In contrast to real materials, the ideal gas does not liquefy or solidify, no matter how cold it is.
Alternatively thinking, the ideal gas law, refers to the limit of infinitely high temperature and zero pressure; these conditions guarantee non-interactive motions of the constituent molecules.

==
Kinetic theory approach ==
The magnitude of the kelvin is now defined in terms of kinetic theory, derived from the value of Boltzmann's constant.

Kinetic theory provides a microscopic account of temperature for some bodies of material, especially gases, based on macroscopic systems' being composed of many microscopic particles, such as molecules and ions of various species, the particles of a species being all alike.
It explains macroscopic phenomena through the classical mechanics of the microscopic particles.
The equipartition theorem of kinetic theory asserts that each classical degree of freedom of a freely moving particle has an average kinetic energy of kBT/2 where kB denotes Boltzmann's constant.
The translational motion of the particle has three degrees of freedom, so that, except at very low temperatures where quantum effects predominate, the average translational kinetic energy of a freely moving particle in a system with temperature T will be 3kBT/2.

Molecules, such as oxygen (O2), have more degrees of freedom than single spherical atoms: they undergo rotational and vibrational motions as well as translations.
Heating results in an increase in temperature due to an increase in the average translational kinetic energy of the molecules.
Heating will also cause, through equipartitioning, the energy associated with vibrational and rotational modes to increase.
Thus a diatomic gas will require more energy input to increase its temperature by a certain amount, i.e. it will have a greater heat capacity than a monatomic gas.

As noted above, the speed of sound in a gas can be calculated from the molecular character of the gas, from its temperature and pressure, and from the value of Boltzmann's constant.
Taking the value of Boltzmann's constant as a primarily defined reference of exactly defined value, a measurement of the speed of sound can provide a more precise measurement of the temperature of the gas.
It is possible to measure the average kinetic energy of constituent microscopic particles if they are allowed to escape from the bulk of the system, through a small hole in the containing wall.
The spectrum of velocities has to be measured, and the average calculated from that.
It is not necessarily the case that the particles that escape and are measured have the same velocity distribution as the particles that remain in the bulk of the system, but sometimes a good sample is possible.

==
Thermodynamic approach ==
Temperature is one of the principal quantities in the study of thermodynamics.
Formerly, the magnitude of the kelvin was defined in thermodynamic terms, but nowadays, as mentioned above, it is defined in terms of kinetic theory.

The thermodynamic temperature is said to be absolute for two reasons.
One is that its formal character is independent of the properties of particular materials.
The other reason is that its zero is, in a sense, absolute, in that it indicates the absence of microscopic classical motion of the constituent particles of matter, so that they have a limiting specific heat of zero for zero temperature, according to the third law of thermodynamics.
Nevertheless, a thermodynamic temperature does in fact have a definite numerical value that has been arbitrarily chosen by tradition and is dependent on the property of particular materials; it is simply less arbitrary than relative "degrees" scales such as Celsius and Fahrenheit.

Being an absolute scale with one fixed point (zero), there is only one degree of freedom left to arbitrary choice, rather than two as in relative scales.
For the Kelvin scale since May 2019, by international convention, the choice has been made to use knowledge of modes of operation of various thermometric devices, relying on microscopic kinetic theories about molecular motion.
The numerical scale is settled by a conventional definition of the value of the Boltzmann constant, which relates macroscopic temperature to the average microscopic kinetic energy of particles such as molecules.
Its numerical value is arbitrary, and an alternate, less widely used absolute temperature scale exists called the Rankine scale, made to be aligned with the Fahrenheit scale as Kelvin is with Celsius.

The thermodynamic definition of temperature is due to Kelvin.
It is framed in terms of an idealized device called a Carnot engine, imagined running in a fictive continuous cycle of successive processes that traverse a cycle of states of its working body.
The engine takes in a quantity of heat Q1 from a hot reservoir and passes out a lesser quantity of heat Q2 to a cold reservoir.
The difference in energy is passed, as thermodynamic work, to a work reservoir, and is considered to be the output of the engine.
The cycle is imagined to run so slowly that at each point of the cycle the working body is in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium.
The successive processes of the cycle are thus imagined to run reversibly with no entropy production.
Then the quantity of entropy taken in from the hot reservoir when the working body is heated is equal to that passed to the cold reservoir when the working body is cooled.
Then the absolute or thermodynamic temperatures, T1 and T2,  of the reservoirs are defined so that to be such that

The zeroth law of thermodynamics allows this definition to be used to measure the absolute or thermodynamic temperature of an arbitrary body of interest, by making the other heat reservoir have the same temperature as the body of interest.

Kelvin's original work postulating absolute temperature was published in 1848.
It was based on the work of Carnot, before the formulation of the first law of thermodynamics.
Carnot had no sound understanding of heat and no specific concept of entropy.
He wrote of 'caloric' and said that all the caloric that passed from the hot reservoir was passed into the cold reservoir.
Kelvin wrote in his 1848 paper that his scale was absolute in the sense that it was defined "independently of the properties of any particular kind of matter".
His definitive publication, which sets out the definition just stated, was printed in 1853, a paper read in 1851.Numerical details were formerly settled by making one of the heat reservoirs a cell at the triple point of water, which was defined to have an absolute temperature of 273.16
K.
Nowadays, the numerical value is instead obtained from measurement through the microscopic statistical mechanical international definition, as above.
===
Intensive variability ===
In thermodynamic terms, the temperature is an intensive variable because it is equal to a differential coefficient of one extensive variable with respect to another, for a given body.
It thus has the dimensions of a ratio of two extensive variables.
In thermodynamics, two bodies are often considered as connected by contact with a common wall, which has some specific permeability properties.
Such specific permeability can be referred to a specific intensive variable.
An example is a diathermic wall that is permeable only to heat; the intensive variable for this case is temperature.
When the two bodies have been connected through the specifically permeable wall for a very long time, and have settled to a permanent steady state, the relevant intensive variables are equal in the two bodies; for a diathermal wall, this statement is sometimes called the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
In particular, when the body is described by stating its internal energy U, an extensive variable, as a function of its entropy S, also an extensive variable, and other state variables
V, N, with U = U (S, V, N), then the temperature is equal to the partial derivative of the internal energy with respect to the entropy:
Likewise, when the body is described by stating its entropy S as a function of its internal energy U, and other state variables V, N, with S = S (U, V, N), then the reciprocal of the temperature is equal to the partial derivative of the entropy with respect to the internal energy:
The above definition, equation (1), of the absolute temperature, is due to Kelvin.
It refers to systems closed to the transfer of matter and has a special emphasis on directly experimental procedures.
A presentation of thermodynamics by Gibbs starts at a more abstract level and deals with systems open to the transfer of matter; in this development of thermodynamics, the equations (2) and (3) above are actually alternative definitions of temperature.

===
Local thermodynamic equilibrium ===
Real-world bodies are often not in thermodynamic equilibrium and not homogeneous.
For the study by methods of classical irreversible thermodynamics, a body is usually spatially and temporally divided conceptually into 'cells' of small size.
If classical thermodynamic equilibrium conditions for matter are fulfilled to good approximation in such a 'cell', then it is homogeneous and a temperature exists for it.
If this is so for every 'cell' of the body, then local thermodynamic equilibrium is said to prevail throughout the body.
It makes good sense, for example, to say of the extensive variable U, or of the extensive variable S, that it has a density per unit volume or a quantity per unit mass of the system, but it makes no sense to speak of the density of temperature per unit volume or quantity of temperature per unit mass of the system.
On the other hand, it makes no sense to speak of the internal energy at a point, while when local thermodynamic equilibrium prevails, it makes good sense to speak of the temperature at a point.
Consequently, the temperature can vary from point to point in a medium that is not in global thermodynamic equilibrium, but in which there is local thermodynamic equilibrium.

Thus, when local thermodynamic equilibrium prevails in a body, the temperature can be regarded as a spatially varying local property in that body, and this is because the temperature is an intensive variable.

==
Basic theory ==
Temperature is a measure of a quality of a state of a material.

The quality may be regarded as a more abstract entity than any particular temperature scale that measures it, and is called hotness by some writers.
The quality of hotness refers to the state of material only in a particular locality, and in general, apart from bodies held in a steady state of thermodynamic equilibrium, hotness varies from place to place.
It is not necessarily the case that a material in a particular place is in a state that is steady and nearly homogeneous enough to allow it to have a well-defined hotness or temperature.
Hotness may be represented abstractly as a one-dimensional manifold.
Every valid temperature scale has its own one-to-one map into the hotness manifold.
When two systems in thermal contact are at the same temperature no heat transfers between them.
When a temperature difference does exist heat flows spontaneously from the warmer system to the colder system until they are in thermal equilibrium.
Such heat transfer occurs by conduction or by thermal radiation.
Experimental physicists, for example Galileo and Newton, found that there are indefinitely many empirical temperature scales.
Nevertheless, the zeroth law of thermodynamics says that they all measure the same quality.
This means that for a body in its own state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium, every correctly calibrated thermometer, of whatever kind, that measures the temperature of the body, records one and the same temperature.
For a body that is not in its own state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium, different thermometers can record different temperatures, depending respectively on the mechanisms of operation of the thermometers.

===
Bodies in thermodynamic equilibrium ===
For experimental physics, hotness means that, when comparing any two given bodies in their respective separate thermodynamic equilibria, any two suitably given empirical thermometers with numerical scale readings will agree as to which is the hotter of the two given bodies, or that they have the same temperature.
This does not require the two thermometers to have a linear relation between their numerical scale readings, but it does require that the relation between their numerical readings shall be strictly monotonic.
A definite sense of greater hotness can be had, independently of calorimetry, of thermodynamics, and of properties of particular materials, from Wien's displacement law of thermal radiation:
the temperature of a bath of thermal radiation is proportional, by a universal constant, to the frequency of the maximum of its frequency spectrum; this frequency is always positive, but can have values that tend to zero.
Thermal radiation is initially defined for a cavity in thermodynamic equilibrium.
These physical facts justify a mathematical statement that hotness exists on an ordered one-dimensional manifold.
This is a fundamental character of temperature and thermometers for bodies in their own thermodynamic equilibrium.
Except for a system undergoing a first-order phase change such as the melting of ice, as a closed system receives heat, without a change in its volume and without a change in external force fields acting on it, its temperature rises.
For a system undergoing such a phase change so slowly that departure from thermodynamic equilibrium can be neglected, its temperature remains constant as the system is supplied with latent heat.
Conversely, a loss of heat from a closed system, without phase change, without change of volume, and without a change in external force fields acting on it, decreases its temperature.

===
Bodies in a steady state but not in thermodynamic equilibrium ===
While for bodies in their own thermodynamic equilibrium states, the notion of temperature requires that all empirical thermometers must agree as to which of two bodies is the hotter or that they are at the same temperature, this requirement is not safe for bodies that are in steady states though not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
It can then well be that different empirical thermometers disagree about which is hotter, and if this is so, then at least one of the bodies does not have a well-defined absolute thermodynamic temperature.
Nevertheless, anyone has given body and any one suitable empirical thermometer can still support notions of empirical, non-absolute, hotness, and temperature, for a suitable range of processes.
This is a matter for study in non-equilibrium thermodynamics.

===
Bodies not in a steady state ===
When a body is not in a steady-state, then the notion of temperature becomes even less safe than for a body in a steady state not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
This is also a matter for study in non-equilibrium thermodynamics.

===
Thermodynamic equilibrium axiomatics ===
For the axiomatic treatment of thermodynamic equilibrium, since the 1930s, it has become customary to refer to a zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The customarily stated minimalist version of such a law postulates only that all bodies, which when thermally connected would be in thermal equilibrium, should be said to have the same temperature by definition, but by itself does not establish temperature as a quantity expressed as a real number on a scale.
A more physically informative version of such a law views empirical temperature as a chart on a hotness manifold.
While the zeroth law permits the definitions of many different empirical scales of temperature, the second law of thermodynamics selects the definition of a single preferred, absolute temperature, unique up to an arbitrary scale factor, whence called the thermodynamic temperature.
If internal energy is considered as a function of the volume and entropy of a homogeneous system in thermodynamic equilibrium, thermodynamic absolute temperature appears as the partial derivative of internal energy with respect the entropy at constant volume.
Its natural, intrinsic origin or null point is absolute zero at which the entropy of any system is at a minimum.
Although this is the lowest absolute temperature described by the model, the third law of thermodynamics postulates that absolute zero cannot be attained by any physical system.

==
Heat capacity ==
When an energy transfer to or from a body is only as heat, the state of the body changes.
Depending on the surroundings and the walls separating them from the body, various changes are possible in the body.
They include chemical reactions, increase of pressure, increase of temperature and phase change.
For each kind of change under specified conditions, the heat capacity is the ratio of the quantity of heat transferred to the magnitude of the change.
For example, if the change is an increase in temperature at constant volume, with no phase change and no chemical change, then the temperature of the body rises and its pressure increases.
The quantity of heat transferred, ΔQ, divided by the observed temperature change, ΔT, is the body's heat capacity at constant volume:
C
          
            V
          
        
        =
Δ
              Q
Δ
T
            
          
        
        .

{\displaystyle C_{V}={\frac {\Delta Q}{\Delta T}}.}

If heat capacity is measured for a well-defined amount of substance, the specific heat is the measure of the heat required to increase the temperature of such a unit quantity by one unit of temperature.
For example, raising the temperature of water by one kelvin (equal to one degree Celsius) requires 4186 joules per kilogram (J/kg).

==
Measurement ==
Temperature measurement using modern scientific thermometers and temperature scales goes back at least as far as the early 18th century, when Gabriel Fahrenheit adapted a thermometer (switching to mercury) and a scale both developed by Ole Christensen Rømer.
Fahrenheit's scale is still in use in the United States for non-scientific applications.

Temperature is measured with thermometers that may be calibrated to a variety of temperature scales.
In most of the world (except for Belize, Myanmar, Liberia and the United States), the Celsius scale is used for most temperature measuring purposes.
Most scientists measure temperature using the Celsius scale and thermodynamic temperature using the Kelvin scale, which is the Celsius scale offset so that its null point is 0 K = −273.15 °C, or absolute zero.
Many engineering fields in the US, notably high-tech and US federal specifications (civil and military), also use the Kelvin and Celsius scales.
Other engineering fields in the US also rely upon the Rankine scale (a shifted Fahrenheit scale) when working in thermodynamic-related disciplines such as combustion.

===
Units ===
The basic unit of temperature in the International System of Units (SI) is the Kelvin.
It has the symbol K.
For everyday applications, it is often convenient to use the Celsius scale, in which 0 °C corresponds very closely to the freezing point of water and 100 °
C is its boiling point at sea level.
Because liquid droplets commonly exist in clouds at sub-zero temperatures, 0 °C is better defined as the melting point of ice.
In this scale, a temperature difference of 1 degree Celsius is the same as a 1kelvin increment, but the scale is offset by the temperature at which ice melts (273.15 K).

By international agreement, until May 2019, the Kelvin and Celsius scales were defined by two fixing points: absolute zero and the triple point of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water, which is water specially prepared with a specified blend of hydrogen and oxygen isotopes.
Absolute zero was defined as precisely 0 K and −273.15 °C.
It is the temperature at which all classical translational motion of the particles comprising matter ceases and they are at complete rest in the classical model.
Quantum-mechanically, however, zero-point motion remains and has an associated energy, the zero-point energy.

Matter is in its ground state, and contains no thermal energy.
The temperatures 273.16 K and 0.01 °
C were defined as those of the triple point of water.
This definition served the following purposes: it fixed the magnitude of the kelvin as being precisely 1 part in 273.16 parts of the difference between absolute zero and the triple point of water; it established that one kelvin has precisely the same magnitude as one degree on the Celsius scale; and it established the difference between the null points of these scales as being 273.15 K (0 K = −273.15 °C and 273.16 K = 0.01 °C).
Since 2019, there has been a new definition based on the Boltzmann constant, but the scales are scarcely changed.

In the United States, the Fahrenheit scale is the most widely used.
On this scale the freezing point of water corresponds to 32 °F and the boiling point to 212 °F.
The Rankine scale, still used in fields of chemical engineering in the US, is an absolute scale based on the Fahrenheit increment.

====
Conversion ====
The following table shows the temperature conversion formulas for conversions to and from the Celsius scale.

====
Plasma physics ====
The field of plasma physics deals with phenomena of electromagnetic nature that involve very high temperatures.
It is customary to express temperature as energy in units of electronvolts (eV) or kiloelectronvolts (keV).
The energy, which has a different dimension from temperature, is then calculated as the product of the Boltzmann constant and temperature, 
  
    
      
        E
        =
        
          k
          
            B
T
{\displaystyle E=k_{\text{B}}T}
  .
Then, 1 eV corresponds to 11605 K.
In the study of QCD matter one routinely encounters temperatures of the order of a few hundred MeV, equivalent to about 1012
K.


==
Theoretical foundation ==
Historically, there are several scientific approaches to the explanation of temperature: the classical thermodynamic description based on macroscopic empirical variables that can be measured in a laboratory; the kinetic theory of gases which relates the macroscopic description to the probability distribution of the energy of motion of gas particles; and a microscopic explanation based on statistical physics and quantum mechanics.
In addition, rigorous and purely mathematical treatments have provided an axiomatic approach to classical thermodynamics and temperature.
Statistical physics provides a deeper understanding by describing the atomic behavior of matter and derives macroscopic properties from statistical averages of microscopic states, including both classical and quantum states.
In the fundamental physical description, using natural units, the temperature may be measured directly in units of energy.
However, in the practical systems of measurement for science, technology, and commerce, such as the modern metric system of units, the macroscopic and the microscopic descriptions are interrelated by the Boltzmann constant, a proportionality factor that scales temperature to the microscopic mean kinetic energy.

The microscopic description in statistical mechanics is based on a model that analyzes a system into its fundamental particles of matter or into a set of classical or quantum-mechanical oscillators and considers the system as a statistical ensemble of microstates.
As a collection of classical material particles, the temperature is a measure of the mean energy of motion, called kinetic energy, of the particles, whether in solids, liquids, gases, or plasmas.
The kinetic energy, a concept of classical mechanics, is half the mass of a particle times its speed squared.
In this mechanical interpretation of thermal motion, the kinetic energies of material particles may reside in the velocity of the particles of their translational or vibrational motion or in the inertia of their rotational modes.
In monatomic perfect gases and, approximately, in most gas, the temperature is a measure of the mean particle kinetic energy.
It also determines the probability distribution function of energy.
In condensed matter, and particularly in solids, this purely mechanical description is often less useful and the oscillator model provides a better description to account for quantum mechanical phenomena.
Temperature determines the statistical occupation of the microstates of the ensemble.
The microscopic definition of temperature is only meaningful in the thermodynamic limit, meaning for large ensembles of states or particles, to fulfill the requirements of the statistical model.

Kinetic energy is also considered as a component of thermal energy.
The thermal energy may be partitioned into independent components attributed to the degrees of freedom of the particles or to the modes of oscillators in a thermodynamic system.
In general, the number of these degrees of freedom that are available for the equipartitioning of energy depends on the temperature, i.e. the energy region of the interactions under consideration.
For solids, the thermal energy is associated primarily with the vibrations of its atoms or molecules about their equilibrium position.
In an ideal monatomic gas, the kinetic energy is found exclusively in the purely translational motions of the particles.
In other systems, vibrational and rotational motions also contribute degrees of freedom.

===
Kinetic theory of gases ===
Maxwell and Boltzmann developed a kinetic theory that yields a fundamental understanding of temperature in gases.

This theory also explains the ideal gas law and the observed heat capacity of monatomic  (or 'noble') gases.

The ideal gas law is based on observed empirical relationships between pressure (p), volume (V), and temperature (T), and was recognized long before the kinetic theory of gases was developed (see Boyle's and Charles's laws).

The ideal gas law states:
p
        V
        =
n
        R
T
        ,
      
    
    {\displaystyle pV=nRT,}
where n is the number of moles of gas and R = 8.314462618...
J⋅mol−1⋅K−1
is the gas constant.

This relationship gives us our first hint that there is an absolute zero on the temperature scale, because it only holds if the temperature is measured on an absolute scale such as Kelvin's.
The ideal gas law allows one to measure temperature on this absolute scale using the gas thermometer.

The temperature in kelvins can be defined as the pressure in pascals of one mole of gas in a container of one cubic meter, divided by the gas constant.

Although it is not a particularly convenient device, the gas thermometer provides an essential theoretical basis by which all thermometers can be calibrated.

As a practical matter, it is not possible to use a gas thermometer to measure absolute zero temperature since the gases tend to condense into a liquid long before the temperature reaches zero.
It is possible, however, to extrapolate to absolute zero by using the ideal gas law, as shown in the figure.

The kinetic theory assumes that pressure is caused by the force associated with individual atoms striking the walls, and that all energy is translational kinetic energy.

Using a sophisticated symmetry argument, Boltzmann deduced what is now called the Maxwell–Boltzmann probability distribution function for the velocity of particles in an ideal gas.

From that probability distribution function, the average kinetic energy (per particle) of a monatomic ideal gas is

  
    
      
        
          E
          
            k
=
1
            2
m
        
          v
          
            rms
          
          
            2
          
        
        =
3
2
k
          
            B
T
        ,
      
    
    {
\displaystyle E_{\text{k}}={\frac {1}{2}}mv_{\text{rms}}^{2}={\frac {3}{2}}k_{\text{B}}T,}
where the Boltzmann constant kB is the ideal gas constant divided by the Avogadro number, and
v
rms
          
        
        =
⟨
v
                
                  2
⟩
            
          
        
        =
⟨
v
                ,
                v
⟩
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle v_{\text{rms}}={\sqrt
{\left\langle v^{2}\right\rangle }}={\sqrt {\left\langle v,v\right\rangle }}}
   is the root-mean-square speed.
Thus the ideal gas law states that internal energy is directly proportional to temperature.
This direct proportionality between temperature and internal energy is a special case of the equipartition theorem, and holds only in the classical limit of an ideal gas.
It does not hold for most substances, although it is true that temperature is a monotonic (non-decreasing) function of internal energy.

===
Zeroth law of thermodynamics ===
When two otherwise isolated bodies are connected together by a rigid physical path impermeable to matter, there is the spontaneous transfer of energy as heat from the hotter to the colder of them.
Eventually, they reach a state of mutual thermal equilibrium, in which heat transfer has ceased, and the bodies' respective state variables have settled to become unchanging.
One statement of the zeroth law of thermodynamics is that if two systems are each in thermal equilibrium with a third system, then they are also in thermal equilibrium with each other.
This statement helps to define temperature
but it does not, by itself, complete the definition.
An empirical temperature is a numerical scale for the hotness of a thermodynamic system.
Such hotness may be defined as existing on a one-dimensional manifold, stretching between hot and cold.
Sometimes the zeroth law is stated to include the existence of a unique universal hotness manifold, and of numerical scales on it, so as to provide a complete definition of empirical temperature.
To be suitable for empirical thermometry, a material must have a monotonic relation between hotness and some easily measured state variable, such as pressure or volume, when all other relevant coordinates are fixed.
An exceptionally suitable system is the ideal gas, which can provide a temperature scale that matches the absolute Kelvin scale.
The Kelvin scale is defined on the basis of the second law of thermodynamics.

===
Second law of thermodynamics ===
As an alternative to considering or defining the zeroth law of thermodynamics, it was the historical development in thermodynamics to define temperature in terms of the second law of thermodynamics which deals with entropy.
The second law states that any process will result in either no change or a net increase in the entropy of the universe.
This can be understood in terms of probability.

For example, in a series of coin tosses, a perfectly ordered system would be one in which either every toss comes up heads or every toss comes up tails.
This means the outcome is always 100 % the same result.
In contrast, many mixed (disordered) outcomes are possible, and their number increases with each toss.
Eventually, the combinations of ~50% heads and ~50% tails dominate, and obtaining an outcome significantly different from 50/50 becomes increasingly unlikely.
Thus the system naturally progresses to a state of maximum disorder or entropy.

As temperature governs the transfer of heat between two systems and the universe tends to progress toward a maximum of entropy, it is expected that there is some relationship between temperature and entropy.
A heat engine is a device for converting thermal energy into mechanical energy, resulting in the performance of work.
and analysis of the Carnot heat engine provides the necessary relationships.
The work from a heat engine corresponds to the difference between the heat put into the system at high temperature, qH and the heat extracted at the low temperature, qC.
The efficiency is the work divided by the heat input:

where wcy is the work done per cycle.
The efficiency depends only on qC/qH.
Because qC and qH correspond to heat transfer at the temperatures TC and
TH respectively, qC
/qH should be some function of these temperatures:

Carnot's theorem states that all reversible engines operating between the same heat reservoirs are equally efficient.
Thus, a heat engine operating between T1 and T3 must have the same efficiency as one consisting of two cycles, one between T1 and T2, and the second between T2 and T3.
This can only be the case if
q
          
            13
=
q
                
                  1
q
                
                  2
q
                
                  2
q
                
                  3
,
      
    
    {\displaystyle q_{13}={\frac {q_{1}q_{2}}{q_{2}q_{3}}},}
  which implies

  
    
      
        
          q
          
            13
          
        
        =
f
(
          
            
              T
              
                1
              
            
            ,
T
              
                3
              
            
          
          )
        
        =
f
(
          
            
              T
              
                1
              
            
            ,
            
              T
              
                2
              
            
          
          )
        
        f
(
          
            
              T
              
                2
              
            
            ,
            
              T
              
                3
              
            
          
          )
        
        .
{\displaystyle q_{13}=f\left(T_{1},T_{3}\right)=f\left(T_{1},T_{2}\right)f\left(T_{2},T_{3}\right).}

Since the first function is independent of T2, this temperature must cancel on the right side, meaning f(T1, T3)
is of the form
g(T1)/g(T3) (i.e. f(T1, T3) =
f(T1,
T2)f(T2, T3) =
g(T1)/g(T2
) · g(T2)/g(T3) = g(T1)/g(T3)
), where g is a function of a single temperature.
A temperature scale can now be chosen with the property
that

Substituting (6) back into (4) gives a relationship for the efficiency in terms of temperature:
For TC = 0 K the efficiency is 100% and that efficiency becomes greater than 100% below 0 K.
Since an efficiency greater than 100% violates the first law of thermodynamics, this implies that 0
K is the minimum possible temperature.
In fact the lowest temperature ever obtained in a macroscopic system was 20 nK, which was achieved in 1995 at NIST.
Subtracting the right hand side of (5) from the middle portion and rearranging gives
q
              
                H
T
H
              
            
          
        
        −
q
              
                C
T
              
                C
=
0
,
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {q_{\text{H}}}{T_{\text{H}}}}-{\frac {q_{\text{C}}}{T_{\text{C}}}}=0,}
  where the negative sign indicates heat ejected from the system.
This relationship suggests the existence of a state function, S, defined by

where the subscript indicates a reversible process.
The change of this state function around any cycle is zero, as is necessary for any state function.

This function corresponds to the entropy of the system, which was described previously.
Rearranging (8) gives a formula for temperature in terms of fictive infinitesimal quasi-reversible elements of entropy and heat:
For a system, where entropy S(E) is a function of its energy E, the temperature T is given by

i.e. the reciprocal of the temperature is the rate of increase of entropy with respect to energy.

===
Definition from statistical mechanics ===
Statistical mechanics defines temperature based on a system's fundamental degrees of freedom.

Eq.(10) is the defining relation of temperature, where the entropy 
  
    
      
        S
      
    
    {\displaystyle S}
   is defined (up to a constant) by the logarithm of the number of microstates of the system in the given macrostate (as specified in the microcanonical ensemble):
S
        =
k
          
            
              B
ln
⁡
(
        N
)
      
    
    {\displaystyle S=k_{\mathrm {B} }\ln(N)}
where
k
          
            
              B
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle k_{\mathrm {B} }}
   is Boltzmann's constant and
N is the number of microstates.

When two systems with different temperatures are put into purely thermal connection, heat will flow from the higher temperature system to the lower temperature one; thermodynamically this is understood by the second law of thermodynamics: The total change in entropy following a transfer of energy 
  
    
      
        Δ
E
      
    
    {\displaystyle \Delta E}
from system 1 to system 2
is:

  
    
      
        Δ
S
=
−
(
        d
        S
        
          /
        
        d
E
        
          )
          
            1
⋅
        Δ
        E
+
(
        d
        S
        
          /
        
        d
E
        
          )
          
            2
⋅
        Δ
        E
        =
(
          
            
              
                1
T
                  
                    2
                  
                
              
            
            −
1
T
                  
                    1
                  
                
              
            
          
          )
        
        Δ
E
      
    
    {\displaystyle
\Delta
S=-(dS/
dE)_{1}\cdot
\Delta
E+(dS/dE)_{2}\cdot
\Delta E=\left({\frac {1}{T_{2}}}-{\frac {1}{T_{1}}}\right)\Delta E}
and is thus positive if
T
          
            1
          
        
        >
        
          T
2
          
        
      
    
    {
\displaystyle T_{1}>T_{2}}
  
From the point of view of statistical mechanics, the total number of microstates in the combined system 1 + system 2 is
N
          
            1
⋅
N
          
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle N_{1}\cdot N_{2}}
, the logarithm of which (times Boltzmann's constant) is the sum of their entropies; thus a flow of heat from high to low temperature, which brings an increase in total entropy, is more likely than any other scenario (normally it is much more likely), as there are more microstates in the resulting macrostate.

===
Generalized temperature from single-particle statistics ===
It is possible to extend the definition of temperature even to systems of few particles, like in a quantum dot.
The generalized temperature is obtained by considering time ensembles instead of configuration-space ensembles given in statistical mechanics in the case of thermal and particle exchange between a small system of fermions
(N even less than 10) with a single/double-occupancy system.
The finite quantum grand canonical ensemble, obtained under the hypothesis of ergodicity and orthodicity, allows expressing the generalized temperature from the ratio of the average time of occupation 
  
    
      
        
          τ
          
            1
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \tau _{1}}
   and 
  
    
      
        
          τ
          
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \tau _{2}}
   of the single/double-occupancy system:
T
        =
E
              −
              
                E
                
                  F
(
                
                  1
+
                  
                    
                      3
                      
                        2
N
                      
                    
                  
                
                )
k
                
                  B
ln
⁡
(
                
                  2
                  
                    
                      
                        τ
                        
                          2
                        
                      
                      
                        τ
                        
                          1
)
,
      
    
    {\displaystyle T={\frac {E-E_{\text{F}}\left(1+{\frac {3}{2N}}\right)}{k_{\text{B}}\ln \left(2{\frac {\tau _{
2}}{\tau _{1}}}\right)}},}
  where EF is the Fermi energy.
This generalized temperature tends to the ordinary temperature when N goes to infinity.

===
Negative temperature ===
On the empirical temperature scales that are not referenced to absolute zero, a negative temperature is one below the zero-point of the scale used.
For example, dry ice has a sublimation temperature of −78.5 °C which is equivalent to −109.3 °F.
On the absolute Kelvin scale this temperature is 194.6 K.
No body can be brought to exactly 0 K (the temperature of the ideally coldest possible body) by any finite practicable process; this is a consequence of the third law of thermodynamics.
The international kinetic theory temperature of a body cannot take negative values.
The thermodynamic temperature scale, however, is not so constrained.

For a body of matter, there can sometimes be conceptually defined, in terms of microscopic degrees of freedom, namely particle spins, a subsystem, with a temperature other than that of the whole body.
When the body is in its own state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium, the temperatures of the whole body and of the subsystem must be the same.
The two temperatures can differ when, by work through externally imposed force fields, energy can be transferred to and from the subsystem, separately from the rest of the body; then the whole body is not in its own state of internal thermodynamic equilibrium.
There is an upper limit of energy such a spin subsystem can attain.

Considering the subsystem to be in a temporary state of virtual thermodynamic equilibrium, it is possible to obtain a negative temperature on the thermodynamic scale.
Thermodynamic temperature is the inverse of the derivative of the subsystem's entropy with respect to its internal energy.
As the subsystem's internal energy increases, the entropy increases for some range, but eventually attains a maximum value and then begins to decrease as the highest energy states begin to fill.
At the point of maximum entropy, the temperature function shows the behavior of a singularity, because the slope of the entropy function decreases to zero and then turns negative.
As the subsystem's entropy reaches its maximum, its thermodynamic temperature goes to positive infinity, switching to negative infinity as the slope turns negative.
Such negative temperatures are hotter than any positive temperature.
Over time, when the subsystem is exposed to the rest of the body, which has a positive temperature, energy is transferred as heat from the negative temperature subsystem to the positive temperature system.
The kinetic theory temperature is not defined for such subsystems.

==
Examples ==


==
See also ==


== Notes and references ==
===
Bibliography of cited references ===
Adkins, C.J. (1968/1983).
Equilibrium Thermodynamics, (1st edition 1968), third edition 1983, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK, ISBN 0-521-25445-0.

Buchdahl, H.A. (1966).
The Concepts of Classical Thermodynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Jaynes, E.T. (1965).
Gibbs vs Boltzmann entropies, American Journal of Physics, 33(5), 391–398.

Middleton, W.E.K. (1966).
A History of the Thermometer and its Use in Metrology, Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

Miller, J (2013).
"
Cooling molecules the optoelectric way".
Physics Today.
66
(1):
12–14.
Bibcode:2013PhT....66a
..
12M. doi:10.1063/pt.3.1840.
Archived from the original on 2016-05-15.

Partington, J.R. (1949).
An Advanced Treatise on Physical Chemistry, volume 1, Fundamental Principles.
The Properties of Gases, Longmans, Green & Co., London, pp.
175–177.

Pippard, A.B. (1957/1966).
Elements of Classical Thermodynamics for Advanced Students of Physics, original publication 1957, reprint 1966, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.

Quinn, T.J. (1983).
Temperature, Academic Press, London, ISBN 0-12-569680-9.

Schooley, J.F. (1986).
Thermometry, CRC Press, Boca Raton, ISBN 0-8493-5833-7.

Roberts, J.K., Miller, A.R. (1928/1960).
Heat and Thermodynamics, (first edition 1928), fifth edition, Blackie & Son Limited, Glasgow.

Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin) (1848).
On an absolute thermometric scale founded on Carnot's theory of the motive power of heat, and calculated from Regnault's observations, Proc.
Camb.
Phil.
Soc.
(
1843/1863) 1, No.
5
: 66–71.

Thomson, W. (Lord Kelvin) (March 1851).
"
On the Dynamical Theory of Heat, with numerical results deduced from Mr Joule's equivalent of a Thermal Unit, and M. Regnault's Observations on Steam".
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.
XX
(part II)
: 261–268, 289–298.

Truesdell, C.A. (1980).
The Tragicomical History of Thermodynamics, 1822–1854, Springer, New York, ISBN 0-387-90403-4.

Tschoegl, N.W. (2000).
Fundamentals of Equilibrium and Steady-State Thermodynamics, Elsevier, Amsterdam, ISBN 0-444-50426-5.

Zeppenfeld, M.; Englert, B.G.U.; Glöckner, R.; Prehn, A.; Mielenz, M.; Sommer, C.; van Buuren, L.D.; Motsch, M.; Rempe, G. (2012).
"
Sysiphus cooling of electrically trapped polyatomic molecules".
Nature.
491 (7425)
: 570–573.
arXiv:1208.0046.
Bibcode:2012Natur.491
..570Z. doi:10.1038/nature11595.
PMID 23151480.

==
Further reading ==
Chang, Hasok (2004).
Inventing Temperature: Measurement and Scientific Progress.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-517127-3.

Zemansky, Mark Waldo (1964).
Temperatures Very Low and Very High.
Princeton, NJ:
Van Nostrand.

==
External links ==
Current map of global surface temperatures
The Northrop Grumman RQ-180 is an American stealth unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) surveillance aircraft intended for contested airspace.
As of 2019, there had been no images or statements released, but growing evidence points to the existence of the RQ-180 and its use in regular front-line service.
Edwards Air Force Base personnel have reportedly nicknamed the RQ-180 the "Great White Bat" and "Shikaka".
==
Development ==
After the retirement of the SR-71 Blackbird in 1999, the US Air Force lacked an intelligence platform capable of penetrating airspace guarded by advanced air defense systems.
The RQ-180 was designed to fulfill the mission previously accomplished by the high-speed SR-71.The RQ-180
appears to be a follow-on to the Joint Unmanned Combat Air Systems project which was cancelled in late 2005 when the United States Navy (USN) wanted a carrier-based aircraft (which led to the UCAS-D) while the United States Air Force (USAF) wanted a larger, long-range global strike platform.
In December 2005, the program was split in two, with the USN starting the UCAS-D program which created the Northrop Grumman X-47B, and the USAF starting a "classified program.
"
The program was unmasked in Aviation Week & Space Technology in a December 9, 2013 cover story following several months of research.
The RQ-180 was secretly funded through the USAF's classified budget.
Northrop Grumman was given the task to build the aircraft after a competition in which it defeated Boeing and Lockheed Martin.
Northrop Grumman is believed to have been awarded a development contract for the RQ-180 in 2008, with deliveries of low-rate production aircraft beginning in 2013.
Satellite imagery of Area 51 reportedly shows large hangars that could house the 130 ft (40 m) or larger wingspan of the aircraft.
The RQ-180 may also be related to the expansion of Northrop Grumman's production facility at United States Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California.
According to Aviation Week, the secret development of the RQ-180 explains public statements of USAF officials calling for penetrating Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities with no public acknowledgement of an effort to create one.
It may explain the service's lack of commitment for the RQ-4 Global Hawk and instead favoring of higher priority "classified platforms".
The USAF also does not want to buy and maintain large numbers of MQ-1 Predator and MQ-9 Reaper systems in order to have an aircraft that would have the ability to penetrate denied airspace and persistently provide ISR coverage.
The RQ-180 may also be responsible for the termination of the Next-Generation Bomber program in 2009 from costs, and the emergence of the follow-on Long Range Strike Bomber (LRS-B) program that would be cheaper and work with the UAV.
The USAF MQ-X program that was to find a platform to replace the Reaper may have been cancelled in 2012 because of the RQ-180.Creation of the RQ-180 is believed to be related to the LRS-B program, which will have a new strategic bomber operate with a "family of systems" including a Long Range Stand Off Weapon, conventional Prompt Global Strike missiles, and electronic attack and ISR platforms; the RQ-180 would appear to fill the electronic attack and ISR roles.
On October 27, 2015, the LRS-B development contract was also awarded to Northrop Grumman.
Lockheed Martin is developing its own solution to the problem of operating an ISR in defended airspace, known as the SR-72, that relies on flying at hypersonic speeds.
Northrop Grumman's stealth design was seen as less susceptible to acquisition problems and risky technologies and could be put into service sooner, as soon as 2015.
A hypersonic reconnaissance aircraft would have inferior stealth features due to heat stress on radar absorbent materials and would thus be detected earlier.
Moving targets could change position before the SR-72 could reach them.
The existence of the aircraft was confirmed with the briefest of details by an Air Force surveillance chief during an aerospace industry event in 2014.In November 2020
the first photograph emerged of the RQ-180.
The aircraft was spotted flying at high altitude over Edwards Air Force Base.

== Design ==
The RQ-180 addresses a need for conducting penetrating ISR missions into defended airspace, a mission that was left unattended with the retirement of the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird in 1999.
It is equipped with an AESA radar and passive electronic surveillance measures, and may be capable of conducting electronic attack missions.
The RQ-180 shows a shift from UAVs that operate in permissive environments, such as the RQ-4 Global Hawk and MQ-9 Reaper, to ones that can perform missions in contested airspace.
It is larger, stealthier, and has a longer range than the RQ-170 Sentinel which has previously been used for those types of missions.
The RQ-180 is believed to be about the size of the Global Hawk, which weighs 32,250 lb (14,630 kg), and have similar capabilities of endurance (24 hours) and range (12,000 nmi (14,000 mi; 22,000 km)).
This is much more than the RQ-170's endurance of 5–6 hours.
It has superior all-aspect, broadband radar cross-section reduction features compared to previous stealth aircraft such as the F-117 Nighthawk, F-22 Raptor and F-35 Lightning II.
The airframe has superior aerodynamics to give better range, endurance, and service ceiling.
The RQ-180 is believed to have a cranked-kite layout like the X-47B, but with a much longer wingspan, perhaps as much as 130 ft (40 m).
Northrop Grumman claims the wing is more scalable and adaptable than the B-2 Spirit's flying wing shape.
Aviation Week constructed concept images, including one on the cover of the magazine, of the stealthy unmanned aircraft that can penetrate an adversary's state-of-the-art air defenses to conduct intelligence, surveillance or reconnaissance missions.
==
Specifications ==
General characteristics
Crew
: Zero
Wingspan: 130 ft (40 m)Performance

Service ceiling: 60,000 ft (18,000 m) 


==
See also ==
Lockheed Martin RQ-170 Sentinel
Mikoyan Skat
Northrop Grumman Bat
Sukhoi Okhotnik
Related lists
List of active United States military aircraft


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Aviation Week release
Aviation Week's "The Road to Stealth UAS"
On the morning of 7 April 2017, the United States launched 59 Tomahawk cruise missiles from the Mediterranean Sea into Syria, aimed at Shayrat Airbase controlled by the Syrian government.
The strike was executed under responsibility of U.S. President Donald Trump, as a direct response to the Khan Shaykhun chemical attack that occurred on 4 April.
The strike was the first unilateral military action by the United States targeting the Syrian government during the Syrian Civil War.
Trump stated shortly thereafter, "It is in this vital national security interest of the United States to prevent and deter the spread and use of deadly chemical weapons.
"The
Syrian Air Force launched airstrikes against the rebels from the base only hours after the American attack.
It was reported that advance warning was given to Russia, an ally of the Syrian government, by the USA prior to the missile strike.

==
Attack ==
On the evening of 6 April, President Trump notified members of the U.S. Congress of his plan on the missile strike.
According to a White House official, more than two dozen members of Congress were briefed at the notification.
Internationally, the United States also notified several countries, including Canada, the UK, Australia, and Russia, in advance of the strike.
The U.S. military stated it communicated with the Russian military to minimize any chance of Russian casualties.

The strike was conducted without either U.S. congressional or United Nations Security Council approval.
Commodore Tate Westbrook commanded the Navy task force in charge of the missile launch.
It was the first time that the United States had acknowledged intentionally carrying out military action against the forces of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.
The strike targeted Shayrat Airbase in the Homs Governorate, which was believed by American intelligence to be the base for the aircraft that carried out a chemical weapons attack on 4 April, and was intended to destroy air defenses, aircraft, hangars and fuel.
The US avoided striking a suspected sarin gas storage facility at the targeted airport.
59 Tomahawk missiles were said to have been launched from two U.S. Navy warships, USS Ross and USS Porter, at around 20:40 EDT (04:40 local time).
Reconnaissance was provided by Python 73, a Boeing RC-135 of the 55th Wing.
==
Casualties ==
U.S. Central Command stated in a press release that Tomahawk missiles hit "aircraft, hardened aircraft shelters, petroleum and logistical storage, ammunition supply bunkers, defense systems, and radars".
Initial U.S. reports claimed "approximately 20 planes" were destroyed, and that 58 out of the 59 cruise missiles launched "severely degraded or destroyed" their intended target.
According to the satellite images the runways and the taxiways have been reportedly undamaged and combat flights from the attacked airbase resumed on 7 April a few hours after the attack, although U.S. officials did not state that the runway was a target.
In a later statement on 10 April 2017, the US Secretary of Defense James Mattis claimed that the strike destroyed about 20% of the Syrian government's operational aircraft and the base had lost the ability to refuel or rearm aircraft.
An independent bomb damage assessment conducted by ImageSat International counted hits on 44 targets, with some targets being hit by more than one missile; these figures were determined using satellite images of the airbase 10 hours after the strike.
Among the targets struck was a 2K12 Kub (SA6) missile battery composed of five elements.
The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said the strike damaged over a dozen hangars, a fuel depot, and an air defense base.
Al-Masdar News reported that 15 fighter jets were damaged or destroyed and that the destruction of fuel tankers caused several explosions and a large fire.
According to the claims of Russian defense ministry, the "combat effectiveness" of the attack was "extremely low"; they claimed that only 23 missiles hit the base destroying six aircraft, and it did not know where the other 36 landed.
Russian television news, citing a Syrian source at the airfield, said that nine planes were destroyed by the strikes (5 Su-22M3s, 1 Su-22M4, and 3
Mig-23ML)
and that all planes were thought to have been out of action at the time.
The Israeli satellite imagery services company ImageSat International later released high resolution satellite images of the base taken within 10 hours of the attack showing that at a minimum, 44 targets had been hit, and that some had been hit multiple times.
Lost Armour's online photographic database, for vehicle losses in the War in Syria, has images of 10 destroyed aircraft at Shayrat airbase.
Seven or nine Syrian soldiers were killed, including a general; Russian military personnel were also present at the airbase at the time it was attacked.
According to Syrian state news SANA, nine civilians were also killed in the attack, including four children.
SANA also stated that five of the civilians were killed in the village of Shayrat, outside the base, while another four were killed in the village of Al-Hamrat, and that another seven civilians were wounded when a missile hit homes in Al-Manzul, four kilometers (two and a half miles)
away from the Shayrat air base.
According to Russian defense ministry spokesperson Igor Konashenkov, four Syrian soldiers were killed and another two were missing.
Some observers believe that the Russian government warned the Syrian government, which had enough time to move planes to another base.

==
Aftermath ==
Hours after the U.S. missile strike, Syrian government's warplanes took off from the Shayrat base to attack rebel positions again, including the town of Khan Shaykhun.
Commentators attributed the ability of the Syrian government to continue to operate from the base to the fact that the US gave Russia, Syria's ally, an advanced warning regarding the strike, which enabled Syrians to shelter many of its aircraft from the attack.
Within a day of the attack, Russia announced it would strengthen Syria's air defenses and formally notified the Pentagon that as of 21:00 GMT (00:00 Moscow Time, 8 April 2017), Russia had suspended the U.S.–Russia Memorandum of Mutual Understanding, which had established a hotline between the countries′ militaries designed to avoid collisions between their aircraft over Syria.
As a result, Belgium suspended its air operations in Syria, and the US began limiting itself to only the most essential air strikes.
According to some local sources, the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant took advantage of the attack and absence of the Syrian Air Force in eastern Homs, by launching several attacks on the Syrian Army's defenses in the western Palmyra countryside.
It also attacked the checkpoints outside the village of al-Furqalas, but those attacks were repelled.
According to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, the Shayrat airbase remained operational and Syrian warplanes took off from it the following day.
The price of oil briefly rose over 2% following the strike.
After both the chemical attack and missile strike, the U.S. administration was in disagreement and contradiction to U.S. policy from 2013 until 30 March 2017, as well the statements by U.S. ambassador to U.N. Nikki Haley, United States Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer and National Security Advisor H. R. McMaster differed on the change of U.S. military posture toward Syria and prioritization of regime change.
On 7 April 2017, an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council was held: Bolivia′s
ambassador Sacha Llorenty requested a closed session to discuss the U.S. strike, but U.S. ambassador Nikki Haley, serving as the council president for April, forced the meeting to be held in public view.
United Nations News Centre reported that while some delegates expressed support for the strikes as a response to the Syrian Government's alleged use of chemical weapons, others condemned it as a unilateral act of aggression, underlining that the Council must authorize any such intervention.
On 8 April 2017, the UK Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson issued a statement that announced that, upon consultations with the U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, he had cancelled his trip to Moscow scheduled for 10 April.
On 11 April 2017, after the meeting at Lucca in Italy the Group of Seven unanimously blamed the Syrian government's military for the chemical attack and agreed that Assad must step down as part of any peace solution, but European allies rejected the US and UK push for sanctions against Russia and Syria.
On 19 April 2017, two US defense officials said that the Syrian government had relocated the majority of its combat planes to Khmeimim Airbase shortly after the strike.
In September 2020, U.S. President Trump mentioned that he wanted to kill al-Assad in 2017, by saying: "I would have rather taken him out.
I had him all set, Mattis didn't want to do it."
==
Reactions ==


===
United States ===


====
Politicians ====
Reactions from members of Congress were mixed and not uniform by political party.
Paul Ryan (R–WI), the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, said the strike was "appropriate and just".
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R–CA) said, "Assad has made his disregard for innocent human life and long-standing norms against chemical weapons use crystal clear.
Tonight's strikes show these evil actions carry consequences."
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D–CA) said, "Tonight's strike in Syria appears to be a proportional response to the regime's use of chemical weapons."
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R–KY) said the strike was "perfectly executed and for the right purpose".
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D–NY) said, "Making sure Assad knows that when he commits such despicable atrocities he will pay a price is the right thing to do."
Senator Bill Nelson (D–FL) expressed his support, and said, "I hope this teaches Assad not to use chemical weapons again."
Senator Marco Rubio (R–FL) called it an "important decisive step".
Quoting the President's statement, Senator Orrin Hatch (R–UT) tweeted, "'No child of God should ever suffer such horror.'
Amen.
"
In a joint statement, Senators John McCain (R–AZ) and Lindsey Graham (R–SC) said, "Unlike the previous administration, President Trump confronted a pivotal moment in Syria and took action.
For that, he deserves the support of the American people.
"
Their sentiment was shared by fellow Senators Bob Corker (R–TN), Tom Cotton (R–AR), Joni Ernst (R–IA), Cory Gardner (R–CO), David Perdue (R–GA), Ben Sasse (R–NE), and Thom Tillis (R–NC).
Many members who supported the action showed lack of worry about the authority issues or did not know the legal and constitutional rationale that supported the action.
Other lawmakers criticized the President's actions, or urged caution.
Representative Adam Schiff (D–CA), the Ranking Member of the House Intelligence Committee, was informed of the strike by Dan Coats, the Director of National Intelligence, as it was happening.
He urged the administration "not to make this a military effort to change the regime".
In a joint statement, Representatives and Iraq War veterans Seth Moulton (D–MA) and Steve Russell (R–OK) said, "We cannot stand by in silence as dictators murder children with chemical weapons, but military action without clear goals and objectives gets us nowhere."
Senator Chris Coons (D–DE) said he was "gravely concerned that the United States is engaging further militarily in Syria without a well-thought-out, comprehensive plan".
Representative Ted Lieu (D–CA) and Senator Tim Kaine (D–VA) called the strike unconstitutional, with the former tweeting, "This was done with no debate in Congress and no explanation to the American people."
Senator Bernie Sanders (I-VT) tweeted that the strike could lead the U.S. into a new long-term quagmire, and that "such engagements are disastrous for American security, for the American economy, and for the American people".
Representative Tulsi Gabbard (D–HI) gave a more critical message, and said, "This escalation is short-sighted and will lead to the death of more civilians, more refugees, the strengthening of al-Qaeda and other terrorists, and a possible nuclear war between the United States and Russia."
Other lawmakers expressing criticism included Senators Michael Bennet (D–CO), Ben Cardin (D–MD), Ted Cruz (R–TX), Dick Durbin (D–IL), Ed Markey (D–MA), Jeff Merkley (D–OR), Elizabeth Warren (D–MA), and Representatives Joaquín Castro (D–TX) and Steny Hoyer (D–MD).A number of Republicans with libertarian leanings also criticized the strike.
Senator Mike Lee (R–UT) said, "President Trump should make his case in front of the American people and allow their elected representatives to debate the benefits and risks of further Middle East intervention to our national security interests."
Senator Rand Paul (R–KY) tweeted, "While we all condemn the atrocities in Syria, the United States was not attacked."
Representatives Justin Amash (R–MI) said, "Airstrikes are an act of war.
Atrocities in Syria cannot justify a departure from Constitution, which vests in Congress the power to commence war", and Thomas Massie (R–KY) called it a "big mistake".
Former congressman Ron Paul argued that because in Syria "things [had been] going along reasonably well for the conditions", there was "zero chance" that Assad had deliberately used chemical weapons, and called the attack a "false flag".

====
Public ====
U.S. Media outlets such as the New York Times, Washington Post, MSNBC and CNN were all generally supportive of the administration's decision to use airstrikes against Syria.

A poll conducted by The Washington Post and ABC News reported that a "bare majority" of Americans supported the missile strikes and a similarly narrow majority opposed any further military action against the Syrian Government.
A poll conducted by The Huffington Post and YouGov reported that around 51% of Americans supported the decision, and slightly more than one-third opposed both the decision and any further military action, with 45% unsure regarding future action.
A poll conducted by CBS News reported that a small majority (nearly 6/10) supported the attack, but the appearance of consensus ends regarding future action.
A poll conducted by Politico and Morning Consult reported that 66% supported the strikes, which includes 35% who strongly support and 31% who somewhat support them.
Many right-wing/-leaning populist media figures criticized Trump's reversal of policy towards war in Syria and the Middle East.
Ann Coulter pointed out that Trump "campaigned on not getting involved in Mideast" and this was one of the reasons many voted for him.
Several protests were held in the U.S. which demonstrated against the attack.

===
Syria and allies ===
A joint command center of Russian and Iranian military in Syria, who support the Syrian government, said the strike crossed "red lines" and threatened to "respond with force" to "US aggression".

====
Syria ====
Syrian state media condemned the strike, calling it an "act of aggression", and claiming it caused unspecified losses.
The Syrian Army said that its response will be to continue to "crush terrorism" and restore "peace and security to all Syrians".
The Governor of Homs, Talal Barazi, said that the strike proves that the United States is supporting terrorism within Syria.
Barazi told the Syrian News Channel that "they are not surprised today to see the supporting parties interfering directly after the failure of terrorists in targeting Syria".
The spokesperson for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad called the missile strikes "unjust and arrogant aggression", and an "outrageous act", and that the attack "does not change the deep policies" of the Syrian Government.
The Syrian Ambassador Bashar Jaafari at the UN Security Council session stated that "this act makes America a partner of ISIL, Al-Nusra and other terrorist groups", and it was a violation of the U.N. Charter.
President Assad later told the Agence France-Presse that the chemical attack was "100% fabricated" and accused the United States of being "hand-in-glove with the terrorists" over the chemical attack.
He also explained that the chemical attack was made up in order to give the United States an excuse to bomb the Shayrat airbase in retaliation.
Najib Ghadbian, a representative of the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and Opposition Forces, welcomed the strikes: "They are first good steps
but we would like them to be part of a bigger strategy that would put an end to the mass killing, an end to impunity and eventually we hope that they will lead to a kind of a political transition [in Syria].
"
The pro-Turkish Kurdish National Council welcomed the missile strikes in Syria.
"
All Syrian people, including the Kurds, are happy and welcoming such an air campaign by the United States", a leader in the Kurdish Unity Party, part of the KNC, stated.
Salih Muslim Muhammad, co-leader of the Democratic Union Party, stated that the attack "must yield positive results since the parties who did not believe in a political solution" will "reconsider" and "see that there is no military solution", and the US was "forced" to execute the attack.
The PYD "hoped" that the US will not only attack the Syrian government, but "other parties have also used it, in Sheikh Maqsood, in Rojava, and Raqqa".
====
Russia ====
The Russian President′s spokesperson said the U.S. strike was "an act of aggression against a sovereign country violating the norms of international law under a trumped-up pretext", which "substantially impair[ed]" Russia–United States relations.
The Russian Government also alleged that the strike was an attempt to distract the world from civilian casualties in Iraq (an apparent reference to U.S. airstrike in Mosul that killed more than 200).
The Russian foreign ministry denounced the strike as being based on false intelligence and against international law, suspended the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on Prevention of Flight Safety Incidents that had been signed with the U.S., and called an emergency meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
Russian foreign minister Sergey Lavrov compared the strike to the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Russian prime minister Dimitry Medvedev said the attack had placed the U.S. on the cusp of warfare with Russia.
Russia has sent the frigate Admiral Grigorovich to the east Mediterranean in response, and warned that the US strike could have "extremely serious" consequences.

====
Iran ====
Iran's president Hassan Rouhani condemned the U.S. military strike, saying Trump had claimed that "he wanted to fight terrorism, but today, all terrorists in Syria are celebrating the U.S. attack".
According to Iranian foreign minister Mohammad Javad Zarif's tweet, "Not even two decades after 9/11, U.S. military fighting on same side as al-Qaida & ISIS in Yemen & Syria.
Time to stop hype and cover-ups."
He described U.S. concerns regarding chemical attacks as hypocritical, inasmuch as the United States had supported Iraqi forces under Saddam Hussein as they massively used chemical weapons during the Iran–Iraq War.
During Friday prayers in Tehran, worshipers protesting the strike chanted "Death to America" and "Death to Al Saud" – referring to the Saudi royal family.
Ayatollah Mohammad Emami Kashani, who led the Friday prayers, called the United States "crazy" and blasted its "crimes".
Ayatollah Kashani said that the Americans "gave chemical weapons and substances to the terrorists, while creating terrorists all over the world".
According to an analyst writing for HuffPost, the 2017 Deir ez-Zor missile strike by Iran suggests that the country has shifted its three decades-long policy of testing, but not using missiles, as a reaction to Donald Trump's escalation in the Middle East, including "needless increase" in America's military involvement in the Syrian proxy war.

===
International ===
The governments of Albania, Australia, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Canada, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Georgia, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kosovo, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, and the United Kingdom generally supported the strike, some calling it a just response and strong message against the use of chemical weapons.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the European Union have also expressed support for the attack.
During the April 10 European Union summit in Madrid, the leaders of southern EU nations (Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain) said that a US missile strike on a Syrian airbase in retaliation for a suspected chemical attack was "understandable".
Luxembourg's foreign minister, Jean Asselborn, noted that the U.S. and Trump's change in policy toward Assad government was surprising, and considered an international diplomatic effort as a solution.
Slovakia and Netherlands said they understood why the strike was carried out, but that it is important to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible.
Finland stressed the role of the UN Security Council to work for a ceasefire and political negotiations to achieve sustainable peace.
Austria also called for de-escalation of the situation and consider there can be only a political and not military solution for the conflict in Syria.
The government of Cyprus believes the strike is not beyond international law if it concerns a serious violation of humanitarian law.
The Chinese, Greek, and Swedish governments offered neutral responses to the attack while the Indonesian government expressed concern over the attack.
Trump told Xi Jinping, China's paramount leader and his guest at Mar-a-Lago, that he had ordered the attack; the missiles were near their targets as the Chinese leader left the resort.
Xi told Trump that he understood the need of a military operation to respond when children were killed, according to Rex Tillerson.
The Egyptian foreign ministry called on the United States and Russia to "contain the conflict" and reach a comprehensive and final resolution to the crisis, as did Hungarian Foreign Minister Péter Szijjártó who said that the civil war "cannot be resolved without an American-Russian accord" and Colombian President and 2016 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Juan Manuel Santos who called for a political solution to the conflict in Syria and dialogue between the United States and Russia to avoid escalating the already complex situation.
The government of Switzerland has urged the international community to tackle the escalating Syrian crisis through diplomatic means rather than military confrontation.
Taoiseach Enda Kenny of Ireland has described the strike as a "matter of
grave concern"The governments of Belarus, Brazil, Bolivia, Russia and Venezuela criticized the strikes, with Bolivia describing the actions as a violation of international law and Iran arguing that the strike would strengthen terrorists and complicate the war.
Bolivian ambassador Sacha Llorenty accused the U.S. for "imperialistic action" and related the current US Security Council situation with the one from 2003 about the Iraq War, when Colin Powell wrongly alleged that Iraq was hiding weapons of mass destruction.
Belarus condemned the attack as "unacceptable", while Venezuela described the attack as a violation of Syria's sovereignty.
Brazilian Minister of Foreign Affairs Aloysio Nunes Ferreira condemned the “unilateral use of force” by the United States without authorization from the United Nations.
North Korea said that the strikes were an unforgivable act of aggression and that the strikes demonstrate why the country is entitled to its nuclear weapons program.
The U.N. Secretary-General António Guterres appealed "for restraint to avoid any acts that could deepen the suffering of the Syrian people", and that "there is no other way to solve the conflict than through a political solution".

== See also ==
2018 missile strikes against Syria
International reactions to the 2013 Ghouta chemical attack §
Military options
September 2016
Deir ez-Zor air raid
Shayrat and Tiyas airbase ambush


==
References ==


==
External links ==
U.S. Department of Defense announcement
Documentation of assessment by Russian experts of the strike, Jamestown Foundation, Eurasia Daily Monitor, Vol.
14, Issue 50, by Roger McDermott
The Iowa class was a class of six fast battleships ordered by the United States Navy in 1939 and 1940.
They were initially intended to intercept fast capital ships such as the Japanese Kongō class while also being capable of serving in a traditional battle line alongside slower battleships and act as its "fast wing".
The Iowa class was designed to meet the Second London Naval Treaty's "escalator clause" limit of 45,000-long-ton (45,700 t) standard displacement.
Four vessels, Iowa, New Jersey, Missouri, and Wisconsin, were completed; two more, Illinois and Kentucky, were laid down but canceled in 1945 and 1958, respectively, before completion, and both hulls were scrapped in 1958–1959.

The four Iowa-class ships were the last battleships commissioned in the US Navy.
All older US battleships were decommissioned by 1947 and stricken from the Naval Vessel Register (NVR) by 1963.
Between the mid-1940s and the early 1990s, the Iowa-class battleships fought in four major US wars.
In the Pacific Theater of World War II, they served primarily as fast escorts for Essex-class aircraft carriers of the Fast Carrier Task Force and also shelled Japanese positions.
During the Korean War, the battleships provided naval gunfire support (NGFS) for United Nations forces, and in 1968, New Jersey shelled Viet Cong and Vietnam People's Army forces in the Vietnam War.
All four were reactivated and modernized at the direction of the United States Congress in 1981, and armed with missiles during the 1980s, as part of the 600-ship Navy initiative.
During Operation Desert Storm in 1991, Missouri and Wisconsin fired missiles and 16-inch (406 mm) guns at Iraqi targets.

Costly to maintain, the battleships were decommissioned during the post-Cold War draw down in the early 1990s.
All four were initially removed from the Naval Vessel Register, but the United States Congress compelled the Navy to reinstate two of them on the grounds that existing NGFS would be inadequate for amphibious operations.
This resulted in a lengthy debate over whether battleships should have a role in the modern navy.
Ultimately, all four ships were stricken from the Naval Vessel Register and released for donation to non-profit organizations.

With the transfer of Iowa in 2012, all four are part of non-profit maritime museums across the US.

==
Background ==
The vessels that eventually became the Iowa-class battleships were born from the US Navy's War Plan Orange, a Pacific war plan against Japan.
War planners anticipated that the US fleet would engage and advance in the Central Pacific, with a long line of communication and logistics that would be vulnerable to high-speed Japanese cruisers.
The chief concern was that the US Navy's traditional 21-knot battle line would be too slow to force these Japanese task forces into battle, while faster carriers and their cruiser escorts would be outmatched by the Japanese Kongō-class battlecruisers, which had been upgraded in the 1930s to fast battleships.
As a result, the US Navy envisioned a fast detachment of the battle line that could bring the Japanese fleet into battle.
Even during the development process of the preceding North Carolina-class and South Dakota-class battleships, designs that could achieve over 30 knots in order to counter the threat of fast "big gun" ships were seriously considered.
At the same time, a special strike force consisting of fast battleships operating alongside carriers and destroyers was being envisaged; such a force could operate independently in advance areas and act as scouts.
This concept eventually evolved into the Fast Carrier Task Force, though initially the carriers were believed to be subordinate to the battleship.
Another factor was the "escalator clause" of the Second London Naval Treaty, which reverted the gun caliber limit from 14 inches (356 mm) to 16 inches (406 mm).
Japan had refused to sign the treaty and in particular refused to accept the 14-inch gun caliber limit or the 5:5:3 ratio of warship tonnage limits for Britain, United States, and Japan respectively.
This resulted in the three treaty powers, the United States, Britain, and France, invoking the escalator clause after April 1937.
Circulation of intelligence evidence in November 1937 of Japanese capital ships violating naval treaties caused the treaty powers to expand the escalator clause in June 1938, which amended the standard displacement limit of battleships from 35,000 long tons (35,600 t) to 45,000 long tons (45,700 t).

==
Design ==


===
Early studies ===
Work on what would eventually become
the Iowa-class battleship began on the first studies in early 1938, at the direction of Admiral Thomas C. Hart, head of the General Board, following the planned invocation of the "escalator clause" that would permit maximum standard capital ship displacement of 45,000 long tons (45,700 t).
Using the additional 10,000 long tons (10,200 t) over previous designs, the studies included schemes for 27-knot (50 km/h; 31 mph)
"slow" battleships that increased armament and protection as well as "fast" battleships capable of 33 knots (61 km/h; 38 mph) or more.
One of the "slow" designs was an expanded South Dakota-class carrying either twelve 16-inch/45 caliber Mark 6 guns or nine 18-inch (457 mm)/48 guns and with more armor and a power plant large enough to drive the larger ship through the water at the same 27-knot maximum speed as the South Dakotas.
While the "fast" studies would result in the Iowa class, the "slow" design studies would eventually settle on twelve 16-inch guns and evolve into the design for the 60,500-long-ton (61,500 t)
Montana class after all treaty restrictions were removed following the start of World War II.
Priority was given to the "fast" design in order to counter and defeat Japan's 26 knot (actually 30 knot)
Kongō-class battlecruisers, whose higher speed advantage over existing U.S. battleships might let them "penetrate U.S. cruisers, thereby making it 'open season' on U.S. supply ships",
And then overwhelm the Japanese battle line
was therefore a major driving force in setting the design criteria for the new ships, as was the restricting width of the Panama Canal.
For "fast" battleships, one such design, pursued by the Design Division section of the Bureau of Construction and Repair, was a "cruiser-killer".
Beginning on 17 January 1938, under Captain A.J. Chantry, the group drew up plans for ships with twelve 16-inch and twenty 5-inch (127 mm) guns, Panamax capability but otherwise unlimited displacement,
a top speed of 35 knots (65 km/h; 40 mph) and a range of 20,000 nautical miles (37,000 km; 23,000 mi)
when traveling at the more economical speed of 15 knots (28 km/h; 17 mph).
Their plan fulfilled these requirements with a ship of 50,940 long tons (51,760 t) standard displacement, but Chantry believed that more could be done if the ship were to be this large; with a displacement greater than that of most battleships, its armor would have protected it only against the 8-inch (200 mm) weapons carried by heavy cruisers.
Three improved plans – "A", "B", and "C" – were designed at the end of January.
An increase in draft, vast additions to the armor, and the substitution of twelve 6-inch (152 mm) guns in the secondary battery was common among the three designs.
"
A" was the largest, at 59,060 long tons (60,010 t) standard, and was the only one to still carry the twelve 16-inch guns in four triple turrets (3-gun turrets according to US Navy).
It required 277,000 shp (207,000 kW) to make 32.5 knots (60.2 km/h; 37.4 mph).
"
B" was the smallest at 52,707 long tons (53,553 t) standard; like "A" it had a top speed of 32.5 knots, but "B" only required 225,000 shp (168,000 kW) to make this speed.
It also carried only nine 16-inch guns, in three triple turrets.
"
C" was similar but it added 75,000 shp (56,000 kW) (for a total of 300,000 shp (220,000 kW)), to make the original requirement of 35 knots.
The weight required for this and a longer belt – 512 feet (156 m), compared with 496 feet (151 m) for "B" – meant that the ship was 55,771 long tons (56,666 t) standard.
===
Design history ===
In March 1938, the General Board followed the recommendations of the Battleship Design Advisory Board, which was composed of the naval architect William Francis Gibbs, William Hovgaard (then president of New York Shipbuilding), John Metten, Joseph W. Powell, and the long-retired Admiral and former Chief of the Bureau of Ordnance Joseph Strauss.
The board requested an entirely new design study, again focusing on increasing the size of the 35,000-long-ton (36,000 t)
South Dakota-class.
The first plans made for this indicated that 30 knots (56 km/h; 35 mph) was possible on a standard displacement of about 37,600 long tons (38,200 t).
33 knots (61 km/h; 38 mph) could be bought with 220,000 shp (160,000 kW) and a standard displacement of around 39,230 long tons (39,860 t), which was well below the London Treaty's "escalator clause" maximum limit of 45,000 long tons (45,700 t).These designs were able to convince the General Board that a reasonably well-designed and balanced 33-knot "fast" battleship was possible within the terms of the "escalator clause".
However, further studies revealed major problems with the estimates.
The speed of the ships meant that more freeboard would be needed both fore and amidships, the latter requiring an additional foot of armored freeboard.
Along with this came the associated weight in supporting these new strains: the structure of the ship had to be reinforced and the power plant enlarged to avoid a drop in speed.
In all, about 2,400 long tons (2,440 t) had to be added, and the large margin the navy designers had previously thought they had – roughly 5,000 long tons (5,080 t) – was suddenly vanishing.
The draft of the ships was also allowed to increase, which enabled the beam to narrow and thus reduced required power (since lower beam-to-draft ratio reduces wave-making resistance).
This also allowed the ships to be shortened which reduced weight.
With the additional displacement, the General Board was incredulous that a tonnage increase of 10,000 long tons (10,200 t) would allow only the addition of 6 knots (11 km/h; 6.9 mph) over the South Dakotas.
Rather than retaining the 16-inch/45 caliber Mark 6 guns used in the South Dakotas, they ordered that the preliminary design would have to include the more powerful but significantly heavier 16-inch/50 caliber Mark 2 guns left over from the canceled Lexington-class battlecruisers and South Dakota-class battleships of the early 1920s.
The 16"/50 turret weighed some 400 long tons (406 t) more than the 16"/45 turret already in use.
The barbette diameter had been increased from 37-foot-3-inch (11.4 m) to 39 feet 4 inches (12.0 m)
so the total weight gain was about 2,000 long tons (2,030 t), putting the ship at a total of 46,551 long tons (47,298 t) – well over the 45,000 long ton limit.
An apparent savior appeared in a Bureau of Ordnance preliminary design for a turret that could carry the 50-caliber guns while also fit in the smaller barbette of the 45-caliber gun turret.
Other weight savings were achieved through thinning some armor elements and substituting construction steel with armor-grade Special Treatment Steel (STS) in certain areas.
The net savings reduced the preliminary design displacement to 44,560 long tons (45,280 t) standard, though the margin remained tight.
This breakthrough was shown to the General Board as part of a series of designs on 2 June 1938.However, the Bureau of Ordnance continued working on the turret with the larger barbette, while the Bureau of Construction and Repair used the smaller barbettes in the contract design of the new battleships.
As the bureaus were independent of one another, they did not realize that the two plans could not go together until November 1938, when the contract design was in the final stages of refinement.
By this time, the ships could not use the larger barbette, as it would require extensive alterations to the design and would result in substantial weight penalties.
The General Board was astounded; one member asked the head of the Bureau of Ordnance if it had occurred to him that Construction and Repair would have wanted to know what turret his subordinates were working on "as a matter of common sense".
A complete scrapping of plans was avoided only when designers within the Bureau of Ordnance were able to design a new 50-caliber gun, the Mark 7, that was both lighter and smaller in outside diameter; this allowed it to be placed in a turret that would fit in the smaller barbette.
The redesigned 3-gun turret, equipped as it was with the Mark 7 naval gun, provided an overall weight saving of nearly 850 long tons (864 t) to the overall design of the Iowa class.
The contract design displacement subsequently stood at 45,155 long tons (45,880 t) standard and 56,088 long tons (56,988 t) full load.
In May 1938, the United States Congress passed the Second Vinson Act which "mandated a 20% increase in strength of the United States Navy".
The act was sponsored by Carl Vinson, a Democratic Congressman from Georgia who was Chairman of the House Naval Affairs and Armed Services Committee.
The Second Vinson Act updated the provisions of the Vinson-Trammell Act of 1934 and the Naval Act of 1936, which had "authorized the construction of the first American battleships in 17 years", based on the provisions of the London Naval Treaty of 1930; this act was quickly signed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt and provided the funding to build the Iowa class.
Each ship cost approximately US$100 million.
As 1938 drew to a close the contract design of the Iowas was nearly complete, but it would continuously evolve as the New York Navy Yard, the lead shipyard, conducted the final detail design.
These revisions included changing the design of the foremast, replacing the original 1.1-inch (27.9 mm)/75-caliber guns that were to be used for anti-aircraft (AA) work with 20 mm (0.79 in)/70 caliber Oerlikon cannons and 40 mm (1.57 in)/56 caliber Bofors guns, and moving the combat information center into the armored hull.
Additionally, in November 1939, the New York Navy Yard greatly modified the internal subdivision of the machinery rooms, as tests had shown the underwater protection in these rooms to be inadequate.
The longitudinal subdivision of these rooms was doubled, and the result of this was clearly beneficial: "The prospective effect of flooding was roughly halved and the number of uptakes and hence of openings in the third deck greatly reduced."
Although the changes meant extra weight and increasing the beam by 1 foot (0.30 m) to 108 feet 2 inches (32.97 m), this was no longer a major issue; Britain and France had renounced the Second London Naval Treaty soon after the beginning of the Second World War.
The design displacement was 45,873 long tons (46,609 t) standard, approximately 2% overweight, when Iowa and New Jersey were laid down in June and September 1940.
By the time the Iowas were completed and commissioned in 1943–44, the considerable increase in anti-aircraft armament – along with their associated splinter protection and crew accommodations – and additional electronics had increased standard displacement to some 47,825 long tons (48,592 t), while full load displacement became 57,540 long tons (58,460 t).
==
Specifications ==


===
General characteristics ===
The Iowa-class battleships are 860 ft 0 in (262.13 m) long at the waterline and 887 ft 3 in (270.43 m)
long overall with beam of 108 ft 2 in (32.97 m).
During World War II, the draft was 37 ft 2 in (11.33 m) at full load displacement of 57,540 long tons (58,460 t) and 34 ft 9 1⁄4 in (10.60 m) at design combat displacement of 54,889 long tons (55,770 t).
Like the two previous classes of American fast battleships, the Iowas feature a triple bottom under the armored citadel and armored skegs around the inboard shafts.
The dimensions of the Iowas were strongly influenced by speed.
When the Second Vinson Act was passed by the United States Congress in 1938, the US Navy moved quickly to develop a 45,000-ton-standard battleship that would pass through the 110 ft (34 m) wide Panama Canal.
Drawing on a 1935 empirical formula for predicting a ship's maximum speed based on scale-model studies in flumes of various hull forms and propellers and a newly developed empirical theorem that related waterline length to maximum beam, the Navy drafted plans for a battleship class with a maximum beam of 108 ft 2 in (32.97 m) which, when multiplied by 7.96, produced a waterline length of 860 ft (262 m).
The Navy also called for the class to have a lengthened forecastle and amidship, which would increase speed, and a bulbous bow.
The Iowas exhibit good stability, making them steady gun platforms.
At design combat displacement, the ships' (GM) metacentric height was 9.26 ft (2.82 m).
They also have excellent maneuverability in the open water for their size, while seakeeping is described as good, but not outstanding.
In particular, the long fine bow and sudden widening of the hull just in front of the foremost turret contributed to the ships being rather wet for their size.
This hull form also resulted in very intense spray formations, which led to some difficulty refueling escorting destroyers.

===
Armament ===


====
Main battery ====
The primary guns used on these battleships are the nine 16-inch (406 mm)/50-caliber Mark 7 naval guns, a compromise design developed to fit inside the barbettes.
These guns fire high explosive-
and armor-piercing shells, and can fire a 16-inch shell approximately 23.4 nautical miles (43.3 km; 26.9 mi).
The guns are housed in three 3-gun turrets: two forward of the battleship's superstructure and one aft, in a configuration known as "2-A-1".
The guns are 66 feet (20 m) long (50 times
their 16-inch bore, or 50 calibers from breechface to muzzle).
About 43 feet (13 m) protrudes from the gun house.
Each gun weighs about 239,000 pounds (108,000 kg) without the breech, or 267,900 pounds (121,500 kg) with the breech.
They fired 2,700-pound (1,225 kg) armor-piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2,500 ft/s (762 m/s), or 1,900-pound (862 kg) high-capacity projectiles at 2,690 ft/s (820 m/s), up to 24 miles (21 nmi; 39 km).
At maximum range, the projectile spends almost ​1 1⁄2 minutes in flight.
The maximum firing rate for each gun is two rounds per minute.
Each gun rests within an armored turret, but only the top of the turret protrudes above the main deck.
The turret extends either four decks (Turrets 1 and 3) or five decks (Turret 2) down.
The lower spaces contain rooms for handling the projectiles and storing the powder bags used to fire them.
Each turret required a crew of between 85 and 110 men to operate.
The original cost for each turret was US$1.4 million, but this figure does not take into account the cost of the guns themselves.
The turrets are "three-gun", not "triple", because each barrel is individually sleeved and can be elevated and fired independently.
The ship could fire any combination of its guns, including a broadside of all nine.

The large-caliber guns were designed to fire two different conventional 16-inch shells: the 2,700-pound (1,225 kg) Mk.
8
"Super-heavy" APC (Armor Piercing, Capped) shell for anti-ship and anti-structure work, and the 1,900-pound (862 kg) Mk.
13 high-explosive round designed for use against unarmored targets and shore bombardment.
When firing the same conventional shell, the 16-inch/45 caliber Mark 6 used by the fast battleships of the North Carolina and South Dakota
classes had a slight advantage over the 16-inch/50 caliber Mark 7 gun when hitting deck armor – a shell from a 45 cal gun would be slower, meaning that it would have a steeper trajectory as it descended.
At 35,000 yards (20 mi; 32 km), a shell from a 45 cal would strike a ship at an angle of 45.2 degrees, as opposed to 36 degrees with the 50 cal.
The Mark 7 had a greater maximum range over the Mark 6: 23.64 miles (38.04 km) vs 22.829 miles
(36.740 km).In the 1950s, the W23, an adaptation of the W19 nuclear artillery shell was developed specifically for the 16-inch guns.
The shell weighed 1,900 pounds (862 kg) had an estimated yield of 15 to 20 kilotons of TNT (63,000 to 84,000 GJ), and its introduction made the Iowa-class battleship's 16-inch guns the world's largest nuclear artillery, and made these four battleships the only US Navy ships ever to have nuclear shells for naval guns.
Although developed for exclusive use by the battleship's guns it is not known if any of the Iowas actually carried these shells while in active service due to the United States Navy's policy of refusing to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weaponry aboard its ships.
In 1991 the United States unilaterally withdrew all of its nuclear artillery shells from service, and dismantling of the US nuclear artillery inventory is said to have been completed in 2004.

====
Secondary battery ====
The Iowas carried twenty 5-inch (127 mm)/38 caliber Mark 12 guns in ten Mark 28 Mod 2 enclosed base ring mounts.
Originally designed to be mounted upon destroyers built in the 1930s, these guns were so successful that they were added to many American ships during the Second World War, including every major ship type and many smaller warships constructed between 1934 and 1945.
They were considered to be "highly reliable, robust and accurate" by the Navy's Bureau of Ordnance.
Each 5-inch/38 gun weighed almost 4,000 pounds (1,800 kg) without the breech; the entire mount weighed 156,295 pounds (70,894 kg).
It was 223.8 inches (5,680 mm)
long overall, had a bore length of 190 inches (4,800 mm) and a rifling length of 157.2 inches (3,990 mm).
The gun could fire shells at about 2,500–2,600 ft/s (760–790 m/s)
; about 4,600 could be fired before the barrel needed to be replaced.
Minimum and maximum elevations were −15 and 85 degrees respectively.
The guns' elevation could be raised or lowered at about 15 degrees per second.
The mounts closest to the bow and stern could aim from −150 to 150 degrees; the others were restricted to −80 to 80 degrees.
They could be turned at about 25 degrees per second.
The 5-inch/38 gun functioned as a dual purpose gun (DP); that is, it was able to fire at both surface and air targets with a reasonable degree of success.
However, this did not mean that it possessed inferior anti-air abilities.
As proven during 1941 gunnery tests conducted aboard North Carolina the gun could consistently shoot down aircraft flying at 12,000–13,000 feet (2.3–2.5 mi; 3.7–4.0 km),
twice the effective range of the earlier single purpose 5-inch/25 caliber AA gun.
As Japanese airplanes became faster, the gun lost some of its effectiveness in the anti-aircraft role; however, toward the end of the war its usefulness as an anti-aircraft weapon increased again because of an upgrade to the Mark 37 Fire Control System and proximity-fused shells.
The 5-inch/38 gun would remain on the battleships for the ships' entire service life; however, the total number of guns and gun mounts was reduced from twenty guns in ten mounts to twelve guns in six mounts during the 1980s' modernization of the four Iowas.
The removal of four of the gun mounts was required for the battleships to be outfitted with the armored box launchers needed to carry and fire Tomahawk missiles.
At the time of the 1991 Persian Gulf War, these guns had been largely relegated to littoral defense for the battleships.
Since each battleship carried a small detachment of Marines aboard, the Marines would man one of the 5-inch gun mounts.

==== Anti-air battery ====
At the time of their commissioning, all four of the Iowa-class battleships were equipped with 20 quad 40  mm mounts and 49 single 20 mm mounts.
These guns were respectively augmented with the Mk 14 range sight and Mk 51 fire control system to improve accuracy.

The Oerlikon 20-millimeter (0.8 in) gun, one of the most heavily produced anti-aircraft guns of the Second World War, entered service in 1941 and replaced the 0.50-inch (12.7 mm) M2 Browning MG on a one-for-one basis.
Between December 1941 and September 1944, 32% of all Japanese aircraft downed were credited to this weapon, with the high point being 48.3% for the second half of 1942; however, the 20 mm guns were found to be ineffective against the Japanese Kamikaze attacks used during the latter half of World War II and were subsequently phased out in favor of the heavier Bofors 40-millimeter (1.6 in)
AA gun.
When the Iowa-class battleships were commissioned in 1943 and 1944, they carried twenty quad 40 mm AA gun mounts, which they used for defense against enemy aircraft.
These heavy AA guns were also employed in the protection of allied aircraft carriers operating in the Pacific Theater of World War II, and accounted for roughly half of all Japanese aircraft shot down between 1 October 1944 and 1 February 1945.
Although successful in this role against WWII aircraft, the 40 mm guns were stripped from the battleships in the jet age – initially from New Jersey when reactivated in 1968 and later from Iowa, Missouri, and Wisconsin when they were reactivated for service in the 1980s.

===
Propulsion ===
The powerplant of the Iowas consists of eight Babcock & Wilcox boilers and four sets of double reduction cross-compound geared turbines, with each turbine set driving a single shaft.
Specifically, the geared turbines on Iowa and Missouri were provided by General Electric, while the equivalent machinery on New Jersey and Wisconsin was provided by Westinghouse.
The plant produced 212,000 shp (158,000 kW) and propelled the ship up to a maximum speed of 32.5 kn (60.2 km/h; 37.4 mph) at full load displacement and 33 kn (61 km/h; 38 mph) at normal displacement.
The ships carried 8,841 long tons (8,983 t) of fuel oil which gave a range of 15,900 nmi (29,400 km; 18,300 mi) at 17 kn (31 km/h; 20 mph).
Two semi-balanced rudders gave the ships a tactical turning diameter of 814 yards (744 m) at 30 kn (56 km/h; 35 mph) and 760 yards (695 m) at 20 kn (37 km/h; 23
mph).The machinery spaces were longitudinally divided into eight compartments with alternating fire and engine rooms to ensure adequate isolation of machinery components.
Four fire rooms each contained two M-Type boilers operating at 600 pounds per square inch (4,137 kPa; 42 kgf/cm2) with a maximum superheater outlet temperature of 850 °F (454 °C).
The double-expansion engines consist of a high-pressure (HP) turbine and a low-pressure (LP) turbine.
The steam is first passed through the HP turbine which turns at up to 2,100 rpm.
The steam, largely depleted at this point, is then passed through a large conduit to the LP turbine.
By the time it reaches the LP turbine, it has no more than 50 psi (300 kPa) of pressure left.
The LP turbine increases efficiency and power by extracting the last little bit of energy from the steam.
After leaving the LP turbine, the exhaust steam passes into a condenser and is then returned as feed water to the boilers.
Water lost in the process is replaced by three evaporators, which can make a total of 60,000 US gallons per day (3 liters per second) of fresh water.
After the boilers have had their fill, the remaining fresh water is fed to the ship's potable water systems for drinking, showers, hand washing, cooking, etc.
All of the urinals and all but one of the toilets on the Iowa class flush with saltwater in order to conserve fresh water.
The turbines, especially the HP turbine, can turn at 2,000 rpm; their shafts drive through reduction gearing that turns the propeller shafts at speeds up to 225 rpm, depending upon the desired speed of the ship.
The Iowas were outfitted with four screws: the outboard pair consisting of four-bladed propellers 18.25 ft (5.56 m) in diameter and inboard pair consisting of five-bladed propellers 17 ft (5.18 m) in diameter.
The propeller designs were adopted after earlier testing had determined that propeller cavitation caused a drop in efficiency at speeds over 30 kn (56 km/h; 35 mph).

The two inner shafts were housed in skegs to smooth the flow of water to the propellers and improve the structural strength of the stern.
The four engine rooms each has a pair of 1,250 kW Ship's Service Turbine Generators (SSTGs), providing the ship with a total non-emergency electrical power of 10,000 kW at 450 volts alternating current.
Additionally, the vessels have a pair of 250 kW emergency diesel generators.
To allow battle-damaged electrical circuits to be repaired or bypassed, the lower decks of the ship have a Casualty Power System whose large 3-wire cables and wall outlets called "biscuits" can be used to reroute power.

===
Electronics (1943–69) ===
The earliest search radars installed were the SK air-search radar and SG surface-search radar during World War II.
They were located on the mainmast and forward fire-control tower of the battleships, respectively.
As the war drew to a close, the United States introduced the SK-2 air-search radar and SG surface-search radar; the Iowa class was updated to make use of these systems between 1945 and 1952.
At the same time, the ships' radar systems were augmented with the installation of the SP height finder on the main mast.
In 1952, AN/SPS-10 surface-search radar and AN/SPS-6 air-search radar replaced the SK and SG radar systems, respectively.
Two years later the SP height finder was replaced by the AN/SPS-8 height finder, which was installed on the main mast of the battleships.
In addition to these search and navigational radars, the Iowa class were also outfitted with a variety of fire control systems for their gun systems, and later for their missile systems.
Beginning with their commissioning, the battleships made use of a trio of Mk 38 gun fire control systems to direct the 16-inch guns and a quartet of Mk 37 gun fire control systems to direct the 5-inch gun batteries.
These systems were upgraded over time, but remained the cornerstones of the combat radar systems on the Iowa class during their careers.
The range estimation of these gunfire control systems provided a significant accuracy advantage over earlier ships with optical rangefinders; this was demonstrated off Truk Atoll on 16 February 1944, when the Iowa engaged the Japanese destroyer Nowaki at a range of 35,700 yards (32.6 km; 17.6 nmi) and straddled her, setting the record for the longest-ranged straddle in history.
In World War II, the electronic countermeasures (ECM) included the SPT-1 and SPT-4 equipment; passive electronic support measures (ESM) were a pair of DBM radar direction finders and three intercept receiving antennas, while the active components were the TDY-1 jammers located on the sides of the fire control tower.
The ships were also equipped with the Mark III identification, friend or foe (IFF) system, which were replaced by the Mark X when the ships were overhauled in 1955.
When the New Jersey was reactivated in 1968 for the Vietnam War, she was outfitted with the ULQ-6 ECM system.

===
Armor ===
Like all battleships, the Iowas carried heavy armor protection against shellfire and bombs with significant underwater protection against torpedoes.
The Iowa's "all-or-nothing" armor scheme was largely modeled on that of the preceding South Dakota class, and designed to give a zone of immunity against fire from 16-inch/45-caliber guns between 18,000 and 30,000 yards (16,000 and 27,000 m; 10 and 17 mi) away.
The protection system consists of Class A face-hardened Krupp cemented (K.C.) armor and Class B homogeneous Krupp-type armor; furthermore, special treatment steel (STS), a high-tensile structural steel with armor properties comparable to Class B, was extensively used in the hull plating to increase protection.
The citadel consisting of the magazines and engine rooms were protected by an STS outer hull plating 1.5 inches (38 mm) thick and a Class A armor belt 12.1 inches (307 mm)
thick mounted on 0.875-inch (22.2 mm) STS backing plate; the armor belt is sloped at 19 degrees, equivalent to 17.3 in (439 mm) of vertical class B armor at 19,000 yards.
The armor belt extends to the triple bottom, where the Class B lower portion tapers to 1.62 inches (41 mm).
The ends of the armored citadel are closed by 11.3-inch (287 mm) vertical Class
A transverse bulkheads for Iowa and New Jersey.
The transverse bulkhead armor on Missouri and Wisconsin was increased to 14.5 inches (368 mm); this extra armor provided protection from fire directly ahead, which was considered more likely given the high speed of the Iowas.
The deck armor consists of a 1.5-inch-thick (38 mm) STS weather deck, a combined 6-inch-thick (152 mm) Class B and STS main armor deck, and a 0.63-inch-thick (16 mm)
STS splinter deck.
Over the magazines, the splinter deck is replaced by a 1-inch (25 mm) STS third deck that separates the magazine from the main armored deck.
The powder magazine rooms are separated from the turret platforms by a pair of 1.5-inch STS annular bulkheads under the barbettes for flashback protection.
The installation of armor on the Iowas also differed from those of earlier battleships in that the armor was installed while the ships were still "on the way" rather than after the ships had been launched.
The Iowas had heavily protected main battery turrets, with 19.5-inch (495 mm)
Class B and STS face, 9.5-inch
(241 mm)
Class A sides, 12-inch (305 mm)
Class A rear, and 7.25-inch (184 mm) Class B roof.
The turret barbettes' armor is Class A with 17.3 inches (439 mm) abeam and 11.6 inches (295 mm) facing the centerline, extending down to the main armor deck.
The conning tower armor is Class B with 17.3 inches (439 mm) on all sides and 7.25 inches (184 mm) on the roof.
The secondary battery turrets and handling spaces were protected by 2.5 inches (64 mm) of STS.
The propulsion shafts and steering gear compartment behind the citadel had considerable protection, with 13.5-inch (343 mm) Class A side strake and 5.6–6.2-inch (142–157 mm) roof.
The armor's immunity zone shrank considerably against guns equivalent to their own 16-inch/50-caliber guns armed with the Mk.
8 armor-piercing shell due to the weapon's increased muzzle velocity and improved shell penetration; increasing the armor would have increased weight and reduced speed, a compromise that the General Board was not willing to make.
The Iowas' torpedo defense was based on the South Dakotas' design, with some modifications.
The system is an internal "bulge" that consists of four longitudinal torpedo bulkheads behind the outer hull plating with a system depth of 17.9 feet (5.46 m) to absorb the energy of a torpedo warhead.
The extension of the armor belt to the triple bottom, where it tapers to a thickness of 1.62 inches (41 mm), serves as one of the torpedo bulkheads and was hoped to add to protection.
The torpedo bulkheads were designed to elastically deform to absorb energy and several compartments were liquid loaded in order to disrupt the gas bubble.
The outer hull was intended to detonate a torpedo, with the outer two compartments absorbing the shock and with any splinters or debris being stopped by the lower armored belt and the empty compartment behind it.
However, the Navy discovered in caisson tests in 1939 that the initial design for this torpedo defense system was actually less effective than the previous design used on the North Carolinas' due to the rigidity of the lower armor belt causing leakage into adjacent compartments.
To mitigate the effects, the welded joint between the lower armor belt and the triple bottom was reinforced with buttstaps, and the liquid loading system was altered so that the two outermost compartments were filled, while the two inboard compartments were void spaces.
Iowas' system was also improved over the South Dakotas' through closer spacing of the traverse bulkheads, greater thickness of the lower belt at the triple bottom joint, and increased total volume of the "bulge".
The system was further modified for the last two ships of the class, Illinois and Kentucky, by eliminating knuckles along certain bulkheads; this was estimated to improve the strength of the system by as much as 20%.Based on costly lessons in the Pacific theater, concerns were raised about the ability of the armor on these battleships to withstand aerial bombing, particularly high altitude bombing using armor piercing bombs.
Developments such as the Norden bombsight further fueled these concerns.
While the design of the Iowas was too far along to adequately address this issue, experience in the Pacific theater eventually demonstrated that high altitude unguided bombing was ineffective against maneuvering warships.

===
Aircraft (1943–69) ===
When they were commissioned during World War II, the Iowa-class battleships came equipped with two aircraft catapults designed to launch floatplanes.
Initially, the Iowas carried the Vought OS2U Kingfisher and Curtiss SC Seahawk, both of which were employed to spot for the battleship's main gun batteries – and, in a secondary capacity, perform search-and-rescue missions.

By the time of the Korean War, helicopters had replaced floatplanes and the Sikorsky HO3S-1 helicopter was employed.
New Jersey made use of the Gyrodyne QH-50 DASH drone for her Vietnam war deployment in 1968–69.
==
Conversion proposals ==
The Iowa class were the only battleships with the speed required for post-war operations based around fast aircraft carrier task forces.
There were a number of proposals in the early Cold War to convert the class to take into account changes in technology and doctrine.
These included plans to equip the class with nuclear missiles, add aircraft capability and – in the case of Illinois and Kentucky – a proposal to rebuild both as aircraft carriers instead of battleships.
Initially, the Iowa class was to consist of only four battleships with hull numbers BB-61 to BB-64: Iowa, New Jersey, Missouri, and Wisconsin.
However, changing priorities during World War II resulted in the battleship hull numbers BB-65 Montana and BB-66 Ohio being reordered as Illinois and Kentucky respectively; Montana and Ohio were reassigned to hull numbers BB-67 and BB-68.
At the time these two battleships were to be built
a proposal was put forth to have them constructed as aircraft carriers rather than fast battleships.
The plan called for the ships to be rebuilt to include a flight deck and an armament suite similar to that placed aboard the Essex-class aircraft carriers that were at the time under construction in the United States.
Ultimately, nothing came of the design proposal to rebuild these two ships as aircraft carriers and they were cleared for construction as fast battleships to conform to the Iowa-class design, though they differed from the earlier four that were built.
Eventually, the Cleveland-class light cruisers were selected for the aircraft-carrier conversion.
Nine of these light cruisers would be rebuilt as Independence-class light aircraft carriers.
After the surrender of the Empire of Japan, construction on Illinois and Kentucky stopped.
Illinois was eventually scrapped, but Kentucky's construction had advanced enough that several plans were proposed to complete Kentucky as a guided missile battleship (BBG) by removing the aft turret and installing a missile system.
A similar conversion had already been performed on the battleship Mississippi (BB-41/AG-128) to test the RIM-2 Terrier missile after World War II.
One such proposal came from Rear Admiral W.K. Mendenhall, Chairman of the Ship Characteristics Board (SCB); Mendehall proposed a plan that called for $15–30 million to be spent to allow Kentucky to be completed as a guided-missile battleship (BBG) carrying eight SSM-N-8 Regulus II guided missiles with a range of 1,000 nautical miles (1,900 km; 1,200 mi).
He also suggested Terrier or RIM-8 Talos launchers to supplement the AA guns and proposed nuclear (instead of conventional) shells for the 16-inch guns.
This never materialized, and Kentucky was ultimately sold for scrap in 1958, although her bow was used to repair her sister Wisconsin after a collision on 6 May 1956, earning her the nickname WisKy.
In 1954, the Long Range Objectives Group of the United States Navy suggested converting the Iowa-class ships to BBGs.
In 1958, the Bureau of Ships offered a proposal based on this idea.
This replaced the 5- and 16-inch gun batteries with "two Talos twin missile systems, two RIM-24 Tartar twin missile systems, an RUR-5 ASROC antisubmarine missile launcher, and a Regulus II installation with four missiles", as well as flagship facilities, sonar, helicopters, and fire-control systems for the Talos and Tartar missiles.
In addition to these upgrades, 8,600 long tons (8,700 t) of additional fuel oil was also suggested to serve in part as ballast for the battleships and for use in refueling destroyers and cruisers.
Due to the estimated cost of the overhaul ($178–193 million)
this proposal was rejected as too expensive; instead, the SCB suggested a design with one Talos, one Tartar, one ASROC and two Regulus launchers and changes to the superstructure, at a cost of up to $85 million.
This design was later revised to accommodate the Polaris Fleet Ballistic Missile, which in turn resulted in a study of two schemes by the SCB.
In the end, none of these proposed conversions for the battleships were ever authorized.
Interest in converting the Iowas into guided-missile battleships began to deteriorate in 1960, because the hulls were considered too old and the conversion costs too high.
Nonetheless, additional conversion proposals – including one to install the AN/SPY-1 Aegis Combat System radar on the battleships – were suggested in 1962, 1974 and 1977, but as before, these proposals failed to gain the needed authorization.
This was due, in part, to the possibility that sensitive electronics within 200 ft (61 m) of any 16-inch gun muzzle may be damaged from overpressure.

== 1980s refit ==
In 1980, Ronald Reagan was elected president on a promise to build up the U.S. military as a response to the increasing military power of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Navy was commissioning the Kirov class of missile cruisers, the largest type of surface warship built since World War II (other than aircraft carriers or amphibious assault vessels).
As part of Reagan's 600-ship Navy policy and as a counter to the Kirov class, the U.S. Navy began reactivating the four Iowa-class units and modernizing them for service.

The Navy considered several proposals that would have removed the aft 16-inch turret.
Martin Marietta proposed to replace the turret with servicing facilities for 12 AV-8B Harrier STOVL jumpjets.
Charles Myers, a former Navy test pilot turned Pentagon consultant, proposed replacing the turret with vertical launch systems for missiles and a flight deck for Marine helicopters.
An article in the U.S. Naval Institute's Proceedings proposed a canted flight deck with steam catapult and arrestor wires for F/A-18 Hornet fighters.
Plans for these conversions were dropped in 1984.Each battleship was overhauled to burn navy distillate fuel and modernized to carry electronic warfare suites, close-in weapon systems (CIWS) for self-defense, and missiles.
The obsolete electronics and anti-aircraft armament were removed to make room for more modern systems.
The Navy spent about $1.7 billion, from 1981 through 1988, to modernize and reactivate the four Iowa-class battleships, roughly the same as building four Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates.

After modernization, the full load displacement was relatively unchanged at 57,500 long tons (58,400 t).The modernized battleships operated as centerpieces of their own battle group (termed as a Battleship Battle Group or Surface Action Group), consisting of one Ticonderoga-class cruiser, one Kidd-class destroyer or Arleigh Burke-class destroyer, one Spruance-class destroyer, three Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigates and one support ship, such as a fleet oiler.

===
Armament ===
During their modernization in the 1980s each Iowa was equipped with four of the US Navy's Phalanx CIWS mounts, two of which sat just behind the bridge and two which were next to the after ship's funnel.
Iowa, New Jersey, and Missouri were equipped with the Block 0 version of the Phalanx, while Wisconsin received the first operational Block 1 version in 1988.
The Phalanx system is intended to serve as a last line of defense against enemy missiles and aircraft, and when activated can engage a target with a 20 mm caliber M61 Vulcan 6-barreled Gatling cannon at a distance of approximately 4,000 yards (3.7 km;
2.0 nmi).As part of their modernization in the 1980s, each of the Iowas received a complement of Armored Box Launchers and "shock hardened" Mk.
141 quad cell launchers.
The former was used by the battleships to carry and fire the BGM-109 Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles (TLAMs) for use against enemy targets on land, while the latter system enabled the ships to carry a complement of RGM-84 Harpoon anti-ship missiles for use against enemy ships.
With an estimated range of 675 to 1,500 nautical miles (1,250 to 2,778 km; 777 to 1,726 mi) for the Tomahawk missile and 64.5 to 85.5 nautical miles (119.5 to 158.3 km; 74.2 to 98.4 mi) for the Harpoon missile system, these two missile systems displaced the 16-inch guns and their maximum range of 42,345 yards (38.7 km; 20.9 nmi) to become the longest-ranged weapons on the battleships during the 1980s.
It has been alleged by members of the environmental group Greenpeace that the battleships carried the TLAM-A (also cited, incorrectly, as the TLAM-N) – a Tomahawk missile with a variable yield W80 nuclear warhead – during their 1980s service with the United States Navy, but owing to the United States Navy's policy of refusing to confirm or deny the presence of nuclear weaponry aboard its ships, these claims can not be conclusively proved.
Between 2010 and 2013, the U.S. withdrew the BGM-109A, leaving only conventional munitions packages for its Tomahawk Missile inventory, though the Iowas had been withdrawn from service at that point.
Owing to the original 1938 design of the battleships, the Tomahawk missiles could not be fitted to the Iowa class unless the battleships were rebuilt in such a way as to accommodate the missile mounts that would be needed to store and launch the Tomahawks.
This realization prompted the removal of the anti-aircraft guns previously installed on the Iowas and the removal of four of each of the battleships' ten 5-inch/38 DP mounts.
The mid and aft end of the battleships were then rebuilt to accommodate the missile magazines.
At one point, the NATO Sea Sparrow was to be installed on the reactivated battleships; however, it was determined that the system could not withstand the overpressure effects from firing the main battery.
To supplement the anti-aircraft capabilities of the Iowas, five FIM-92 Stinger surface-to-air missile firing positions were installed.
These secured the shoulder-launched weapons and their rounds for ready use by the crew.

===
Electronics ===
During their modernization under the 600-ship Navy program, the Iowa-class battleships' radar systems were again upgraded.
The AN/SPS-6 air-search radar system was replaced with the AN/SPS-49 radar set (which also augmented the existing navigation capabilities on the battleships), and the AN/SPS-8 surface-search radar set was replaced by the AN/SPS-67 search radar.
By the Korean War, jet engines had replaced propellers on aircraft, which severely limited the ability of the 20 mm and 40 mm AA batteries and their gun systems to track and shoot down enemy planes.
Consequently, the AA guns and their associated fire-control systems were removed when reactivated.
New Jersey received this treatment in 1967, and the others followed in their 1980s modernizations.
In the 1980s, each ship also received a quartet of Phalanx Close in Weapon System (CIWS) mounts which made use of a radar system to locate incoming enemy projectiles and destroy them with a 20 mm Gatling gun before they could strike the ship.

With the added missile capacity of the battleships in the 1980s came additional fire-support systems to launch and guide the ordnance.
To fire the Harpoon anti-ship missiles, the battleships were equipped with the SWG-1 fire-control system, and to fire the Tomahawk missiles the battleships used either the SWG-2 or SWG-3 fire-control system.
In addition to these offensive-weapon systems, the battleships were outfitted with the AN/SLQ-25 Nixie to be used as a lure against enemy torpedoes, an SLQ-32 electronic warfare system that can detect, jam, and deceive an opponent's radar and a Mark 36 SRBOC system to fire chaff rockets intended to confuse enemy missiles.
Aside from the electronics added for weaponry control, all four battleships were outfitted with a communications suite used by both cruisers and guided missile cruisers in service at the time.
This communication suite included the OE-82 antenna for satellite communications, but did not include the Naval Tactical Data System.

===
Aircraft (1982–1992) ===
During the 1980s these battleships made use of the RQ-2 Pioneer, an unmanned aerial vehicle employed in spotting for the guns.
Launched from the fantail using a rocket-assist booster that was discarded shortly after takeoff, the Pioneer carried a video camera in a pod under the belly of the aircraft which transmitted live video to the ship so operators could observe enemy actions or fall of shot during naval gunnery.
To land the UAV a large net was deployed at the back of the ship; the aircraft was flown into it.
Missouri and Wisconsin both used the Pioneer UAVs successfully during Operation Desert Storm, and in one particularly memorable incident, a Pioneer UAV operated by Wisconsin received the surrender of Iraqi troops during combat operations.
This particular Pioneer was later donated to the Smithsonian Institution, and is now on public display.
During Operation Desert Storm these Pioneers were operated by detachments of VC-6.
In addition to the Pioneer UAVs, the recommissioned Iowas could support six types of helicopters: the Sikorsky HO3S-1, UH-1 Iroquois, SH-2 Seasprites, CH-46 Sea Knight, CH-53 Sea Stallion and the LAMPS
III SH-60B Seahawk.

==
Gunfire support role ==
Following the 1991 Gulf War and the subsequent dissolution of the Soviet Union, the United States Navy began to decommission and mothball many of the ships it had brought out of its reserve fleet in the drive to attain a 600-ship Navy.
At the height of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman's 600-ship Navy plan, nearly 600 ships of all types were active within the Navy.
This included fifteen aircraft carriers, four battleships and over 100 submarines, along with various other types of ships the overall plan specified.
When the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991 the Navy sought to return to its traditional, 313-ship composition.
While reducing the fleet created under the 600-ship Navy program, the decision was made to deactivate the four recommissioned Iowa-class battleships and return them to the reserve fleet.

In 1995, the decommissioned battleships were removed from the Naval Vessel Register after it was determined by ranking US Navy officials that there was no place for a battleship in the modern navy.
In response to the striking of the battleships from the Naval Vessel Register a movement began to reinstate the battleships, on the grounds that these vessels had superior firepower over the 5-inch guns found on the Spruance, Kidd, and Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, and Ticonderoga-class cruisers.
Citing concern over the lack of available gunfire to support amphibious operations, Congress required the Navy to reinstate two battleships to the Naval Vessel Register and maintain them with the mothball fleet, until the Navy could certify it had gunfire support within the current fleet that would meet or exceed the battleship's capability.
The debate over battleships in the modern navy continued until 2006, when the two reinstated battleships were stricken after naval officials submitted a two-part plan that called for the near-term goal of increasing the range of the guns in use on the Arleigh Burke-class destroyers with new Extended Range Guided Munition (ERGM) ammunition intended to allow a 5-inch projectile fired from these guns to travel an estimated 40 nautical miles (74 km; 46 mi) inland.
The long-term goal called for the replacement of the two battleships with 32 vessels of the Zumwalt class of guided-missile destroyers.
Cost overruns caused the class to be reduced to three ships.
These ships are outfitted with an Advanced Gun System (AGS) that was to fire specially developed 6-inch Long Range Land Attack Projectiles for shore bombardment;.
LRLAP procurement was cancelled in 2017 and the AGS is unusable.
The long-term goal for the Zumwalt class is to have the ships mount railguns or free-electron lasers.

==
Cultural significance ==
The Iowa class became culturally symbolic in the United States in many different ways, to the point where certain elements of the American public – such as the United States Naval Fire Support Association – were unwilling to part with the battleships, despite their apparent obsolescence in the face of modern naval combat doctrine that places great emphasis on air supremacy and missile firepower.
Although all were officially stricken from the Naval Vessel Register they were spared scrapping and were donated for use as museum ships.
Their service records added to their fame, ranging from their work as carrier escorts in World War II to their shore bombardment duties in North Korea, North Vietnam, and the Middle East, as well as their service in the Cold War against the expanded Soviet Navy.
Their reputation combined with the stories told concerning the firepower of these battleships' 16-inch guns were such that when they were brought out of retirement in the 1980s in response to increased Soviet Naval activity – and in particular, in response to the commissioning of the Kirov-class battlecruisers – the United States Navy was inundated with requests from former sailors pleading for a recall to active duty
so they could serve aboard one of the battleships.
In part because of the service length and record of the class, members have made numerous appearances in television shows, video games, movies, and other media, including appearances of the Kentucky and Illinois in the anime series Neon Genesis Evangelion, the History Channel documentary series Battle 360: USS Enterprise, the Discovery Channel documentary
The Top 10 Fighting Ships (where the Iowa class was rated Number 1), the book turned movie A Glimpse of Hell, the 1989 music video for the song by Cher
"If I Could Turn Back Time", the 1992 film Under Siege, the 2012 film Battleship, among other appearances.
Japanese rock band Vamps performed the finale of their 2009 US tour on board Missouri on 19 September 2009.

==
Ships ==
When brought into service during the final years of World War II, the Iowa-class battleships were assigned to operate in the Pacific Theatre of World War II.
By this point in the war, aircraft carriers had displaced battleships as the primary striking arm of both the United States Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy.
As a result of this shift in tactics, U.S. fast battleships of all classes were relegated to the secondary role of carrier escorts and assigned to the Fast Carrier Task Force to provide anti-aircraft screening for U.S. aircraft carriers and perform shore bombardment.
Three were recalled to service in the 1950s with the outbreak of the Korean War, and provided naval artillery support for U.N. forces for the entire duration of the war before being returned to mothballs in 1955 after hostilities ceased.
In 1968, to help alleviate U.S. air losses over North Vietnam, New Jersey was summoned to Vietnam, but was decommissioned a year after arriving.
All four returned in the 1980s during the drive for a 600-ship Navy to counter the new Soviet Kirov-class battlecruisers, only to be retired after the collapse of the Soviet Union on the grounds that they were too expensive to maintain.

1.
^
Kentucky was not officially launched; her hull was moved from drydock to allow Missouri to be admitted for repairs following her grounding.

===
Iowa ===
Iowa was ordered 1 July 1939, laid down 27 June 1940, launched 27 August 1942, and commissioned 22 February 1943.
She conducted a shakedown cruise in Chesapeake Bay before sailing to Naval Station Argentia, Newfoundland, to be ready in case the German battleship Tirpitz entered the Atlantic.
Transferred to the Pacific Fleet in 1944, Iowa made her combat debut in February and participated in the campaign for the Marshall Islands.
The ship later escorted U.S. aircraft carriers conducting air raids in the Marianas campaign, and then was present at the Battle of Leyte Gulf.
During the Korean War, Iowa bombarded enemy targets at Songjin, Hŭngnam, and Kojo, North Korea.
Iowa returned to the US for operational and training exercises before being decommissioned on 24 February 1958.
Reactivated in the early 1980s, Iowa operated in the Atlantic Fleet, cruising in North American and European waters for most of the decade and participating in joint military exercises with European ships.
On 19 April 1989, 47 sailors were killed following an explosion in her No.
2 turret.
In 1990, Iowa was decommissioned for the last time and placed in the mothball fleet.
She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 17 March 2006.
Iowa was anchored as part of the National Defense Reserve Fleet in Suisun Bay, California until October 2011, when she was towed from her mooring to Richmond, California for renovation as a museum ship.
She was towed from Richmond in the San Francisco Bay on 26 May 2012, to San Pedro at the Los Angeles Waterfront to serve as a museum ship run by Pacific Battleship Center and opened to the public on 7 July 2012.

===
New Jersey ===
New Jersey was ordered 4 July 1939, laid down 16 September 1940, launched 7 December 1942, and commissioned 23 May 1943.
New Jersey completed fitting out and trained her initial crew in the Western Atlantic and Caribbean before transferring to the Pacific Theatre in advance of the planned assault on the Marshall Islands, where she screened the U.S. fleet of aircraft carriers from enemy air raids.
At the Battle of Leyte Gulf, the ship protected carriers with her anti-aircraft guns.
New Jersey then bombarded Iwo Jima and Okinawa.
During the Korean War, the ship pounded targets at Wonsan, Yangyang, and Kansong.
Following the Armistice, New Jersey conducted training and operation cruises until she was decommissioned on August 21, 1957.
Recalled to duty in 1968, New Jersey reported to the gunline off the Vietnamese coast, and shelled North Vietnamese targets before departing the line in December 1968.
She was decommissioned the following year.
Reactivated in 1982 under the 600-ship Navy program, New Jersey was sent to Lebanon to protect U.S. interests and U.S. Marines, firing her main guns at Druze and Syrian positions in the Beqaa Valley east of Beirut.
Decommissioned for the last time 8 February 1991, New Jersey was briefly retained on the Naval Vessel Register before being donated to the Home Port Alliance of Camden, New Jersey for use as a museum ship in October 2001.

===
Missouri ===
Missouri was the last of the four Iowas to be completed.
She was ordered 12 June 1940, laid down 6 January 1941, launched 29 January 1944, and commissioned 11 June 1944.
Missouri conducted her trials off New York with shakedown and battle practice in Chesapeake Bay before transferring to the Pacific Fleet, where she screened US aircraft carriers involved in offensive operations against the Japanese before reporting to Okinawa to shell the island in advance of the planned landings.
Following the bombardment of Okinawa, Missouri turned her attention to the Japanese homeland islands of Honshu and Hokkaido, performing shore bombardment and screening US carriers involved in combat operations.
She became a symbol of the US Navy's victory in the Pacific when representatives of the Empire of Japan boarded the battleship to sign the documents of unconditional surrender to the Allied powers in September 1945.
After World War II, Missouri conducted largely uneventful training and operational cruises until suffering a grounding accident.
In 1950, she was dispatched to Korea in response to the outbreak of the Korean War.
Missouri served two tours of duty in Korea providing shore bombardment.
She was decommissioned in 1956.
She spent many years at Puget Sound Naval Shipyard in Bremerton, Washington.
Reactivated in 1984, as part of the 600-ship Navy plan, Missouri was sent on operational cruises until being assigned to Operation Earnest Will in 1988.
In 1991, Missouri participated in Operation Desert Storm, firing 28 Tomahawk Missiles and 759 16-inch shells at Iraqi targets along the coast.
Decommissioned for the last time in 1992, Missouri was donated to the USS Missouri Memorial Association of Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, for use as a museum ship in 1999.

===
Wisconsin ===
Wisconsin was ordered 12 June 1940, laid down 25 January 1942, launched 7 December 1943, and commissioned 16 April 1944.
After trials and initial training in Chesapeake Bay, she transferred to the Pacific Fleet in 1944, and was assigned to protect the US fleet of aircraft carriers involved in operations in the Philippines until summoned to Iwo Jima to bombard the island in advance of the Marine landings.
Afterward, she proceeded to Okinawa, bombarding the island in advance of the allied amphibious assault.
In mid-1945 Wisconsin turned her attention to bombarding the Japanese home islands until the surrender of Japan in August.
Reactivated in 1950, for the Korean War, Wisconsin served two tours of duty, assisting South Korean and UN forces by providing call fire support and shelling targets.
In 1956, the bow of the uncompleted Kentucky was removed and grafted on Wisconsin, which had collided with the destroyer USS Eaton.
Decommissioned in 1958, Wisconsin was placed in the reserve fleet at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard until reactivated in 1986, as part of the 600-ship Navy plan.
In 1991, Wisconsin participated in Operation Desert Storm, firing 24 Tomahawk Missiles at Iraqi targets, and expending 319 16-inch shells at Iraqi troop formations along the coast.
Decommissioned for the last time 30 September 1991, Wisconsin was placed in the reserve fleet until stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 17 March 2006, so she could be transferred for use as a museum ship.
Wisconsin is currently berthed at the Nauticus maritime museum in Norfolk, Virginia.

===
Illinois  and Kentucky ===
Hull numbers BB-65 and BB-66 were originally intended as the first and second ships of the Montana class of battleships; however the passage of an emergency war building program on 19 July 1940, resulted in both hulls being reordered as Iowa-class units to save time on construction.
The war ended before either could be completed, and work was eventually stopped.
Initially, proposals were made to convert the hulls into aircraft carriers similar to the Essex class, but the effort was dropped.
Eventually both hulls were scrapped.

Illinois was ordered on 9 September 1940, and initially laid down on 6 December 1942.
However, work was suspended pending a decision on whether to convert the hull to an aircraft carrier.
Upon determination the result would cost more and be less capable than building from scratch construction resumed, but was canceled for good approximately one-quarter complete on 11 August 1945.
She was sold for scrap and broken up on the slipway in September 1958.

Kentucky was ordered on 9 September 1940, and laid down on 7 March 1942.
Work on the ship was suspended in June 1942, and the hull floated out to make room for the construction of LSTs.
The interruption lasted for two and a half years while a parallel aircraft carrier debate played out as with Illinois, reaching the same conclusion.
Work resumed in December 1944, with completion projected for mid-1946.
Further suggestions were made to convert Kentucky into a specialist anti-aircraft ship, and work was again suspended.
With the hull approximately three-quarters completed she was floated on 20 January 1950, to clear a dry-dock for repairs to Missouri, which had run aground.
During this period, plans were proposed to convert Kentucky into a guided missile battleship, which saw her reclassified from BB-66 to BBG-1.
When these failed construction of any sort, work never resumed and the ship was used as a parts hulk; in 1956, her bow was removed and shipped in one piece across Hampton Roads and grafted onto Wisconsin, which had collided with the destroyer Eaton.
In 1958, the engines installed on Kentucky were salvaged and installed on the Sacramento-class fast combat support ships Sacramento and Camden.
Ultimately, what remained of the hulk was sold for scrap on 31 October 1958.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Sources ==


==
Further reading ==
Bonner, Kit; Bonner, Carolyn (1998).
Great Naval Disasters:
U.S. Naval Accidents in the 20th Century.
Osceola, Wisconsin: MBI Publishing.
ISBN 0760305943.
OCLC 39545709.
OL 374840M. Retrieved 17 November 2020.

Butler, John A. (1995).
Strike Able-Peter:
The Stranding and Salvage of the USS Missouri.
Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press.
ISBN 1557500940.

Hoskins, Lawrence E., LT USNR (September 1983).
"
Comment and Discussion".
Proceedings.
United States Naval Institute.

Naval Historical Foundation (2004)
[2000].

Holland, W. J. (ed.).
The Navy.
New York:
Barnes & Noble Books.
ISBN 9781435144545.
OCLC 1150821211.
OL 26458638M. Retrieved 17 November 2020.

Newcome, Laurence R. (2004).
Unmanned Aviation: A Brief History of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.
Reston, Virginia:
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
ISBN 978-1563476440.
OCLC 55078813.

Newell, Gordon; Smith, Allen E., Vice Admiral (USN), Ret.
(
1969).
Mighty Mo:
The U.S.S. Missouri:
A Biography of the Last Battleship.
Seattle, Washington: Superior Publishing Company.
LCCN 72-87802.

Poyer, Joe (1991)
[1984].

Lightbody, Andy; Taylor, Blaine (eds.).
Battleships at War:
America's Century Long Romance with the Big Guns of the Fleet.
Canoga Park, California: Challenge Publications.

Reilly, John C., Jr. (1989).
Operational Experience of Fast Battleships: World War II, Korea, Vietnam.
Washington, DC: Naval Historical Center.
OCLC 19547740.

Sumrall, Robert F. (1999).
USS Missouri (BB-63).
Missoula, Montana:
Pictorial Histories.
ISBN 1575100509.
OCLC 43607533.

Wright, Christopher C. (2020). "
Question 14/56:
Concerning a Notch in the Hull at the top of the Main Deck Level, Portside, on Indiana (BB-58) Class Battleships".
Warship International.
LVII (1): 36–47.
ISSN 0043-0374.

==
External links ==
A comparison of seven battleship classes during WWII
War Service Fuel Consumption of U.S. Naval Surface Vessels FTP 218
Firing Procedure for the 16"/50 (40.6 cm)
Mark 7
Operating Instructions for Five Inch, 38 Caliber, Gun Crews
The Avangard (Russian: Авангард; English: Vanguard; previously known as Objekt 4202, Yu-71 and Yu-74) is a Russian hypersonic glide vehicle (HGV) that can be carried as a MIRV payload by the UR-100UTTKh, R-36M2 and RS-28 Sarmat heavy ICBMs.
It can deliver both nuclear and conventional payloads.
The Avangard is one of the six new Russian strategic weapons unveiled by Russian President Vladimir Putin on 1 March 2018.

==
History ==
According to Vladimir Putin, the US withdrawal from the ABM Treaty in 2002 forced Russia to start developing hypersonic weapons: "We had to create these [hypersonic] weapons in response to the US deployment of a strategic missile defense system, which in the future would be capable of virtually neutralizing, zeroing out all our nuclear potential".
In 2007, when asked about U.S. plans to deploy ballistic missile defenses in Europe, Putin mentioned that Russia was developing “strategic weapons systems of a completely different type that will fly at hypersonic speed and will be able to change trajectory both in terms of altitude and direction".
The Avangard (then called Yu-71 and Yu-74) was reportedly flight tested between February 2015 and June 2016 on board UR-100UTTKh ICBMs launched from Dombarovsky Air Base, Orenburg Oblast, when it reached a speed of 11,200 kilometres per hour (7,000 mph; 3,100 m/s) and successfully hit targets at the Kura Missile Test Range, Kamchatka Krai.
In October 2016, another flight test was carried out using a R-36M2 heavy ICBM launched from Dombarovsky Air Base, successfully hitting a target at the Kura Missile Test Range.
This was reportedly the first fully successful test of the glide vehicle.
On 1 March 2018, Russian President Vladimir Putin in his presidential address to the Federal Assembly in Moscow announced that testing of the weapon is now complete and that it has entered serial production.
This was further confirmed by the commander of Russian Strategic Missile Forces, Colonel General Sergei Karakayev.
The latest flight test occurred on 26 December 2018.
Avangard carried by a UR-100UTTKh ICBM launched from Dombarovsky Air Base successfully hit a target at the Kura Missile Test Range.
The Deputy Prime Minister of Russia Yury Borisov stated a day later that the glider flew at 27 times the speed of sound, "invulnerable to interception".
According to Russian Defense Ministry's press service/TASS, the Avangard missile system with the hypersonic glide-vehicle was demonstrated to the US inspection group in accordance with the New START treaty procedures on November 24–26, 2019.On
27 December 2019, the first missile regiment armed with the Avangard HGV officially entered combat duty.
On 19 September 2020, Herbert Efremov, an Advisor for Science at the NPO Mashinostroyenia, was awarded Order of St. Andrew for his contributions to the Avangard development.

==
Design ==
HGVs differ from traditional ballistic missiles by their ability to maneuver and operate at lower altitudes.
The combination of maneuverability and high speed poses significant challenges for conventional missile defense.
With the advantage again swinging toward attack, the defense industry is concerned that weapons of this type will reignite the kind of  arms race that dominated the cold war era.
According to open-source analysis by Jane's, Avangard is a pure glide vehicle without an independent propulsion system.
When approaching a target, the glider is capable of sharp high speed horizontal and vertical evasive maneuvers in flight, which Russian officials claim makes it "invulnerable to any missile defence system".
Arms control expert Jeffrey Lewis of the Institute of International Studies expressed scepticism towards Avangard's ability to evade missile defences, stating that "gliding results in slower speeds than traditional re-entry".
The blast yield of a nuclear warhead carried by the Avangard is reportedly more than 2 megatons TNT.

==
Operators ==
Russia
The Strategic Missile Forces are the only operator of the Avangard HGV.

As of January 2021, 4 Avangard-equipped UR-100NUTTH are deployed with: 

13th Red Banner Rocket Division at Yasny,
Orenburg Oblast


==
See also ==
HGV-202F
MIRV
Kh-47M2
Kinzhal
3M22
Zircon
BrahMos-II
DF-ZF
Boeing X-51
Waverider
Prompt Global Strike
DARPA Falcon Project
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle
Silbervogel
Tupolev
Tu-130


=
= References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andrew Cockburn, "Like a Ball of Fire:
Andrew Cockburn on hypersonic weaponry", London Review of Books, vol.
42, no.
5 (5 March 2020), pp.
31–32.
"'
Welcome to the world of strategic analysis, where we program weapons that don't work to meet threats that don't exist.'
This was what Ivan Selin, a senior Pentagon official, used to tell subordinates in the Defence Department in the 1960s."
(
p. 31.)
Cockburn recounts impracticable-weapons projects, including Russia's Avangard "hypersonic glide missile", Ronald Reagan's "Star Wars" project, the US's 1951 nuclear-powered-bomber project, and the US's 1950s Dyna-Soar "boost-glide"-weapon project suggested by Walter Dornberger, a favorite of Hitler's who had overseen the V2 rocket program.
"
[
T]he US and Russia have both taken Selin's axiom a step further: they mean to deploy a weapon that doesn't work against a threat that doesn't exist
that was in turn developed to counter an equally non-existent threat."
(
p. 32.)
A Lazy Dog (sometimes called a Red Dot Bomb or Yellow Dog Bomb) is a small, unguided kinetic projectile typically about 1.75 inches (44 mm) in length, 0.5 inches (13 mm) in diameter, and weighing about 0.7 ounces (
20 g).The weapons were designed to be dropped from an aircraft.
They contained no explosive charge but as they fell they would develop significant kinetic energy making them lethal and able to easily penetrate soft cover such as jungle canopy, several inches of sand, or light armor.
Lazy Dog munitions were simple and cheap; they could be dropped in huge numbers in a single pass.
Though their effects were often no more deadly than other projectiles, they did not leave unexploded ordnance (UXO) that could be active years after a conflict ended.

Lazy Dog projectiles were used primarily during the Korean and the Vietnam Wars.

==
Development ==
Lazy Dog munitions had precursors in air-dropped flechettes dating from World War
I.Lazy Dogs in their familiar form were descended from projectiles of almost identical design and appearance that were originally developed early in World War II (as early as 1941).
The Korean War–era and Vietnam War–era
"Lazy  Dog" was further developed, tested and deployed into the 1950s and 1960s.
Originally an Armament Laboratory program codenamed Lazy Dog, the weapon's development involved Delco Products Corporation, F&F Mold and Die Works, Inc., Haines Designed Products, and Master Vibrator Company of Dayton.
The project objective was to design and test free-fall missiles and their dispensing units for use in bombers and fighters.
Lazy Dog anti-personnel missiles were designed to spray enemy troops with small projectiles with three times the force of standard air-burst bombs.
The Armament Laboratory worked with the Flight Test Laboratory to conduct wind tunnel tests of a number of bomb shapes which design studies indicated to be the most efficient for storage and release from high performance aircraft.
Experimental Lazy Dog projectiles of various shapes and sizes were tested at Air Proving Ground, Eglin AFB, Florida, in late 1951 and early 1952.
An F-84 flying at 400 knots and 75 feet (23 m) above the ground served as the test bed while a jeep and a B-24 were the targets.
The result was eight hits per square yard.
Tests revealed Shapes 2 and 5 to be the most effective.
Shape 5, an improved basic Lazy Dog slug, had the force of a .50 caliber bullet and could penetrate 24 inches (61 cm) of packed sand.
Shape 2 could penetrate 12 inches (30 cm) of sand—
twice as much as a .45 caliber slug fired point blank.
==
Deployment ==
The Shape 2 projectile was sent to the Far East Air Force for combat use by mid-1952.
FEAF immediately ordered 16,000 Lazy Dog weapon systems.
An Air Force Lieutenant Colonel named Haile attached to the Armament Laboratory spent 90 days in Japan to set up local manufacture of the Lazy Dog weapons and train crew members in their use.
Project Lazy Dog continued throughout 1952 to determine the optimum characteristics for stable dispersion containers and the feasibility of substituting a Lazy Dog warhead for the explosive nose of the Matador missile.
The Lazy Dog program was still ongoing in the late 1950s.
Lazy Dog projectiles could be dropped from almost any kind of flying vehicle.
They could be hurled from buckets, dropped by hand, thrown in their small shipping bags made of paper, or placed in a Mark 44 cluster adaptor—a simple hinged casing with bins built in to hold the projectiles, opened by a mechanical time delay fuze.
The adaptors themselves were 69.9 inches long and 14.18 inches in diameter.
They would be shipped empty, then filled by hand.
Depending on how many projectiles could be packed in, loaded weight varied between 560 and 625 pounds, with the theoretical maximum number of projectiles listed as 17,500.Regardless of  how they were released into the air, each "Lazy Dog" projectile would develop an enormous amount of kinetic energy as it fell, penetrating nearly any material upon hitting the ground.
Some reports say that their speeds often exceeded 700 feet per second (480 mph; 210 m/s) before impact.
A variant version of the "Lazy  Dog" projectile was developed for the recoilless rifle.
However, development was suspended because another kind of flechette solution was used for the recoilless rifle instead.

== See also ==
Concrete bomb
Kinetic bombardment


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==
Karmes, David (2014).
The Patricia Lynn Project.
ISBN
9781491752272.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)
Tagg, Lori S. (2001).
"
7".
On the Front Line of R&D. ASC History Office.
Archived from the original on 9 January 2010.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)
Pursglove, S David (February 1962).
"
Bizarre Weapons for the Little Wars".
Popular Mechanics.
Hearst Magazines.
117 (2): 107–112.
Retrieved 17
May 2018.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)
Eades, J.B.; Powers, C. (1964).
Static and Dynamic Stability Studies on Several Lazy Dog Configurations (PDF).
U.S. Navy Ordnance Laboratory, White Oak, Maryland.
Retrieved 18
May 2018.CS1
maint: ref=harv (link)
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is a research and development agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of emerging technologies for use by the military.

Originally known as the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), the agency was created on February 7, 1958 by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in response to the Soviet launching of Sputnik 1 in 1957.
By collaborating with academia, industry, and government partners, DARPA formulates and executes research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, often beyond immediate U.S. military requirements.
DARPA-funded projects have provided significant technologies that influenced many non-military fields, such as computer networking and the basis for the modern Internet, and graphical user interfaces in information technology.

DARPA is independent of other military research and development and reports directly to senior Department of Defense management.
DARPA comprises approximately 220 government employees in six technical offices, including nearly 100 program managers, who together oversee about 250 research and development programs.
The name of the organization first changed from its founding name, ARPA, to DARPA, in March 1972, changing back to ARPA in February 1993, then reverted to DARPA in March 1996.The agency's current director, appointed in March 2021, is Stefanie Tompkins.

==
Mission ==
Currently, their mission statement is "to make pivotal investments in breakthrough technologies for national security".

==
History ==


===
Early history (1958–1969) ===
The creation of the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was authorized by President Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1958 for the purpose of forming and executing research and development projects to expand the frontiers of technology and science, and able to reach far beyond immediate military requirements, the two relevant acts being the Supplemental Military Construction Authorization (Air Force) (Public Law 85-325) and Department of Defense Directive 5105.15, in February 1958.
Its creation was directly attributed to the launching of Sputnik and to U.S. realization that the Soviet Union had developed the capacity to rapidly exploit military technology.
Initial funding of ARPA was $520 million.
ARPA's first director, Roy Johnson, left a $160,000 management job at General Electric for an $18,000 job at ARPA.
Herbert York from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was hired as his scientific assistant.
Johnson and York were both keen on space projects, but when NASA was established later in 1958 all space projects and most of ARPA's funding were transferred to it.
Johnson resigned and ARPA was repurposed to do "high-risk", "high-gain", "far out" basic research, a posture that was enthusiastically embraced by the nation's scientists and research universities.
ARPA's second director was Brigadier General Austin W. Betts, who resigned in early 1961.
He was succeeded by Jack Ruina who served until 1963.
Ruina, the first scientist to administer ARPA, managed to raise its budget to $250 million.
It was Ruina who hired J. C. R. Licklider as the first administrator of the Information Processing Techniques Office, which played a vital role in creation of ARPANET, the basis for the future Internet.
Additionally, the political and defense communities recognized the need for a high-level Department of Defense organization to formulate and execute R&D projects that would expand the frontiers of technology beyond the immediate and specific requirements of the Military Services and their laboratories.
In pursuit of this mission, DARPA has developed and transferred technology programs encompassing a wide range of scientific disciplines that address the full spectrum of national security needs.

From 1958 to 1965, ARPA's emphasis centered on major national issues, including space, ballistic missile defense, and nuclear test detection.

During 1960, all of its civilian space programs were transferred to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the military space programs to the individual services.
This allowed ARPA to concentrate its efforts on the Project Defender (defense against ballistic missiles), Project Vela (nuclear test detection), and Project AGILE (counterinsurgency R&D) programs, and to begin work on computer processing, behavioral sciences, and materials sciences.
The DEFENDER and AGILE programs formed the foundation of DARPA sensor, surveillance, and directed energy R&D, particularly in the study of radar, infrared sensing, and x-ray/gamma ray detection.

ARPA
at this point (1959) played an early role in Transit (also called NavSat) a predecessor to the Global Positioning System (GPS).

"Fast-forward to 1959 when a joint effort between DARPA and the Johns Hopkins
Applied Physics Laboratory began to fine-tune the early explorers' discoveries.
TRANSIT, sponsored by the Navy and developed under the leadership of Dr. Richard Kirschner at Johns Hopkins, was the first satellite positioning system.
"During the late 1960s, with the transfer of these mature programs to the Services, ARPA redefined its role and concentrated on a diverse set of relatively small, essentially exploratory research programs.
The agency was renamed the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1972, and during the early 1970s, it emphasized direct energy programs, information processing, and tactical technologies.
Concerning information processing, DARPA made great progress, initially through its support of the development of time-sharing (all modern operating systems rely on concepts invented for the Multics system, developed by a cooperation among Bell Labs, General Electric and MIT, which DARPA supported by funding Project MAC at MIT with an initial two-million-dollar grant).DARPA supported the evolution of the ARPANET (the first wide-area packet switching network), Packet Radio Network, Packet Satellite Network and ultimately, the Internet and research in the artificial intelligence fields of speech recognition and signal processing, including parts of Shakey the robot.
DARPA also funded the development of the Douglas Engelbart's NLS computer system and The Mother of All Demos; and the Aspen Movie Map, which was probably the first hypermedia system and an important precursor of virtual reality.

===
Later history (1970–1980) ===
The Mansfield Amendment of 1973 expressly limited appropriations for defense research (through ARPA/DARPA) only to projects with direct military application.

The resulting "brain drain" is also credited with boosting the development of the fledgling personal computer industry.
Some young computer scientists left the universities to startups and private research laboratories such as Xerox PARC.

Between 1976 and 1981, DARPA's major projects were dominated by air, land, sea, and space technology, tactical armor and anti-armor programs, infrared sensing for space-based surveillance, high-energy laser technology for space-based missile defense, antisubmarine warfare, advanced cruise missiles, advanced aircraft, and defense applications of advanced computing.
These large-scale technological program demonstrations were joined by integrated circuit research, which resulted in submicrometer electronic technology and electron devices that evolved into the Very-Large-Scale Integration (VLSI) Program and the Congressionally-mandated charged particle beam program.
Many of the successful programs were transitioned to the Services, such as the foundation technologies in automatic target recognition, space based sensing, propulsion, and materials that were transferred to the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO), later known as the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (BMDO), now titled the Missile Defense Agency (MDA).
===
Recent history (1981–present) ===
During the 1980s, the attention of the Agency was centered on information processing and aircraft-related programs, including the National Aerospace Plane (NASP) or Hypersonic Research Program.
The Strategic Computing Program enabled DARPA to exploit advanced processing and networking technologies and to rebuild and strengthen relationships with universities after the Vietnam War.
In addition, DARPA began to pursue new concepts for small, lightweight satellites (LIGHTSAT) and directed new programs regarding defense manufacturing, submarine technology, and armor/anti-armor.

In 1981, two engineers, Robert McGhee and Kenneth Waldron, started to develop the Adaptive Suspension Vehicle (ASV) nicknamed the "Walker" at the Ohio State University, under a research contract from DARPA.
The vehicle was 17 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 10.5 feet high, and had six legs to support its three-ton aluminum body, in which it was designed to carry cargo over difficult terrains.
However, DARPA lost interest in the ASV, after problems with cold-weather tests.
On February 4, 2004 the agency shut down its so called "LifeLog Project".
The project's aim would have been, "to gather in a single place just about everything an individual says, sees or does".
On October 28, 2009 the agency broke ground on a new facility in Arlington, Virginia a few miles from the Pentagon.
In fall 2011, DARPA hosted the 100-Year Starship Symposium with the aim of getting the public to start thinking seriously about interstellar travel.
On June 5, 2016, NASA and DARPA announced that it planned to build new X-planes with NASA's plan setting to create a whole series of X planes over the next 10 years.
Between 2014 and 2016, DARPA shepherded the first machine-to-machine computer security competition, the Cyber Grand Challenge (CGC),
bringing a group of top-notch computer security experts to search for security vulnerabilities, exploit them, and create fixes that patch those vulnerabilities in a fully-automated fashion.
In June 2018, DARPA leaders demonstrated a number of new technologies that were developed within the framework of the GXV-T program.
The goal of this program is to create a lightly armored combat vehicle of not very large dimensions, which, due to maneuverability and other tricks, can successfully resist modern anti-tank weapon systems.
In September 2020, DARPA and the US Air Force announced that the Hypersonic Air-breathing Weapon Concept (HAWC) are ready for free-flight tests within the next year.
Victoria Coleman became the director of DARPA in November 2020.In recent years, DARPA officials have contracted out core functions to corporations.
For example, during fiscal year 2020, Chenega ran physical security on DARPA’s premises, System High Corp. carried out program security, and Agile Defense ran unclassified IT services.
General Dynamics runs classified IT services.
Strategic Analysis Inc. provided support services regarding engineering, science, mathematics, and front office and administrative work.

DARPA history
		
		
		


==
Organization ==


===
Current program offices ===
DARPA has six technical offices that manage the agency's research portfolio, and two additional support offices that manage special projects and transition efforts.
All offices report to the DARPA director, including:

The Adaptive Execution Office (AEO)
is one of two new DARPA offices created in 2009 by the DARPA Director, Regina Dugan.
The office's four project areas include technology transition, assessment, rapid productivity and adaptive systems.
AEO provides the agency with robust connections to the warfighter community and assists the agency with the planning and execution of technology demonstrations and field trials to promote adoption by the warfighter, accelerating the transition of new technologies into DoD capabilities.

The Defense Sciences Office (DSO) vigorously pursues the most promising technologies within a broad spectrum of the science and engineering research communities and develops those technologies into important, radically new military capabilities.
DSO identifies and pursues high-risk, high-payoff fundamental research initiatives across a broad spectrum of science and engineering disciplines – sometimes reshaping existing fields or creating entirely new disciplines – and transforms these initiatives into radically new, game-changing technologies for U.S. national security.

The Information Innovation Office (I2O) aims to ensure U.S. technological superiority in all areas where information can provide a decisive military advantage.
Some of the program managers in I2O are Stuart Wagner (as of September 2014), Steve Jameson (as of August 2014), Angelos Keromytis (as of July 2014), and David Doermann (as of April 2014).
Brian Pierce is currently the office director.

The Microsystems Technology Office (MTO) mission focuses on the heterogeneous microchip-scale integration of electronics, photonics, and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).
Their high risk/high payoff technology is aimed at solving the national level problems of protection from biological, chemical and information attack and to provide operational dominance for mobile distributed command and control, combined manned and unmanned warfare, and dynamic, adaptive military planning and execution.

The Strategic Technology Office (STO) mission is to focus on technologies that have a global theater-wide impact and that involve multiple Services.

The Tactical Technology Office (TTO) engages in high-risk, high-payoff advanced military research, emphasizing the "system" and "subsystem" approach to the development of aeronautic, space, and land systems as well as embedded processors and control systems
The Biological Technologies Office (BTO) fosters, demonstrates, and transitions  breakthrough fundamental research, discoveries, and applications that integrate biology, engineering, and computer science for national security.
Created in April 2014 by then director Arati Prabhakar, taking programs from the MTO and DSO divisions.
===
Former offices ===
Information Awareness Office: 2002–2003
The Advanced Technology Office (ATO) researched, demonstrated, and developed high payoff projects in maritime, communications, special operations, command and control, and information assurance and survivability mission areas.

The Special Projects Office (SPO) researched, developed, demonstrated, and transitioned technologies focused on addressing present and emerging national challenges.
SPO investments ranged from the development of enabling technologies to the demonstration of large prototype systems.
SPO developed technologies to counter the emerging threat of underground facilities used for purposes ranging from command-and-control, to weapons storage and staging, to the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction.
SPO developed significantly more cost-effective ways to counter proliferated, inexpensive cruise missiles, UAVs, and other platforms used for weapon delivery, jamming, and surveillance.
SPO invested in novel space technologies across the spectrum of space control applications including rapid access, space situational awareness, counterspace, and persistent tactical grade sensing approaches including extremely large space apertures and structures.

The  Information Systems Office (ISO) in the 1990s developed system applications of advanced information technologies.

It was a predecessor to the Information Exploitation Office.
A 1991 reorganization created several offices which existed throughout the early 1990s:
The Electronic Systems Technology Office combined areas of the Defense Sciences Office and the Defense Manufacturing Office.
This new office will focus on the boundary between general-purpose computers and the physical world, such as sensors, displays and the first few layers of specialized signal-processing that couple these modules to standard computer interfaces.

The Computing Systems Technology Office combined functions of the old Information Sciences and Tactical Technology office.
The office "will work scalable parallel and distributed heterogeneous computing systems technologies", DoD said.

The Software and Intelligent Systems Technology Office and the Computing Systems office will have responsibility associated with the Presidential High-Performance Computing Initiative.
The Software office will also be responsible for "software systems technology, machine intelligence and software engineering."

The Land Systems Office was created to develop advanced land vehicle and anti-armor systems, once the domain of the Tactical Technology Office.

The Undersea Warfare Office combined areas of the Advanced Vehicle Systems and Tactical Technology offices to develop and demonstrate submarine stealth and counter-stealth and automation.
A 2010 reorganization merged two offices:
The Transformational Convergence Technology Office (TCTO) mission was to advance new crosscutting capabilities derived from a broad range of emerging technological and social trends, particularly in areas related to computing and computing-reliant subareas of the life sciences, social sciences, manufacturing, and commerce.
The TCTO was folded into the I2O in 2010.

The Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) focused on inventing the networking, computing, and software technologies vital to ensuring DOD military superiority.
The IPTO was combined with TCTO in 2010 to form the I2O.


== Projects ==
A list of DARPA's active and archived projects is available on the agency's website.
Because of the agency's fast pace, programs constantly start and stop based on the needs of the U.S. government.
Structured information about some of the DARPA's contracts and projects is publicly available.

===
Active projects ===
ACTUV:
A project to build an unmanned Anti-submarine warfare vessel.

Air Dominance Initiative: a 2015 program to develop technologies to be used in sixth-generation jet fighters.

Air Space Total Awareness for Rapid Tactical Execution (ASTARTE):
sensors, artificial intelligence algorithms, and virtual testing environments in order to create an understandable common operating picture when troops are spread out across battlefields
Atmospheric Water Extraction (AWE) program
Big Mechanism:
Cancer research.
(
2015)
binary structure inference system: extract software properties from binary code to support repository-based reverse engineering for micro-patching that minimizes lifecycle maintenance and costs
(2020)
Blackjack: a 2018+ program to develop and test military satellite constellation technologies with a variety of "military-unique sensors and payloads [attached to] commercial satellite buses. ...
as an 'architecture demonstration intending to show the high military utility of global LEO constellations and mesh networks of lower size, weight, and cost spacecraft nodes.'

...
The idea is to demonstrate that 'good enough' payloads in LEO can perform military missions, augment existing programs, and potentially perform 'on par or better than currently deployed exquisite space systems.'"
Blue Canyon Technologies, Raytheon, and SA Photonics Inc. were working on phases 2 and 3 as of fiscal year 2020.

broadband, electro-magnetic spectrum receiver system: prototype and demonstration
BlockADE: Rapidly constructed barrier.
(
2014)
Boeing X-37
Captive Air Amphibious Transporter
Causal Exploration of Complex Operational Environments ("Causal Exploration") – computerized aid to military planning.
(
2018)
Clean-Slate Design of Resilient, Adaptive, Secure Hosts (CRASH), a TCTO initiative
Cognitive Technology Threat Warning System
Collaborative Operations in Denied Environment (CODE):
Modular software architecture for UAVs to pass information to each other in contested environments to identify and engage targets with limited operator direction.
(
2015)
Combat Zones That See: "track everything that moves" in a city by linking up a massive network of surveillance cameras
Control of Revolutionary Aircraft with Novel Effectors (CRANE) program: demonstrate an experimental aircraft design based on active flow control (AFC), which is defined as on-demand addition of energy into a boundary layer in order to maintain, recover, or improve aerodynamic performance.
The aim is for CRANE to generally improve aircraft performance and reliability while reducing cost.
(
2020)
Computational Weapon Optic (CWO):
Computer rifle scope that combines various features into one optic.

DARPA XG: technology for Dynamic Spectrum Access for assured military communications.

detection system consisting of Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)-based assays paired with reconfigurable point-of-need and massively multi-plexed devices for diagnostics and surveillance
Experimental Spaceplane 1 (formerly XS-1):
phase 2 and 3 of a reusable unmanned space transport
Fast Lightweight Autonomy: Software algorithms that enable small UAVs to fly fast in cluttered environments without GPS or external communications.
(
2014)
Fast Network Interface Cards
(FastNICs): develop and integrate new, clean-slate network subsystems in order to speed up applications, such as the distributed training of machine learning classifiers by 100x.
Perspecta Labs and Raytheon BBN were working on FastNICs as of fiscal year 2020.

Force Application and Launch from Continental United States (FALCON): a research effort within TTO to develop a small satellite launch vehicle.
(
2008)
This vehicle is under development by AirLaunch LLC.

Gamma Ray Inspection Technology (GRIT) program:
research and develop high-intensity, tunable, and narrow-bandwidth gamma ray production in compact, transportable form.
This technology can be utilized for discovering smuggled nuclear material in cargo via new inspection techniques, and enabling new medical diagnostics and therapies.
RadiaBeam Technologies LLC was working on a phase 1 of the program, Laser-Compton approach, in fiscal year 2020.

Glide Breaker program: technology for an advanced interceptor capable of engaging maneuvering hypersonic vehicles or missiles in the upper atmosphere.
Northrop Grumman and Aerojet Rocketdyne were working on this program as of fiscal year 2020.

Gremlins: Air-launched and recoverable UAVs with distributed capabilities to provide low-cost flexibility over expensive multirole platforms.

Ground X-Vehicle Technology
High Energy Liquid Laser Area Defense System
High Productivity Computing Systems
HIVE (Hierarchical Identify Verify Exploit)
CPU architecture.
(
2017)
Hydra: Undersea network of mobile unmanned sensors.
(
2013)
hypersonic boost glide systems research
Insect Allies (2017–2021)
Integrated Sensor is Structure
Intelligent Integration of Information (I3) in SISTO, 1994–2000 – supported database research and with ARPA CISTO and NASA funded the NSF Digital Library program, that led.
a.o.
to Google.

Joint All-Domain Warfighting Software (JAWS): software suite featuring automation and predictive analytics for battle management and command & control with tactical coordination for capture (“target custody”) and kill missions.
Systems & Technology Research of Woburn, Massachusetts, is working on this project, with an expected completion date of March 2022.
Raytheon is also working on this project, with an expected completion date of April 2022.

Lasers for Universal Microscale Optical Systems (LUMOS): integrate heterogeneous materials to bring high performance lasers and amplifiers to manufacturable photonics platforms.
As of fiscal year 2020, the Research Foundation for the State University of New York (SUNY) was working to enable “on-chip optical gain” to integrated photonics platforms, and enable complete photonics functionality “on a single substrate for disruptive optical microsystems.”

Manta Ray extra-large unmanned underwater vehicle.
(
2020)
Media Forensics (MediFor): A project aimed at automatically spotting digital manipulation in images and videos, including Deepfakes.
(
2018)
MEMS Exchange:
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
Implementation Environment
Millimeter-wave GaN Maturation (MGM) program: develop new GaN transistor technology to attain high-speed and large voltage swing at the same time.
HRL Laboratories LLC, a joint venture between Boeing and General Motors, is working on phase 2 as of fiscal year 2020.

Modular Optical Aperture Building Blocks (MOABB) program:
design optical satellite components (e.g. telescope, bulk lasers with mechanical beam-steering, detectors, electronics) in a single device.
Create a wafer-scale system that is one hundred times smaller and lighter than existing systems and can steer the optical beam far faster than mechanical components.
Research and design electronic-photonic unit cells that can be tiled together to form large-scale planar apertures (up to 10 centimeters in diameter) that can run at 100 watts of optical power.
The overall goals of such technology are (1) rapid 3D scanning using devices smaller than a cell-phone camera; (2) high-speed laser communications without mechanical steering; (3) and foliage-penetrating perimeter sensing, remote wind sensing, and long-range 3-D mapping.
As of fiscal year 2020, Analog Photonics LLC of Boston, Massachusetts, was working on phase 3 of the program and is expected to finish by May 2022.

Multi-
Azimuth Defense Fast Intercept Round Engagement System (MAD-FIRES) program:
develop technologies that combine advantages of a missile (guidance, precision, accuracy) with advantages of a bullet (speed, rapid-fire, large ammunition capacity) to be used on a medium-caliber guided projectile in defending ships.
Raytheon is currently working on MAD-FIRES phase 3 (
enhance seeker performance, and develop a functional demonstration illuminator and engagement manager to engage and defeat a representative surrogate target) and is expected to be finished by November 2022.

Near Zero Power RF and Sensor Operations (N-ZERO)
: Reducing or eliminating the standby power unattended ground sensors consume.
(
2015)
Neural implants for soldiers.
(
2014)
Novel, nonsurgical, bi-directional brain-computer interface with high spacio-temporal resolution and low latency for potential human use.

Operational Fires (OpFires): developing a new mobile ground-launched booster that helps hypersonic boost glide weapons penetrate enemy air defenses.
As of 17 July 2020, Lockheed Martin was working on phase 3 of the program (develop propulsion components for the missile’s Stage 2 section) to be completed by January 2022.

Persistent Close Air Support
PREventing EMerging Pathogenic Threats (PREEMPT)
Protein Design:
Processes
QuASAR:
Quantum Assisted Sensing and Readout
QuBE:
Quantum Effects in Biological Environments
QUEST:
Quantum Entanglement Science and Technology
Quiness:
Macroscopic Quantum Communications
QUIST:
Quantum Information Science and Technology
RADICS:
Rapid Attack Detection, Isolation and Characterization Systems
Rational Integrated Design of Energetics (RIDE):
developing tools that speed up and facilitate energetics research.

Robotic Servicing of Geosynchronous Satellites program: a telerobotic and autonomous robotic satellite-servicing project, conceived in 2017, and planned for launch no earlier than the 2020s.

Remote-controlled insects
SafeGenes: a synthetic biology project to program "undo" sequences into gene editing programs (2016)
Sea Train develop and demonstrate ways to overcome range limitations in medium unmanned surface vessels by exploiting wave-making resistance reductions.
Applied Physical Sciences Corp. of Groton, Connecticut, is undertaking Phase 1 of the Sea Train program, with an expected completion date of March 2022.

Secure Advanced Framework for Simulation & Modeling (SAFE-SiM) program: build a rapid modeling and simulation environment to enable quick analysis in support of senior-level decision-making.
As of fiscal year 2020, Radiance Technologies and L3Harris were working on portions of the program, with expected completion in August and September 2021, respectively.

Securing Information for Encrypted Verification and Evaluation (SIEVE) program:
use zero knowledge proofs to enable the verification of capabilities for the US military “without revealing the sensitive details associated with those capabilities."
Galois Inc. of Portland, Oregon, and Stealth Software Technologies of Los Angeles, California, are currently working on the SIEVE program, with a projected completion date of May 2024.

Satellite Remote Listening System: a satellite mounted system that can eavesdrop on a targeted area on the surface of the planet in coordination with satellite cameras.
This project is in its infant stage.

Semantic Forensics (SemaFor) program:
develop technologies to automatically detect, attribute, and characterize falsified media (e.g., text, audio, image, video) to defend against automated disinformation.
SRI International of Menlo Park, California, and Kitware Inc. of Clifton, New York, are working on the SemaFor program, with an expected completion date of July 2024.

Sensor plants:
DARPA "is working on a plan to use plants to gather intelligence information" through DARPA's Advanced Plant Technologies (APT) program, which aims to control the physiology of plants in order to detect chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear threats.
(
2017)
SIGMA:
A network of radiological detection devices the size of smart phones that can detect small amounts of radioactive materials.
The devices are paired with larger detector devices along major roads and bridges.
(
2016)
SIGMA+ program: by building on concepts theorized in the SIGMA program, develop new sensors and analytics to detect small traces of explosives and chemical and biological weaponry throughout any given large metropolitan area.

SoSITE: System of Systems Integration Technology and Experimentation: Combinations of aircraft, weapons, sensors, and mission systems that distribute air warfare capabilities across a large number of interoperable manned and unmanned platforms.
(
2015)
SSITH:
System Security Integrated Through Hardware and Firmware - secure
hardware platform (2017); basis for open-source, hack-proof voting system project and 2019 system prototype contract
SXCT:
Squad X Core Technologies: Digitized, integrated technologies that improve infantry squads' awareness, precision, and influence.
(
2015)
SyNAPSE:
Systems of Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics
Tactical Boost Glide (TBG): Air-launched hypersonic boost glide missile.
(
2016)
Tactically Exploited Reconnaissance Node: Ship-based long-range ISR UAV.
(
2014)
TransApps (Transformative Applications), rapid development and fielding of secure mobile apps in the battlefield
UAVForge (2011)
ULTRA-Vis (Urban Leader Tactical Response, Awareness and Visualization): Heads-up display for individual soldiers.
(
2014)
underwater network, heterogeneous: develop concepts and reconfigurable architecture, leveraging advancement in undersea communications and autonomous ocean systems, to demonstrate utility at sea.
Raytheon BBN is currently working on this program, with work expected through 4 May 2021, though if the government exercises all options on the contract then work will continue through 4 February 2024.

Upward Falling Payloads:
Payloads stored on the ocean floor that can be activated and retrieved when needed.
(
2014)
Urban Reconnaissance through Supervised Autonomy (URSA) program: develop technology for use in cities to enable autonomous systems that U.S. infantry and ground forces operate to detect and identify enemies before U.S. troops come across them.
Program will factor in algorithms, multiple sensors, and scientific knowledge about human behavior to determine subtle differences between hostiles and innocent civilians.
Soar Technology Inc. of Ann Arbor, Michigan, is currently working on pertinent vehicle autonomy technology, with work expected completed by March 2022.

VTOL X-Plane (2013)
Warrior Web:
Soft exosuit to alleviate musculoskeletal stress on soldiers when carrying heavy loads.
(
2014)
XDATA:
Processing and analyzing vast amounts of information.
(
2012)


===
Past or transitioned projects ===


==
Notable fiction ==
DARPA is well known as a high-tech government agency, and as such has many appearances in popular fiction.

Some realistic references to DARPA in fiction are as "ARPA" in Tom Swift and the Visitor from Planet X (DARPA consults on a technical threat), in episodes of television program
The West Wing (the ARPA-DARPA distinction), the television program Numb3rs, and the Netflix film Spectral.
==
See also ==
Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center (NWC)
Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E)
Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC)
Homeland Security Advanced Research Projects Agency (HSARPA)
Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA)
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL or LBL)
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL)
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL)
Marine Corps Combat Development Command (MCCDC)
Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake (NAWS)
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL)
Office of Naval Research (ONR)
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL)
Sandia National Laboratories (SNL)
United States Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center (ARDEC)
United States Army Research, Development and Engineering
Command (RDECOM)
United States Army Research Laboratory (ARL)
United States Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL)


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
The Advanced Research Projects Agency, 1958-1974, Barber Associates, December 1975.

DARPA Technical Accomplishments: 1958-1990, Volumes 1–3, Richard H. Van Atta, Sidney G. Reed, Seymour J. Deitchman, et al.,
Institute for Defense Analyses, January 1990 - March 1991.

Belfiore, Michael (2009).
The Department of Mad Scientists:
How DARPA Is Remaking Our World, from the Internet to Artificial Limbs.
Harper.
ISBN 9780061577932.
OCLC 310399265.
William Saletan writes of Belfiore's book that "His tone is reverential and at times breathless, but he captures the agency's essential virtues: boldness, creativity, agility, practicality and speed."
(
Saletan, William (December 24, 2009). "
The Body Electric".
The New York Times.)

Castell, Manuel, The Network Society:
A Cross-cultural Perspective, Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, Cheltenham, UK, 2004.

Jacobsen, Annie, The Pentagon's Brain:
An Uncensored History of DARPA, America's Top-Secret Military Research Agency.
Little, Brown and Company.
2015.
ISBN 978-0316371766.
OCLC 900012161.

Sargent, John F.,
Jr. (February 21, 2018).
Defense Science and Technology Funding (PDF).
Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
Retrieved 26 March 2018.

Sedgwick, John (August 1991).
"
The Men from DARPA".
Playboy.
Vol.
3
no.
8.
pp.
108–109, 122, 154–156.

Weinberger, Sharon, The Imagineers of War:
The Untold Story of DARPA, the Pentagon Agency that Changed the World, New York, Alfred A. Knopf, 2017, ISBN 9780385351799.

==
External links ==
DARPA Home Page
Ongoing Research Programs
Declassified DARPA documents, OSD & Joint Staff FOIA Service
DARPA FY2015 Research Program
Perseus or CVS401 Perseus (named after the Greek hero Perseus) is a stealth hypersonic cruise missile concept study being undertaken by MBDA in consultation with the Royal Navy and French Navy.
The concept study was first unveiled at the 2011 Paris Air Show.
CVS401 Perseus is primarily a supersonic surface-launched and submarine-launched cruise missile concept built around an advanced, agile and stealthy airframe.

A joint Anglo-French project has been launched to develop the missile system formally called Future Cruise/Anti-Ship Weapon (FC/ASW) with the aim of replacing the British Harpoon and French Exocet by 2030.Perseus was just a concept study by 10 engineers working on the design for six months.

==
Characteristics ==
MBDA describes the missile concept as a "unique multi-role, multi-platform weapon system" to be integrated on all major weapon platforms such as; warships, submarines, aircraft and land-based platforms.
The stealthy Perseus missile concept is planned to have capabilities similar to Brahmos, with a range of 300 km reaching speeds of Mach 5.
It is powered by a ramjet motor.
The missile is 5 metres in length and weighs around 800 kg, with a payload comprising one 200 kg main and two 50 kg subsidiary warheads that can either directly contribute to the overall terminal or be ejected from lateral bays before the missile reaches its target, in effect acting as submunitions.
This unique feature allows a single Perseus to either strike several targets in the same general area or to strike a single large target (such as an aircraft carrier) in several different areas simultaneously, with the aim of maximising damage.

"In this case, a linear attack pattern could be selected, munitions striking the forward, centre and aft sections simultaneously.
If a unitary blast is required, then the effectors remain on board the parent missile to add their blast effect to the central warhead.
"Two
types of attack profiles are envisaged: a high-altitude approach, for engaging land based targets; and a sea-skimming low-altitude approach terminating in a 'pop-up' engagement when dealing with surface threats like enemy warships.
The missiles "skimming the sea at wave top" followed by a pop-up maneuver would only allow an estimated 3 second response time for enemy warships.
The missiles concept sensor suite includes;

A multi-mode active e-scan radar with synthetic aperture radar and Doppler beam sharpening.

A laser radar (lidar) for terminal phase imaging and target recognition.
The missile also features a "semi-active laser guidance capability."
MBDA believes that this guidance method will remain important for time-sensitive targeting for many years to come.
Satellite datalink is to be incorporated for in-flight re-targeting, using thin-profile, low-observable active antenna arrays.
"The
missile will be VLS launched and is compatible with the American Mark 41 Vertical Launching System (to be fitted on the Royal Navy's Type 26 frigates) and the French A70 Sylver VLS (currently fitted on the FREMM of the French navy).

==
Potential operators ==
 FranceFrench Air Force
French Navy
United KingdomRoyal Air Force
Royal NavyIn the 2016 UK–France Security Summit
, the two parties pledged to work on a "joint concept phase for the FC/ASW programme to identify solutions for replacement of the Scalp/Storm Shadow missiles for both countries, Harpoon for the UK and Exocet for France."
In the 2018 United Kingdom-France Summit, the FC/ASW programme was further affirmed.

== See also ==
P-800 Oniks – a Russian supersonic anti-ship missile of the same range class.

BrahMos – an Indo-Russian supersonic anti-ship missile derived from the P-800.
YJ-12 – a Chinese supersonic anti-ship missile of the same range class.

==
References ==
Notes


==
External links ==
Video - MBDA Concept Vision 2011
"Perseus"
This is a list of Active Royal Navy weapon systems.

==
Guns ==


===
4.5-inch
Mark 8 naval gun ===
The 4.5-inch (114 mm)
Mark 8 gun can be found on all the Royal Navy's frigates and destroyers and was used from the Falklands War to the War in Iraq.
The gun can fire up to 24 high explosive shells per minute, each weighing more than 40 kilograms (88 lb), at targets more than 12 miles (19 km)
away – this can be extended to nearly 18 miles (29 km)
if special extended-range shells are used.

The main purpose of the gun is naval gunfire support – artillery bombardment of shore targets.
In this role the gun is capable of firing the equivalent of a six-gun shore battery.
It can still be used as an anti-ship weapon.

===
30 mm DS30M Mark 2 naval gun ===
The 30 mm DS30M Mark 2 is a 30-millimetre (1.2 in) automated naval gun system designed to defend ships from fast inshore attack craft armed with short-range weaponry.
The DS30M Mark 2 system consists of a 30 mm Mark 44 Bushmaster II cannon on a fully automated mount with an off-mount electro-optical director (EOD).
The system is fitted to all 13 Type 23 frigates, all 6 Type 45 destroyers, batch 2 River-class offshore patrol vessels (OPVs) and several Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) ships when they have the weapons package added.
In the future the system will be fitted to the aircraft carriers HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales.

===
Oerlikon 20 mm cannon ===
The Oerlikon 20 mm (0.79 in) cannon can be found on the Albion-class landing platform docks, the batch 1 River-class OPVs, the Echo-class survey ships, the primary casualty receiving ship RFA Argus and both the Fort Victoria and Fort Rosalie-class replenishment oilers.

===
Browning .50-calibre
(12.7 mm) heavy machine gun ===
The Browning .50-calibre
heavy machine gun can be found fitted to ships, the first of which was HMS Atherstone in 2014, and in 2021 it was reported that HMS Lancaster had also been fitted with them.

=== 7.62 mm miniguns ===
All Royal Navy ships carry miniguns for close in defence.

=== 7.62 mm General Purpose Machine Gun (GPMG) ===
GPMGs are used for close in defence.

==
Close-in weapon systems ==


===
Phalanx 20 mm ===
The Phalanx Close-in Weapon System (CIWS) is an anti-ship missile defence system.
It is fitted to HMS Albion, the Type 45 destroyers as well as the Bay-class landing ships and Wave and Fort Victoria-class replenishment oilers in the RFA.
It is also currently in the designs for the new Type 26 frigate.
During Operation Telic, Phalanx guns were removed from ships and were crewed by RN personnel based at Basra airport, as part of the Centurion C-RAM system.
Phalanx is now the only CIWS fitted to Royal Navy ships following the decommissioning of HMS Invincible, HMS Illustrious and the Type 22 frigates which were equipped with Goalkeeper.
The last active Goalkeeper system was removed from HMS Bulwark when she entered extended readiness in 2016.

==
Torpedoes ==


=== Spearfish torpedo ===
The Spearfish torpedo is the Royal Navy's heavyweight torpedo, weighing nearly 2 metric tons (2.0 long tons; 2.2 short tons), which is carried by both the attack submarines and ballistic missile submarines.
It has a range of more than 30 mi (48 km) with a speed in excess of 92 miles per hour (148 km/h) and can be used either against other submarines or ships of any size.
It carries a 300 kg (660 lb) explosive charge and is guided either by its in-built sonar or via a copper-cadmium wire.
The Spearfish is undergoing a major upgrade program which will provide sophisticated advances in its homing, warheads, tactical and fueling systems, as well an upgraded guidance link.

===
Sting Ray torpedo ===
The Sting Ray torpedo is the Royal Navy's lightweight torpedo which is designed to be carried by the anti-submarine helicopters AgustaWestland Merlin and Lynx Wildcat.
It has a range of around 5 mi (8.0 km) with a speed of more than 52 mph (84 km/h) and is designed to be used predominantly against submarines.
It carries a 45 kg (99 lb) explosive charge which is powerful enough to punch through the double hulls of modern submarines.
It is also integrated on board the Type 23 frigates, deployed by two twin torpedo launchers.

==
Depth charges ==
The Mk11 or Mk 11
Depth Charge is a depth charge used by Lynx Wildcat or Merlin Mk2 helicopters to attack enemy submarines.

==
Mine disposal system ==


===
Seafox ===
The Seafox Mine Disposal System is an unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) used by both the Sandown and Hunt-class minehunters to counter naval mines.
The unit incorporates a remotely controlled surveillance system in order to identify a target, guided from the parent ship via fibre optic cables.
Once a mine has been identified, an expendable autonomous or remote guided unit is guided to the target and detonates a shaped charge to destroy the mine.
Four independent reversible motors and a hover thruster provide high manoeuvrability, allowing for exact placement prior to charge detonation.
The Seafox is highly capable unit that seen action with the Royal Navy in recent conflicts clearing coastal waters in both Iraq and Libya.

==
Anti-aircraft and anti-missile missiles ==


===
Sea Ceptor ===
The Sea Ceptor missile is currently being integrated onto the Type 23 frigate fleet, as a replacement to the Sea Wolf missile.
It has a range of <1 – 25+ km and is capable of reaching mach 3.
Sea Ceptor will also equip the future Type 26 frigate and Type 31 frigate.
MBDA claim that CAMM has a "wide target set", including the capability to engage small naval vessels, which would give the missile a limited surface-to-surface role.
A Royal Navy officer of the Type 23 frigate HMS Westminster stated: "Westminster managed to explore the real potential of the system during her training and to say it is a real game changer is an understatement.
Unlike its predecessor, the system is capable of defending ships other than Westminster herself.
Whether it’s engaging multiple air threats or fast incoming attack craft, Sea Ceptor represents a massive capability upgrade for the Type 23 frigate."
===
Sea Viper ===
The Sea Viper is the main weapon of the Type 45 destroyers and provides all-round defence for an entire naval task group against all aerial threats at some 70 mi (110 km) away.
It races towards its target at speeds in excess of mach 4 (over 3,000 mph, 4,800 km/h) using a series of tiny jets to manoeuvre, carrying out sharp turns.

The Principle Anti-Air Missile System on the Type 45 destroyers, of which Sea Viper is a principal component, comprises the SAMPSON radar, a Combat Management System, S1850M long-range radar, the Sylver vertical launching system and Aster 15 (20 mi, 32 km) and Aster 30 (75 mi, 121 km) missiles, it is these Aster missiles which hold the name Sea Viper.

== Anti-ship missiles ==


===
Harpoon ===
The Harpoon anti-ship missile is fitted to all Type 23 frigates and three Type 45 destroyers in a 2×4 canister configuration.
Another two destroyers are fitted for but not with the missiles.
The missile is a capable of striking at targets more than 80 miles (130 km) away and is also used by many other NATO navies.
The Harpoon was due to go out of service by the end of 2018.
However, this has subsequently been revised to at least 2023.

===
Martlet ===
The Martlet is a lightweight air-to-surface and surface-to-surface missile under development by Thales Air Defence for the United Kingdom.
It is planned to equip the AgustaWestland AW159 Wildcat of the Fleet Air Arm with the Martlet in the near future.

The Martlet has also been tested on the Type 23 frigate, using a launcher mounted on the side of the 30 mm cannon, as a relatively inexpensive missile to use against small craft and unmanned aerial vehicles.

===
Sea Venom ===
The Sea Venom is a helicopter-launched lightweight anti-ship missile developed by MBDA to replace the Sea Skua.
It will be fitted to the Fleet Air Arm's Wildcat HMA2 helicopters from 2022.
The missile weighs 110 kg (240 lb) and has a warhead of 30 kg (66 lb).
It is optimized to attack fast inshore attack craft (FIAC), however it can also damage targets up to corvette size.

==
Land attack missiles ==


===
Tomahawk missile ===
The Tomahawk missile, also known as TLAM (Tomahawk Land Attack Cruise Missile), allows the Navy's submarines to strike at targets on land accurately.
The missile has been in use with the RN since the late 1990s and has been used in the Kosovo conflict and in the campaigns in the War in Afghanistan and Iraq.
It is fired from a boat's torpedo tubes.
Once it reaches the surface, a booster rocket ignites to propel the missile skywards.
The Tomahawk then heads for its target at 550 mph (890 km/h), delivering a 1,000 lb (450 kg) explosive warhead.

The Tomahawk IV is the latest version of the missile.
It has a longer range than its predecessors and can be directed at a new target in-flight, and can also beam back images of the battlefield.
In British service it is fitted to all Trafalgar and Astute-class submarines.
It is currently planned to be phased out of service in the United States Navy, with no more weapons to be produced after 2015, meaning that it may no longer be an option for the Royal Navy from around the end of the decade.
The UK last bought 65 Tomahawk Land Attack Missiles in July 2014.

===
Trident II D5 ballistic missile ===
The Trident nuclear missile is Britain's nuclear deterrent.
Carried only by the four Vanguard-class submarines, it is ejected from their silos by high-pressure gas before the rockets fire when the missile reaches the surface.
At its fastest, the missile travels at over 13,000 mph (21,000 km/h).
Each Vanguard boat has 16 missile tubes, and each missile has the ability to deliver 8 warheads.
Each individual warhead is about eight times more powerful than the nuclear bomb used at Hiroshima in World War II.

==
See also ==
List of active Royal Navy ships
List of Royal Navy equipment


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Royal Navy (royalnavy.mod.uk)
Royal Navy — The Equipment — Ships (royalnavy.mod.uk)
A cruise missile submarine is a submarine that carries and launches cruise missiles (SLCMs and anti-ship missiles) as its primary armament.
Missiles greatly enhance a vessel's ability to attack surface combatants and strike land targets, and although torpedoes are a more stealthy option, missiles give a much longer stand-off range, as well as the ability to engage multiple targets on different headings at the same time.
Many cruise missile submarines retain the capability to deploy nuclear warheads on their missiles, but they are considered distinct from ballistic missile submarines due to the substantial differences between the two weapons systems' characteristics.

Originally early designs of cruise missile submarines had to surface to launch their missiles, while later designs could do so underwater via dedicated vertical launching system (VLS) tubes.
Many modern attack submarines can launch cruise missiles (and dedicated anti-ship missiles) from their torpedo tubes while some designs also incorporate a small number of VLS canisters, giving some significant overlap between cruise missile submarines and traditional attack submarines.
Nonetheless, vessels classified as attack submarines still use torpedoes as their main armament and have a more multi-role mission profile due to their greater speed and maneuverability, in contrast to cruise missile submarines which are typically larger slower boats focused on the long distance surface strike role.

The United States Navy's hull classification symbols for cruise missile submarines are SSG and SSGN – the SS denotes submarine, the G denotes guided missile, and the N denotes that the submarine is nuclear-powered.

==
U.S. Navy ==
The U.S. Navy's first cruise missile submarines were developed in the early 1950s to carry the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile.
The first of these was a converted World War II era Gato-class submarine, USS Tunny, which was fitted with a hangar capable of carrying a pair of Regulus missiles.
Tunny was used as a test-bed for developing techniques of use for the missile system, before a second boat, USS Barbero was subsequently converted.
From 1957, these two boats undertook the first nuclear deterrent patrols.
Subsequently, two larger diesel submarines of the Grayback-class were purpose built for the carriage of the Regulus missile, with each capable of accommodating up to four missiles, while a further boat, the nuclear-powered USS Halibut, could carry up to five missiles.
Between September 1959 and July 1964, the five Regulus missile boats undertook deterrent patrols in the Pacific Ocean, in concert with the newly commissioned George Washington-class ballistic missile submarines (SSBN) in the Atlantic, until sufficient SSBNs were in service to replace them.

From 2002 to 2008, the U.S. Navy modified the four oldest Ohio-class submarines: Ohio, Michigan, Florida, and Georgia into SSGNs.
The conversion was achieved by installing vertical launching systems (VLS) in a multiple all-up-round canister (MAC) configuration in 22 of the 24 missile tubes, replacing one Trident missile with 7 smaller Tomahawk cruise missiles.
The 2 remaining tubes were converted to lockout chambers for use by special forces personnel.
This gave each converted submarine the capability to carry up to 154 Tomahawks.
The large diameter tubes can also be modified to carry and launch other payloads, such as UAVs or UUVs although these capabilities have not yet been fully implemented.
In addition to generating a significant increase in stand-off strike capabilities, this conversion also counts as an arms reduction towards the START II treaty, because it reduces the number of nuclear weapons that are forward-deployed.
USS Florida (SSGN-728) launched cruise missiles against Libyan targets as part of Operation Odyssey Dawn in March 2011.

==
Soviet Navy/Russian Navy ==
The Soviet Navy (and its successor, the Russian Navy) has (is operating) operated the following classes of cruise missile submarine
(these are NATO reporting names):
Whiskey-class (SSG; Whiskey Single Cylinder, Whiskey Twin Cylinder, Whiskey Long Bin variants) –
out of service.

Juliett-class (SSG) –
out of service.

Echo-class (SSGN;
Echo I and Echo II variants) – out of service.

Papa-class (SSGN) –
out of service.

Charlie-class (SSGN) –
out of service.

Oscar-class (SSGN) –
these carry the P-700 Granit, P-800 Oniks long range anti-ship missile or Kalibr long range land-attack missile.

Yasen-class (SSGN) –
these carry the P-800 Oniks long range anti-ship missile, the Kalibr long range land-attack missile or Kh-101 missile.
The Whiskey variants and Echo
I cruise missile submarines deployed with a nuclear land attack version of the P-5 Pyatyorka (SS-N-3 Shaddock) from the late 1950s to 1964, concurrently with the US Regulus force, until the strategic land attack mission was transferred entirely to the SSBN force.
Along with the Julietts and Echo IIs, these continued as SSGs or SSGNs with an antiship variant of the P-5 until circa 1990.
The Echo Is were an exception; they could not accommodate the antiship targeting radar and served as SSNs after the land attack missiles were withdrawn.

== See also ==
List of submarine classes in service
List of submarine operators
List of NATO reporting names for guided missile submarines
Missile boat (surface ship)
Transporter erector launcher (land vehicle)


==
References ==
Gardiner, Robert; Chumbley, Stephen (1995).
Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships 1947–1995.
London:
Conway Maritime Press.
ISBN 1-55750-132-7.
==
External links ==
US Stingray style sub motherships test missiles.
The Register, 31 May 2007
In aerodynamics, a hypersonic speed is one that greatly exceeds the speed of sound, often stated as starting at speeds of Mach 5 and above.
The precise Mach number at which a craft can be said to be flying at hypersonic speed varies, since individual physical changes in the airflow (like molecular dissociation and ionization) occur at different speeds; these effects collectively become important around Mach 5-10.
The hypersonic regime can also be alternatively defined as speeds where specific heat capacity changes with the temperature of the flow as kinetic energy of the moving object is converted into heat.

==
Characteristics of flow ==
While the definition of hypersonic flow can be quite vague and is generally debatable (especially due to the absence of discontinuity between supersonic and hypersonic flows), a hypersonic flow may be characterized by certain physical phenomena that can no longer be analytically discounted as in supersonic flow.
The peculiarity in hypersonic flows are as follows:
Shock layer
Aerodynamic heating
Entropy layer
Real gas effects
Low density effects
Independence of aerodynamic coefficients with Mach number.
===
Small shock stand-off distance ===
As a body's Mach number increases, the density behind a bow shock generated by the body also increases, which corresponds to a decrease in volume behind the shock due to conservation of mass.
Consequently, the distance between the bow shock and the body decreases at higher Mach numbers.

===
Entropy layer ===
As Mach numbers increase, the entropy change across the shock also increases, which results in a strong entropy gradient and highly vortical flow that mixes with the boundary layer.
===
Viscous interaction ===
A portion of the large kinetic energy associated with flow at high Mach numbers transforms into internal energy in the fluid due to viscous effects.
The increase in internal energy is realized as an increase in temperature.
Since the pressure gradient normal to the flow within a boundary layer is approximately zero for low to moderate hypersonic Mach numbers, the increase of temperature through the boundary layer coincides with a decrease in density.
This causes the bottom of the boundary layer to expand, so that the boundary layer over the body grows thicker and can often merge with the shock wave near the body leading edge.
=== High-temperature flow ===
High temperatures due to a manifestation of viscous dissipation cause non-equilibrium chemical flow properties such as vibrational excitation and dissociation and ionization of molecules resulting in convective and radiative heat-flux.

==
Classification of Mach regimes ==
Although "subsonic" and "supersonic" usually refer to speeds below and above the local speed of sound respectively, aerodynamicists often use these terms to refer to particular ranges of Mach values.
This occurs because a "transonic regime" exists around M=1 where approximations of the Navier–Stokes equations used for subsonic design no longer apply, partly because the flow locally exceeds M=1 even when the freestream Mach number is below this value.

The "supersonic regime" usually refers to the set of Mach numbers for which linearised theory may be used; for example, where the (air) flow is not chemically reacting and where heat transfer between air and vehicle may be reasonably neglected in calculations.
Generally, NASA defines "high" hypersonic as any Mach number from 10 to 25, and re-entry speeds as anything greater than Mach 25.
Among the aircraft operating in this regime are the Space Shuttle and (theoretically) various developing spaceplanes.

In the following table, the "regimes" or "ranges of Mach values" are referenced instead of the usual meanings of "subsonic" and "supersonic".
==
Similarity parameters ==
The categorization of airflow relies on a number of similarity parameters, which allow the simplification of a nearly infinite number of test cases into groups of similarity.
For transonic and compressible flow, the Mach and Reynolds numbers alone allow good categorization of many flow cases.

Hypersonic flows, however, require other similarity parameters.
First, the analytic equations for the oblique shock angle become nearly independent of Mach number at high (~>10) Mach numbers.
Second, the formation of strong shocks around aerodynamic bodies means that the freestream Reynolds number is less useful as an estimate of the behavior of the boundary layer over a body (although it is still important).
Finally, the increased temperature of hypersonic flows mean that real gas effects become important.
For this reason, research in hypersonics is often referred to as aerothermodynamics, rather than aerodynamics.

The introduction of real gas effects means that more variables are required to describe the full state of a gas.
Whereas a stationary gas can be described by three variables (pressure, temperature, adiabatic index), and a moving gas by four (flow velocity), a hot gas in chemical equilibrium also requires state equations for the chemical components of the gas, and a gas in nonequilibrium solves those state equations using time as an extra variable.
This means that for a nonequilibrium flow, something between 10 and 100 variables may be required to describe the state of the gas at any given time.
Additionally, rarefied hypersonic flows (usually defined as those with a Knudsen number above 0.1) do not follow the Navier–Stokes equations.

Hypersonic flows are typically categorized by their total energy, expressed as total enthalpy (MJ/kg), total pressure (kPa-MPa), stagnation pressure (kPa-MPa), stagnation temperature (K), or flow velocity (km/s).

Wallace D. Hayes developed a similarity parameter, similar to the Whitcomb area rule, which allowed similar configurations to be compared.
==
Regimes ==
Hypersonic flow can be approximately separated into a number of regimes.
The selection of these regimes is rough, due to the blurring of the boundaries where a particular effect can be found.

===
Perfect gas ===
In this regime, the gas can be regarded as an ideal gas.
Flow in this regime is still Mach number dependent.
Simulations start to depend on the use of a constant-temperature wall, rather than the adiabatic wall typically used at lower speeds.
The lower border of this region is around Mach 5, where ramjets become inefficient, and the upper border around Mach 10-12.

=== Two-temperature ideal gas ===
This is a subset of the perfect gas regime, where the gas can be considered chemically perfect, but the rotational and vibrational temperatures of the gas must be considered separately, leading to two temperature models.
See particularly the modeling of supersonic nozzles, where vibrational freezing becomes important.
===
Dissociated gas ===
In this regime, diatomic or polyatomic gases (the gases found in most atmospheres) begin to dissociate as they come into contact with the bow shock generated by the body.
Surface catalysis plays a role in the calculation of surface heating, meaning that the type of surface material also has an effect on the flow.
The lower border of this regime is where any component of a gas mixture first begins to dissociate in the stagnation point of a flow (which for nitrogen is around 2000 K).
At the upper border of this regime, the effects of ionization start to have an effect on the flow.

===
Ionized gas ===
In this regime the ionized electron population of the stagnated flow becomes significant, and the electrons must be modeled separately.
Often the electron temperature is handled separately from the temperature of the remaining gas components.
This region occurs for freestream flow velocities around 3-4 km/s.
Gases in this region are modeled as non-radiating plasmas.

===
Radiation-dominated regime ===
Above around 12 km/s, the heat transfer to a vehicle changes from being conductively dominated to radiatively dominated.
The modeling of gases in this regime is split into two classes:
Optically thin:
where the gas does not re-absorb radiation emitted from other parts of the gas
Optically thick: where the radiation must be considered a separate source of energy.
The modeling of optically thick gases is extremely difficult, since, due to the calculation of the radiation at each point, the computation load theoretically expands exponentially as the number of points considered increases.

== See also ==
EnginesRocket engine
Ramjet
Scramjet
Reaction Engines SABRE, LAPCAT (design studies)MissilesShaurya (missile)
Ballistic Missile -  India (Entered Production)
BrahMos-II Cruise
Missile -   (Under Development)
9K720
Iskander Short-range ballistic missile  Russia
(Currently In Service)
3M22 Zircon Anti-ship hypersonic cruise missile  (in production)
R-37 (missile) Hypersonic air-to-air missile  (in service)
Kh-47M2
Kinzhal Hypersonic air-launched ballistic missile
(in service)Other flow regimesSubsonic flight
Transonic
Supersonic speed


==
References ==


==
External links ==
NASA's Guide to Hypersonics
Hypersonics Group at Imperial College
University of Queensland Centre for Hypersonics
High Speed Flow Group at University of New South Wales
Hypersonics Group at the University of Oxford
The ArcLight program was a missile development program of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency with the goal of equipping ships like Aegis cruisers with a weapon system capable of striking targets nearly anywhere on the globe, thereby increasing the power of surface ships to a level comparable to that of ballistic missile-equipped submarines.
According to DARPA, the ArcLight program was to develop a high-tech missile based on the booster stack of the current RIM-161 Standard Missile 3 and equipped with a Hypersonic glide vehicle capable of carrying a 100-200 lb (45-90 kg) warhead.
The configuration would allow ships carrying the ArcLight missile to strike targets 2,300 miles (3,700 km) away from the launch point.
The missile would replace the aging Tomahawk (missile) and could be fired out of the standard vertical launchers available on many surface ships.
Additionally, the ArcLight missile would be capable of launch from air and submarine assets capable of carrying the BGM-109.Dr.
Arthur Mabbett was the program manager of the DARPA project, which was to develop and test two different missile designs.
In DARPA's FY 2012 budget, the ArcLight missile program was terminated.

The reason was that more development work was needed and they could not yet reach a high enough lift-to-drag ratio system from a non-fixed-wing vehicle.

2011 was spent reassessing technology needs, and no further funding was requested after that.

DARPA commented that ArcLight was not part of Prompt Global Strike and was meant as a theater-based system to work with other systems like the Tomahawk cruise missile.

== See also ==
Prompt Global Strike


=
= References ==
A projectile is any object thrown by the exertion of a force.
It can also be defined as an object launched into the space and allowed to move free under the influence of gravity and air resistance.
Although any object in motion through space (for example a thrown baseball, kicked football, fired bullet, thrown arrow, stone released from catapult) may be called projectiles, they are commonly found in warfare and sports.
Mathematical equations of motion are used to analyze projectile trajectories.

==
Motive force ==
Blowguns and pneumatic rifles use compressed gases, while most other guns and cannons utilize expanding gases liberated by sudden chemical reactions by propellants like smokeless powder.
Light-gas guns use a combination of these mechanisms.

Railguns utilize electromagnetic fields to provide a constant acceleration along the entire length of the device, greatly increasing the muzzle velocity.

Some projectiles provide propulsion during flight by means of a rocket engine or jet engine.
In military terminology, a rocket is unguided, while a missile is guided.
Note the two meanings of "rocket" (weapon and engine): an ICBM is a guided missile with a rocket engine.

An explosion, whether or not by a weapon, causes the debris to act as multiple high velocity projectiles.
An explosive weapon, or device may also be designed to produce many high velocity projectiles by the break-up of its casing, these are correctly termed fragments.

==
Delivery projectiles ==
Many projectiles, e.g. shells, may carry an explosive charge or another chemical or biological substance.
Aside from explosive payload, a projectile can be designed to cause special damage, e.g. fire (see also early thermal weapons), or poisoning (see also arrow poison).

==
Sport projectiles ==
In projectile motion the most important force applied to the ‘projectile’ is the propelling force, in this case the propelling forces are the muscles that act upon the ball to make it move, and the stronger the force applied, the more propelling force, which means the projectile (the ball) will travel farther.
See pitching, bowling.

==
Kinetic projectiles ==
A projectile that does not contain an explosive charge or any other kind of payload is termed a kinetic projectile, kinetic energy weapon, kinetic energy warhead, kinetic warhead, kinetic kill vehicle or kinetic penetrator.
Typical kinetic energy weapons are blunt projectiles such as rocks and round shots, pointed ones such as arrows, and somewhat pointed ones such as bullets.
Among projectiles that do not contain explosives are those launched from railguns, coilguns, and mass drivers, as well as kinetic energy penetrators.
All of these weapons work by attaining a high muzzle velocity, or initial velocity, generally up to hypervelocity, and collide with their targets, converting the kinetic energy associated with the relative velocity between the two objects into destructive shock waves and heat.
Other types of kinetic weapons are accelerated over time by a rocket engine, or by gravity.
In either case, it is this kinetic energy that destroys its target.

Some kinetic weapons for targeting objects in spaceflight are anti-satellite weapons and anti-ballistic missiles.
Since in order to reach an object in orbit it is necessary to attain an extremely high velocity, their released kinetic energy alone is enough to destroy their target; explosives are not necessary.
For example: the energy of TNT is 4.6 MJ/kg, and the energy of a kinetic kill vehicle with a closing speed of 10 km/s (22,000 mph) is 50 MJ/kg.
For comparison, 50 MJ is equivalent to the kinetic energy of a school bus weighing 5 metric tons, traveling at 509 km/h (316 mph; 141 m/s).
This saves costly weight and there is no detonation to be precisely timed.
This method, however, requires direct contact with the target, which requires a more accurate trajectory.
Some hit-to-kill warheads are additionally equipped with an explosive directional warhead to enhance the kill probability (e.g. Israeli Arrow missile or U.S. Patriot PAC-3).

With regard to anti-missile weapons, the Arrow missile and MIM-104
Patriot PAC-2 have explosives, while the Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI), Lightweight Exo-Atmospheric Projectile (LEAP, used in Aegis BMDS), and THAAD do not (see Missile Defense Agency).

A kinetic projectile can also be dropped from aircraft.
This is applied by replacing the explosives of a regular bomb with a non-explosive material (e.g. concrete), for a precision hit with less collateral damage.
A typical bomb has a mass of 900 kg (2,000 lb) and a speed of impact of 800 km/h (500 mph).
It is also applied for training the act of dropping a bomb with explosives.
[
1]
This method has been used in Operation Iraqi Freedom and the subsequent military operations in Iraq by mating concrete-filled training bombs with JDAM GPS guidance kits, to attack vehicles and other relatively "soft" targets located too close to civilian structures for the use of conventional high explosive bombs.

A Prompt Global Strike may use a kinetic weapon.
A kinetic bombardment may involve a projectile dropped from Earth orbit.

A hypothetical kinetic weapon that travels at a significant fraction of the speed of light, usually found in science fiction, is termed a relativistic kill vehicle (RKV).

==
Wired projectiles ==
Some projectiles stay connected by a cable to the launch equipment after launching it:

for guidance: wire-guided missile (range up to 4,000 metres or 13,000 feet)
to administer an electric shock, as in the case of a Taser (range up to 10.6 metres or 35 feet); two projectiles are shot simultaneously, each with a cable.

to make a connection with the target, either to tow it towards the launcher, as with a whaling harpoon, or to draw the launcher to the target, as a grappling hook does.

Bolo shotgun ammunition
==
Typical projectile speeds ==


==
Equations of motion ==
An object projected at an angle to the horizontal has both the vertical and horizontal components of velocity.
The vertical component of the velocity on the y-axis is given as 
  
    
      
        
          V
          
            y
=
U
        sin
⁡
θ
      
    
    {\displaystyle V_{y}=U\sin \theta }
   while the horizontal component of the velocity is 
  
    
      
        
          V
x
          
        
        =
U
cos
⁡
θ
      
    
    {\displaystyle V_{x}=U\cos \theta }
  .
There are various calculations for projectiles at a specific angle
θ
      
    
    {\displaystyle
\theta }
  :
1.
Time to reach maximum height.
It is symbolized as (
  
    
      
        t
      
    
    {\displaystyle t}
  ), which is the time taken for the projectile to reach the maximum height from the plane of projection.
Mathematically, it is given as
t
=
U
        sin
⁡
θ
        
          /
        
        g
{\displaystyle t=U\sin
\theta /g}
   where 
  
    
      
        g
      
    
    {\displaystyle g}
   = acceleration due to gravity (app 9.81 m/s²), 
  
    
      
        U
      
    
    {\displaystyle U}
   = initial velocity (m/s) and
θ
      
    
    {\displaystyle \theta }
   = angle made by the projectile with the horizontal axis.

2.
Time of flight
(
  
    
      
        T
      
    
    {\displaystyle T}
):
this is the total time taken for the projectile to fall back to the same plane from which it was projected.
Mathematically it is given as 
  
    
      
        T
=
2
U
        sin
⁡
θ
        
          /
        
        g
      
    
    {\displaystyle T=2U\sin
\theta /g}
  .

3.
Maximum Height
(
  
    
      
        H
      
    
    {\displaystyle H}
):
this is the maximum height attained by the projectile OR the maximum displacement on the vertical axis (y-axis) covered by the projectile.
It is given as 
  
    
      
        H
        =
U
          
            2
sin
          
            2
⁡
θ
        
          /
        
        2
g
{\displaystyle H=U^{2}\sin ^{2}\theta /2
g}
  .

4.
Range
(
  
    
      
        R
      
    
    {\displaystyle R}
):
The Range of a projectile is the horizontal distance covered (on the x-axis) by the projectile.
Mathematically, 
  
    
      
        R
=
        
          U
          
            2
sin
⁡
2
θ
        
          /
        
        g
{\displaystyle R=U^{2}\sin
2\theta /g}
  .
The Range is maximum when angle 
  
    
      
        θ
      
    
    {\displaystyle
\theta }
   = 45°, i.e. 
  
    
      
        sin
⁡
2
θ
        =
1
      
    
    {
\displaystyle \sin 2\theta =1}
  .

== See also ==
Atlatl
Ballistics
Gunpowder
Bullet
Impact depth
Kinetic bombardment
Shell (projectile)
Projectile point
Projectile use by animals
Arrow
Dart
Missile
Sling ammunition
Spear
Torpedo
Range of a projectile
Space debris
Trajectory of a projectile


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
Heidi Knecht (29 June 2013).
Projectile Technology.
Springer Science & Business Media.
ISBN 978-1-4899-1851-2.
==
External links ==
Open Source Physics computer model
Projectile Motion Applet
Another projectile
Motion Applet
Shotgunning is a means of consuming a beverage, especially beer, very quickly by punching a hole in the side of the can, near the bottom, placing the mouth over the hole, and pulling the tab to open the top.
The beer quickly drains, and is quickly consumed.
A related technique, strawpedoing, is used for containers not easily punctured such as glass bottles.
A straw is inserted into the bottle and bent around the hole.
When the bottle is tilted, the beverage quickly drains and is quickly consumed.
The technique increases beverage delivery since the extra hole allows the liquid to leave while air enters simultaneously through the main hole.
The bottleneck, created where air entering the container must travel through the same orifice as liquid leaving, is removed.
Both of these are normally done as a competition.

The participants wait until all the others are ready until the countdown begins.

Once the countdown is finished, the participants get under way and the first one to finish consuming the beverage is the winner.

== Technique ==
To shotgun a beverage, a small hole is punched in the side of the can, close to the bottom.
In order to prevent the liquid from spilling out while the cut is made, the can is held horizontally and the hole is made in the resulting air pocket.
The hole can be made with any sharp object—typically a key, bottle opener, pen or knife.
The drinker then places their mouth over the hole while rotating the can straight up.
When the can's tab is pulled, the liquid will quickly drain through the hole into the drinker's mouth.

== See also ==
Binge drinking
Drinking culture
Beer bong


=
= References ==


==
External links ==
How to Shotgun a Beer - Video by Howcast
How to Shotgun a Beer - Article on wikiHow
The use of rockets in India, for warfare, dates back to the 18th century.
Mysorean rockets were the first iron-cased rockets that were successfully deployed for military use, reverse-engineered by British and introduced in the Europe as Congreve rocket.
After British colonisation of India, scientific R&D in Indian dynasties was restricted and military science in India lagged.
Research in missile technology resumed again after India's independence along with weapons of mass destruction and followed with various missile programs in 70s with development of various ballistic, cruise, surface to air, anti- ballistic missile and orbital launch systems.
India conducted its first nuclear test and initiated with Project Devil as an attempt to reverse engineer Soviet surface to air missile SA-2 Guideline and Project Valiant to develop an intercontinental ballistic missile.
However, it could  not succeed and experience
gained led to development of Prithvi series of short range ballistic-missiles.
In early 80s, India conducted its first successful orbital launch and synchronized its research institutions under IGMDP and successfully developed a series of strategic missile systems.
Since then, India has developed, tested, operationalized and is developing a number of missile systems that are limited to only a handful of countries including ICBMs, ASATs, SLBMs and hypersonic weapon systems.
Threats posed by enemy missile systems led to the pursuit of Indian Ballistic Missile Defense Programme.
In 2017, India produced most of defined MTCR defined missile technologies required to be integrated to produce most missile systems.

==
History ==


===
Kingdom of Mysore ===
Mysorean rockets were the first iron-cased rockets that were successfully deployed for military use.
Hyder Ali, the 18th century ruler of Mysore, and his son and successor, Tippu Sultan used them effectively against the British East India Company.
Tipu Sultan's military manual (called Fathul Mujahidin) even advocated that 200 rocket men should be assigned to each Mysorean Kushoon (brigade).
These rocket men were also trained to launch the rockets.
In addition, wheeled rocket launchers capable of launching five to ten rockets almost simultaneously were used in war.

It was the world's first use of rockets for fighting modern wars.
The British successfully reverse engineered and developed this rocket technology further (See Congreve rocket).
After India was conquered, scientific research and development was constrained to further the British interests and military science in India naturally lagged.

=== Post-independent India ===
Democratic India's missile programme dates back to the late 1950s,
when Jawaharlal Nehru was the Prime Minister of India and Dr. D. S. Kothari was the Scientific Advisor to the Defence Minister.
In 1958, the government of India constituted a team of Indian scientists - called the Special Weapons Development Team - to research guided missile weapons development.

Motivated to strengthen its defences after the 1962 Sino-Indian War, and the prevailing international scenario of the time, the government of independent India renewed its focus on Indian missile technology development.
Initially, the scientists of the Special Weapons Development Team worked from MetCalfe House (New Delhi), but the establishment later shifted to Hyderabad after the state government granted them the former Nizam's army barracks.
This was the genesis of the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL) – earlier known as the Special Weapons Development Team – under DRDO, solely formed for missile technology research and development.
Its first anti-tank missile was a totally indigenous product, which was successfully test-fired.
The project laid the foundation of India's missile programme and many from this group who were involved in the development of the anti-tank missile to be used in Sarath ICVs manufactured at Ordnance Factory Medak, went on to set up the Bharat Dynamics Limited (BDL), Hyderabad in the proximity of the ordnance factory, which became the production agency of missiles in India.
(
In the 1970s, SS-11B anti-tank missiles were manufactured under license from France at the BDL.)

As Indian science and technology was curtailed before it became independent, and missile technology had developed at a fast pace after the second world war, India decided to update itself on missile technology by reverse engineering a surface-to-air missile.
This project was code-named Project Devil and it worked, from 1970 to 1979, on reverse engineering the Russian SAM-2 (which Russia supplied to India).
Dr. B. D. Nag Chaudhri (then Scientific Adviser to the Defence Minister) advocated the need to build technologies needed for the future, such as liquid propellant powered engines.
Thus, a parallel program called Project Valiant was also initiated to build a rocket engine powered by liquid propellants.
V. K. Saraswat was part of the team that built the engine between 1971 – 1974.

Other scientists at DRDO simultaneously focused on building a guidance package – an essential part of a long-range missile that determines its path and accuracy to hit a target.
A platform-based inertial navigation system (INS) was developed and tested, on board an Avro aircraft, in 1974–75.
Subsequently, an INS was built for both missiles and an aircraft, and this was tested in 1979 on board a Canberra aircraft.

By the start of 1980's, DRDL had developed competencies in the fields of propulsion, navigation and manufacture of materials.
Thus, India's political and scientific leadership, which included prime minister Indira Gandhi, Defence Minister R. Venkataraman,
V.S. Arunachalam (Scientific Advisor to the Defence Minister), decided that all these technologies should be consolidated.

This led to the birth of the Integrated Guided Missile Development Program and Dr. Abdul Kalam, who had previously been the project director for the SLV-3 programme at ISRO, was inducted as the DRDL Director in 1983 to conceive and lead it.
He decided that DRDL would pursue multiple projects in this area simultaneously.
Thus, four projects were born under the IGMDP:
Short range surface-to-surface missile (code-named Prithvi)
Short range low-level surface-to-air missile (code-named Trishul)
Medium range surface-to-air missile (code-named Akash) and
Third-generation anti-tank missile
(code-named Nag).The Agni missile was initially conceived in the IGMDP as a technology demonstrator project in the form of a re-entry vehicle, and was later upgraded to a ballistic missile with different ranges.
As part of this program, the Interim Test Range at Balasore in Orissa was also developed for missile testing.

=== Diplomatic and technological hurdles ===
After India test-fired the first Prithvi missile in 1988, and the Agni missile in 1989, the Missile Technology Control Regime (then an informal grouping established in 1987 by Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States) decided to restrict access to any technology that would help India in its missile development program.
Some of the major technology which was denied, included:

phase shifters for the phased array radars for Akash (denied by the USA).

magnesium alloy used in Prithvi's wings (denied by Germany).

servo-valves needed for the electro-hydraulic control systems of Agni and Prithvi.

gyroscopes and accelerometers (denied by France).

processors – Intel said it would not give India chips for the computers used in Prithvi and Agni.
To counter the MTCR, the IGMDP team formed a consortium of DRDO laboratories, industries and academic institutions to build these sub-systems, components and materials.
Though this slowed down the progress of the program, India successfully developed indigenously all the restricted components denied to it by the MTCR.In 2011, the DRDO Chief V K Saraswat had stated that "indigenous content" in India's strategic missiles had gone up to such a level, with ring-laser gyros, composite rocket motors,
micro-navigation systems etc.,
that "no technology control regime" could derail them any longer.

== Projects ==


===
Project Devil ===
Project Devil was one of two early liquid-fuelled missile projects developed by India, along with Project Valiant, in the 1970s.
The goal of Project Devil was to produce a short-range surface-to-surface missile.
Although discontinued in 1980 without achieving intended success, Project Devil, led to the later development of the Prithvi missile in the 1980s.

===
Project
Valiant ===
Project Valiant was one of two early liquid-fuelled missile projects developed by India, along with Project Devil in the 1970s.
The goal of Project Valiant was to produce an ICBM.
Although discontinued in 1974 without achieving full success, Project Valiant, like Project Devil, helped in the development of the Prithvi missile in the 1980s.

===
IGMDP ===
The Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (IGMDP) was a Ministry of Defence (India) programme for the research and development of a comprehensive range of missiles.
The program was managed by the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Ordnance Factories Board in partnership with other Indian government research organisations.
The project started in early 1980s and ended in 2008 after these strategic missiles were successfully developed.
The last major missile developed under the program was the Agni 3 intermediate-range ballistic missile which was successfully tested on 9 July 2007.On 8 January 2008, the DRDO formally announced the successful completion of the IGMDP.
It added that the strategic integrated guided missile program was completed with its design objectives achieved since most of the missiles in the program had been developed and inducted by the Indian armed forces.
Dr.
Abdul Kalam, who conceived and worked on this program, later also became the President of India.

===
Akash ===
Akash (Sanskrit: आकाश Ākāś "Sky") is a medium-range mobile surface-to-air missile defence system developed by the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Ordnance Factories Board and Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) in India.
The missile system can target aircraft up to 30 km away, at altitudes up to 18,000 m.


===
Trishul ===
Trishul— is a short range surface to air missile.
The range of the missile is 12 km and is fitted with a 15 kg warhead.
The weight of the missile is 130 kg


===
Nag ===
Nag (Sanskrit: नाग, Nāg "Cobra") is a third generation "Fire-and-forget" anti-tank missile developed in India.
It is one of five missile systems developed by the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) under the Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (IGMDP).
Nag has been developed at a cost of ₹3 billion (US$42.1 million).

===
Prithvi series ===
Prithvi Missiles are tactical surface-to-surface short-range ballistic missiles (SRBM)
Dhanush is a system consisting of a stabilisation platform (Bow) and the Missile (Arrow).
It is intended for the Indian Navy, to be fired from ships against other ships or land targets.
Dhanush can fire modified versions of Prithvi-II or Prithvi-III.
===
Agni series ===
The Agni missile series started as a "Re-Entry Vehicle" project (later rechristened as Agni Technology Demonstrator) in the IGMDP.
The missiles in this series include:
The Agni-I, Agni-II and Agni-III missiles were developed under the Integrated Guided Missile Development Program.
(
The Defence Research and Development Organisation formally announced the successful completion of the IGMDP after the third test of Agni-III on 7 May 2008.)

Agni-IV was tested on 15 November 2011 and has a range of 3,000 km (1,900 mi), and can carry a warhead of 1 tonnes.
It is a two-stage missile powered by solid propellant.
It is 20 metres (66 feet) tall and has a launch weight of 17 tonnes.
A new missile Agni-V with 5,000 km (3,100 mi) range and MIRV is being developed and was tested on 26 December 2016.
Agni-V shares the similar design as Agni-III with an extra stage added to further increase the range by 1,500 km (930 mi).
Agni-V will be road mobile and it has been stated that all Indian missiles developed after this will be road mobile as well.

Agni-VI is an Intercontinental ballistic missile reported to be in rudimentary stages of development by India, and until May 2012 was not officially confirmed by either the Government of India or the DRDO.
Reportedly, it will be capable of being launched from submarines or from land and to strike a target of over 10,000 km (6,200 mi) with MIRV-ed warheads.
Top DRDO scientists have previously asserted that India has almost all the equipment and technology needed to develop ICBMs, "but where the warhead should go or what the range should be will have to be a political call".

===
K series ===


===
Shaurya ===
The Shaurya missile is a short-medium range hypersonic surface-to-surface hybrid ballistic-cruise missile developed for use by the Indian Army.
Capable of hypersonic speeds, it has a range of 700–1900 km and is capable of carrying a payload of 200 kg to 1-tonne conventional or nuclear warhead.

===
BrahMos ===
Mach 3 Supersonic Cruise Missile developed in collaboration with Russia.
Land Attack and Anti-ship variants in service with the Indian Army and Indian Navy.
Sub-launched and air-launched versions have also been developed and inducted.
The range has been upgraded to nearly 490-500 km.

===
BrahMos II ===
Mach 7 Hypersonic Cruise Missile in development collaboration with Russia.

===
Nirbhay ===
Long Range Sub-Sonic Cruise Missile under development and testing.
It was successfully test fired for second time from Balasore Orissa.

Able to travel at speed of 0.6-0.88 mach.
However, its test on 12th October 2020 failed due to a technical snag.

===
Prahaar ===
Prahaar (Sanskrit:प्रहार, Strike) is a solid-fuelled Surface-to-surface guided short-range tactical ballistic missile that would be equipped with omni-directional warheads and could be used for hitting both tactical and strategic targets.

===
Astra ===
Astra is a 'Beyond Visual Range Air-to-Air Missile' (BVRAAM) being developed for the Indian Air Force.

===
Helina ===
A variant of NAG Missile to be launched from Helicopter is being developed under the Project named HELINA (HELIcopter launched NAg).
It will be structurally different from the Nag.

=== Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle (HSTDV) ===
Project HSTDV is a technology demonstrator aimed to demonstrate autonomous flight of a Scramjet Integrated Vehicle using ethylene.

===
Indian Ballistic Missile Defence Programme ===


====
Prithvi Air Defence (PAD) ====
The Prithvi Air Defence missile has been named as Pradyumna Ballistic Missile Interceptor.
It has a maximum interception altitude of 80 km and is capable of engaging the 300 to 2,000 km class of ballistic missiles at a speed of Mach 5.

DRDO is currently working on a missile for intercepting targets of 5,000+ km range and engaging them at altitudes of up to 150 km.
The tests are expected to commence from 2010–11.

====
Advanced Air Defence (AAD) ====
Main articles: Advanced Air DefenceAlso known as Ashwin Ballistic Missile Interceptor.
The Advanced Air Defence (AAD)/ Ashvin Advanced Defence interceptor missile operates at endo-atmosphere at altitudes of 20-40 kilometres (12–24 miles).
===
Anti-Radiation Missile ===
India developed an Anti-Radiation Missile (ARM) that will help to destroy enemy advance warning systems.
This was named as Rudram-1, with a range of 100-250 km.
Production of the ARM is being done on a priority basis by the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL), which specialises in missile development.

Such missiles can be mounted on the Sukhoi Su-30 MKI fighter planes.

=== Anti-satellite missile ===
India was developing anti satellite weapons.
Following the successful Agni-V ICBM test, this looked all the more achievable.
During an interview with India Today in 2013 Dr. V. K. Saraswat said,

"Today, India has all the building blocks for an anti-satellite system in place.

We don't want to weaponise space but the building blocks should be in place.
Because you may come to a time when you may need it.
Today, I can say that all the building blocks (for an ASAT weapon) are in place.
A little fine tuning may be required but we will do that electronically.
We will not do a physical test (actual destruction of a satellite) because of the risk of space debris affecting other satellites."

According to Rajeswari Rajagopalan, senior fellow at Observer Research Foundation, New Delhi, "it is important to discuss various issues concerning space security, and ASAT is one of them."
Increasing awareness of space debris and continued efforts to develop and implement international measures to tackle the problem is a major concern for India as well as other countries.
According to some researchers, "as it stands today, in space, the probability of debris hitting a satellite is more than an adversary taking your satellite down."

On 27 March 2019
India conducted its first ever ASAT missile test under a project code named Mission Shakti under which a modified Anti-ballistic missile was used to shoot down an Indian satellite in the Low Earth Orbit at a height of 300 km.
The successful missile test makes India only the 4th country after United States, Russia and China to have this capability.

==
Systems ==
===
Air to air ===


===
Anti-radiation ===


===
Anti-satellite ===


===
Anti-ship ===


===
Anti-tank ===


===
Ballistic ===


===
Cruise ===


=== Surface to air ===


===
Other systems ===


== Research and development organisations ==
Current missile research and development in India happens under the Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL), and a group of laboratories collectively called the Missile Complex Laboratories.

Interim Test Range
Bharat Dynamics Limited Manufactures the missile and also has an associated R&D lab
Composite Products Development Centre
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory Develops materials for defence and space usage
Defence Research and Development Laboratory Develops the mission control software among other missile technologies
Dr APJ Abdul Kalam Missile Complex Houses following 3 laboratories:
Advanced Systems Laboratory  Research and development on motors, jet vanes and structures for launch vehicles and missiles
Research Centre Imarat (Develops navigation and electromechanical actuation systems)
Defence Research & Development Laboratory (DRDL) famous for its contributions to IGMDP programme
High Energy Materials Research Laboratory Propellant (missile fuel) research is done in HEMRL.

Missile Complex Laboratories (These laboratories were earlier part of the DRDL or set up under them, but all are now independent entities)
Missile Systems Quality Assurance Agency
Vehicle Research and Development Establishment Develops missile launchers
HTNP Industries Develops Hypersonic missile warheads (Nuclear capable and non nuclear capable)


==
See also ==
Indian Armed Forces
India-China Border Roads
Indian Human Spaceflight Programme
Indian weapons of mass destruction
Indian military satellites


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Desi defence showpieces powered by videshi parts
DRDO
India's lumbering dinosaur
The AGM-183 ARRW ("Air-Launched Rapid Response Weapon") is a hypersonic weapon planned for use by the United States Air Force.
Developed by Lockheed Martin, the boost glide weapon is propelled to a maximum speed of Mach 20 by a missile before gliding towards its target.

==
History ==


===
Development and acquisition ===
In August 2018, the U.S. Air Force awarded a $480 million contract to Lockheed Martin for the development of an air-launched hypersonic weapon.
The resulting missile, the AGM-183A ARRW ("Arrow"), underwent an initial captive carry flight test aboard a U.S. Air Force B-52 in June 2019.In February 2020, the Trump Administration proposed a 23 percent increase in funding for hypersonic weapons and, the same month, the U.S. Air Force announced it had decided to move forward with acquisition of the AGM-183A.In March 2020
, Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Michael D. Griffin stated that the United States was "close at hand" to having a hypersonic boost-glide weapon ready to field.

===
Theorized relation to the "Super-Duper Missile" ===
A "Super-Duper Missile" was announced by US President Donald Trump during a press availability in the Oval Office on May 15, 2020.
According to Trump, the Super-Duper Missile is 17 times faster than existing missiles in the United States arsenal; however, Kingston Reif of the Arms Control Association believes the claim may have been a misstatement.
PBS news correspondent Nick Schifrin has theorized that the Super-Duper Missile is, in fact, the AGM-183A, as has the China Times.

== Design and performance ==
The AGM-183A has a claimed maximum speed of 15,345 miles per hour (24,695 km/h).The weapon uses a boost-glide system, in which it is propelled to hypersonic speed by a rocket on which it is mounted before gliding towards a target.
According to Popular Mechanics, the U.S. Air Force was, as of April 2020, considering using the remaining fleet of B-1B bombers as AGM-183A firing platforms, with each aircraft carrying up to 31 of the weapons mounted internally and on external pylons.

===
Testing ===
A booster flight test of ARRW is slated for March 2021 at Point Mugu Sea Range, off the coast of Southern California.

== See also ==
3M22
Zircon
BrahMos-II
DF-ZF


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Artist's rendering of an AGM-183A in flight
"Hypersonic Missiles" is a song performed by English musician Sam Fender.
The song was released as a digital download on 5 March 2019 by Polydor Records as the fifth single from his debut studio album Hypersonic Missiles.
The song peaked at number 48 on the UK Singles Chart.
The song was written by Sam Fender and produced by Bramwell Bronte.
==
Background ==
In a press release, Fender explained the name of the song was inspired by a 'newly developed Russian missile that travels at something like nine times the speed of sound'.
When describing the song he said, "In many ways, an unorthodox love song.
Its main focus is on the world around the narrator, who is a complete tin foil hatter.
They are convinced the world is on its last legs; they know that it is rife with injustice but feel completely helpless and lacking the necessary intelligence to change it while remaining hopelessly addicted to the fruits of consumerism.
Amongst all the chaos is love and celebration, there is this glimmer of hope that runs through the song, a little notion that no matter what happens, these two people are gonna have a fucking good time regardless of the tyrants that run their world, and regardless of the imminent doom from these 'Hypersonic Missiles'".
The lyrics makes reference to the bombings in Gaza, rising tensions in global politics, and the corporate machine.

==
Music video ==
A music video to accompany the release of "Hypersonic Missiles" was first released onto YouTube on 4 April 2019.

==
Track listing ==


==
Charts ==


==
Certifications ==


==
Release history ==


==
References ==
The Fractional Orbital Bombardment System (FOBS) was a nuclear-weapons delivery system developed in the 1960s by the Soviet Union.
One of the first Soviet efforts to use space to deliver weapons, FOBS envisioned launching nuclear warheads into low Earth orbit before bringing them down on their targets.

Like a kinetic bombardment system but with nuclear weapons, FOBS had several attractive qualities: it had no range limit, its flight path would not reveal the target location, and warheads could be directed to North America over the South Pole, evading detection by  NORAD's north-facing early warning systems.

The maximum altitude would be around 150km.
Energetically, this would require a launch vehicle powerful enough to be capable of putting the weapon 'into orbit'.
However the orbit was only a fraction of a full orbit, not sustained, and so there would be much less need to control a precise orbit, or to maintain it long term.

==
Development history and deployment ==


===
Lead-up to FOBS development ===
Some USSR officials began expressing a desire for a FOBS-type weapon around the time of Sputnik's launch.
By the early 1960s, the Soviet Union felt that pursuing a system like the FOBS would be a natural next step given their belief that the US was already planning to use space to mount nuclear attacks The success of the Soviet Vostok program which saw a rocket send a human into orbit and then land at a predesignated location made this kind of weapon seem more feasible.

===
Competing FOBS designs ===
Soviet rocket engineer Sergei Korolev seems to have been responsible for the first FOBS-type missile design.
His offering was the GR-1; it was also known as 'Global Missile 1' within Korolev's design bureau, as SS-X-10 Scrag by NATO authorities, and as 11A513 (or 8K73) by Soviet GRAU index.
Korolev's research began as early as 1960 and the GR-1 project was sanctioned by Soviet officials on September 24, 1962.Korolev brought up the idea of the GR-1 to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in early 1962.
Soon after, Khrushchev announced that the Soviet Union was capable of utilizing "global missiles" that could fly over both the North and South Poles on their way to a target, continuing on to say that this type of weapon would render early warning radar systems practically obsolete and leave the enemy with no time to retaliate before the weapon's impact.
Korolev's engineers first estimated that NATO radar systems would detect the GR-1's warhead only two minutes before arrival.
The GR-1 was to use the NK-9 and NK-9V as main engines in its first and second stages respectively.
Though the NK-9 and NK-9V weren't created by Korolev's team, the GR-1's 8D726 retrorocket engine was.
This engine would prove to be instrumental to the progress of Russian rocketry, specifically for its importance in the development of the Blok-D upper stage of rockets like the N1, Proton, and Zenit.
The GR-1 had three stages and a total vehicle mass of 117 tons.
It was 35.31 meters long with a 2.68 meter diameter and could carry a single 2.2 megaton yield nuclear warhead.
It was cryogenic liquid propelled, utilizing a mix of RG-1 kerosene with liquid oxygen (LOX).Two other FOBS-type missile projects emerged around the time of the GR-1's early development.
It seems that each of these projects were competing with one another for usage selection.
The first of the two other projects was that of Soviet missile engineer Vladimir Chelomey who proposed two designs: one called the UR-200A (GRAU index 8K83) that was derivative of his UR-200 ICBM and another designated as GR-2 which built off of his colossal UR-500 prototype ICBM and had a much larger explosive yield of 30 megatons.
The UR-200A design was eventually selected for further development over the GR-2.
It was to use the RD-0202 and RD-0205 engines for its first and second stages respectively and be equipped with an AB-200 aeroballistic warhead.
Unlike the GR-1, the UR-200 and its derivatives used storable (or hypergolic) liquid propellants; specifically nitrogen tetroxide and UDMH.
Chelomey and his engineers received development authorization for the UR-200 ICBM on March 16, 1961, beginning work on the UR-200A variant at some point after.
The second of the two other projects came from the Soviet missile designer Mikhail Yangel.
His proposal was the R-36O (8K69 by GRAU index and SS-9 Mod 3 Scarp by NATO report) which was approved for development by Soviet officials on April 16, 1962.
Yangel used an ICBM design of his own, the R-36 (NATO designation SS-9 Scarp), as a base for the R-36O.
The missile had three stages, using the RD-251 engine in its first stage and the RD-252 engine in its second stage.
The weapon's third stage was related to the deorbiting process as well as warhead guidance and delivery; the Soviets referred to this system as OGCh.
An aiming system inside the OGCh would check and rectify trajectory issues in relation to the desired target location through the use of various instruments (for instance, a radio altimeter used in conjunction with an inertial navigation system).
The aiming system would make its checks directly after the missile came into orbit and immediately before third stage ignition.
Deorbiting would be induced by the missile's retrorocket, the RD-854 engine, causing the warhead to take on a ballistic path towards its target.
The warhead, retrorocket, and guidance system were each contained inside the OGCh module.
A series of nozzles on the RD-854 enabled aerial maneuvering of the OGCh.
Other nozzles facilitated the separation of the warhead from the rest of the OGCh, allowing it to fall alone on a ballistic path to the target.
The R-36O's 8F021 warhead had an explosive yield between 5-20 megatons according to Soviet sources.
Western intelligence suggests that the yield was smaller, being somewhere between 1-3.5 megatons.
The missile was 32.60 meters long with a 3.00 meter diameter and a total launch mass of 180 tons.
The R-36O used the same hypergolic propellants as the UR-200.
===
Yangel design selection ===
In 1965, Soviet military officials worked to select one of the three FOBS projects.
The R-36O of Yangel's design bureau was chosen for further development over the others.
The reasoning behind the Soviet FOBS design selection process remains somewhat unclear.
A particularly confounding factor to consider is that none of the three proposed missiles had undergone a single test flight prior to the R-36O's selection.
Even so, there are some explanations as to why Yangel's design was chosen in the end.
These revolve around the occurrence of negative events in the competing GR-1 and UR-200A projects that effectively knocked them out of contention.

One strike against Korolev's GR-1 was that it used a cryogenic propellant, thereby rendering the missile a poor candidate for operational storage in a missile silo as the Soviet military desired.
Other negative factors include that the GR-1's 8D726 retrorocket was demonstrating a proclivity for failure in its initial tests and, as a cause for yet more worry,
the troublesome R-9A
(the subject of a different ongoing Korolev ICBM project) was quite similar to the GR-1 in construction; thus, military leadership was encouraged to look elsewhere for more immediate progress.
The GR-1's ability to deal with US ABM systems and its lengthy fueling process were also questioned by Soviet analysts.
There were also significant delays associated with the production of the GR-1's NK-9 engine (of which the Kuznetsov bureau was responsible for).
Under the weight of these issues, the GR-1 project finally fell apart in January 1965.Chelomey's UR-200A project lost a great deal of support after Khrushchev, his most important political ally, was ousted in 1964.
Military authorities under the Brezhnev administration were far less friendly to Chelomey and quick to deem the R-36O a better choice for further FOBS development.
Having lost the ability to tap into the Soviet Premier's influence, Chelomey ultimately failed to secure the survival of the UR-200A, its development coming to an end in 1965.

===
Flight testing and deployment ===
At its missile range near Baikonur, Kazakhstan, the Soviet Union tested and deployed the R-36O.
A testing station and a horizontal assembly facility were constructed for the missile's development initially.
Over most of 1965, two R-36 test pads were modified to work with the R-36O for its early test flights.
In addition, 18 silos capable of launching the R-36O were built over the mid 1960s to 1971; three rounds of construction occurred with six silos being built each time.
Those built in the same area were placed 10-15 kilometers away from one another to prevent the possibility of a single nuclear strike destroying multiple silos.
The Soviet Union originally planned nineteen R-36O launches, but 24 were carried out by 1971.
The initial four were to begin from a ground-based testing pad and then fly to the Kamchatka Peninsula.
The other tests called for the R-36O to be launched from a silo into orbit where it would then execute its third stage deorbit process over the Pacific Ocean; the missile's payload would be retrofired into Soviet territory.
Over 2000 Soviet service people participated in the tests.
Six of the tests were outright failures while the others achieved either complete or partial success.
Prior to the first launches, the Soviet Union stated that a "space vehicle landing system" was being tested over the Pacific.
The first test flight occurred on December 16, 1965.
It missed the landing area by a wide margin owing to a stabilization instrument malfunction.
The second test was on February 5, 1966 and was also a failure due to a retrorocket issue.
The third test took place on March 16, 1966.
Nitrogen tetroxide spilled over the surface pad during fueling due to a miscommunication and the missile was quickly destroyed by fire.
Some success was had with the fourth test on May 20, 1966, but the payload didn't break away from the missile's guidance system as intended.
The following tests were conducted from silos.
The first two tests of the silo phase ended in the intentional destruction (via self-destruct functionality) of the R-36O as a result of the second stage engine accidentally being activated for too long, sending the payload into an unplanned orbit.
NATO radar systems picked up on the large mass of resulting debris.
In one failed test case, small pieces of the missile rained down on the midwestern United States.
In 1967, the Soviet Union conducted ten more R-36O tests, nine of them seeing some level of success.
In that year and beyond, the Soviet Union used public statements about satellite launch tests as cover for any R-36O test that was intended to put its payload into orbit for some period of time.
On November 19, 1968, about a month after the 20th test, the Soviet Union designated the R-36O as operational and began its deployment in three groups of six.
By 1971, all 18 of the Soviet Union's R-36O silos were in service in Kazakhstan.
NATO intelligence suggests that a primary target was the US Grand Forks Air Force Base where an ABM system was set to be established in the late 1960s to early 1970s.
The R-36O wasn't equipped with a nuclear payload until 1972.

==
Reasons for development ==
The Soviet Union identified a number of strategic advantages of the FOBS.
The following points prompted its development:
The system granted unlimited striking range with a nuclear weapon.

The system allowed a strike to be carried out from any direction.
For instance, the Soviet Union could launch an attack against the United States using a South Pole or North Pole flight path; technically, it could even execute both of these attack plans simultaneously.

The system provided a way of evading early warning radar systems.
This advantage comes from two different attributes of the FOBS: (1) that it could attack from any direction, as stated above, and (2) that it could travel along a very low Earth orbital path.
The first point has to do with the fact that one of the primary missile defense radar systems of the US around the time of the FOBS' early development was the Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS).
The BMEWS was oriented to detect ballistic missiles coming from the aforementioned 'North Pole route' (its three stations being located in Alaska, Greenland, and the United Kingdom) and therefore wouldn't detect a strike flying along a southern orbital path.
The second point considers that FOBS missiles could fly relatively close to the Earth's surface; they could have a perigee of under 100 miles and an apogee as low as 125 miles above the ground (see apsis).
US radar systems like the BMEWS were configured to detect ICBMs that flew several hundred to upwards of 1000 miles above the surface, not low altitude missiles like that of the FOBS.
Thus, the Soviet Union felt that striking with a FOBS would deprive the United States of valuable warning time that ICBMs were likely to give away, time that could be used to mount a devastating retaliatory attack.

The system concealed the target location until the payload was dropped out of orbit.
Theoretically, the FOBS was capable of staying in orbit for several orbits, at most, due to the exceptionally low trajectory, but could separate its warhead from the FOBS vehicle at any given point in the orbit.

The FOBS' flight duration was shorter than that of an ICBM (assuming an indirect route isn't taken for the purpose of radar evasion).
A FOBS missile may have been able to reach its target around 10 minutes before an ICBM would.

The Soviet Union supposed that the FOBS would be capable of trumping US anti-ballistic missile (ABM) systems.
This was actually a primary objective of the Soviet FOBS from its origin.
On one hand, the FOBS was seen as a tool that could boost the effectiveness of a Soviet ICBM strike by first eliminating some of the enemy's safeguards (like ABM systems).
Given the notion that a FOBS missile could not be destroyed by an ABM system, it also follows that the FOBS could be used alone to carry out a nuclear attack.
In late 1967, US officials indicated that they could develop ABMs to counter the Soviet FOBS,
the implication being that it was indeed capable of besting American ABM systems at that time and beforehand.

==
End of deployment and associated reasons ==
There are two main technical disadvantages of the FOBS to consider:

Its nuclear payload was drastically reduced relative to that of an ICBM due to the high level of energy needed to get the weapon into orbit.
According to American intelligence, the FOBS' nuclear warhead mass needed to be roughly ​1⁄2 to ​1⁄3 of that of an ICBM,and required a more robust ablative system, due to the higher entry velocities.

The FOBS was less accurate than an ICBM.
This was empirically demonstrated in the series of Soviet R-36O flight tests that occurred over 1965-1971.There are a number of other factors to consider that prompted the end of FOBS deployment in the Soviet Union:
The FOBS wouldn't be able to overcome later early warning radar system developments made by the US, especially those that came in the form of space-based radar deployments.
The US established missile detection systems of this type by the early 1970s.
The FOBS was made to counter relatively simple ground-based systems like the BMEWS, not the more expansive radar network that followed it.
The Soviet FOBS thus had lost one of its primary capabilities only several years into its deployment, a FOBS strike no longer having an adequate probability of going undetected by the US.

An additional primary use of the Soviet FOBS—its ability to counter an American ABM system—was found out to be needless as time passed.
Contrary to earlier Soviet projections, the US never built a large ABM system purposed in fending off a Soviet ICBM attack.
The only significant American ABM system constructed was Safeguard (initially called Sentinel), but it was shut down by 1976 and mainly China-oriented anyway; it would have been practically useless in the face of anything beyond a limited Soviet nuclear attack regardless of the FOBS.

Soviet SLBM technology grew into a good replacement for the FOBS on the basis of low flight time, high range (via the submarine's ability to move near its target), and the element of surprise.

The FOBS potentially acted as a dangerous accelerant to the Cold War arms race for the reason that it was most useful in the context of a pre-emptive nuclear strike.
A nation observing their enemy developing the FOBS could logically conclude that they viewed a first strike as a viable nuclear strategy; the observing nation may react to this realization by ramping up its own weapon production and perhaps adopting a first strike nuclear strategy as well.
The Soviet Union began decommissioning and dismantling the FOBS deployment in 1982 (officially in January 1983).
The R36-O missile was completely removed from service by February 1983.
Starting in May 1984, the Soviet Union razed its FOBS-capable silos.
There's confusion over whether all 18 silos were destroyed.
One source suggests that six silos were instead modified for the purpose of ICBM modernization testing, as per a SALT II agreement (see Outer Space Treaty and SALT II).

==
Outer Space Treaty and SALT II ==
Article IV of the Outer Space Treaty of 1967 stated that:
Parties to the Treaty undertake not to place in orbit around the Earth any objects carrying nuclear weapons or any other kinds of weapons of mass destruction, install such weapons on celestial bodies, or station such weapons in outer space in any other manner.

The overriding opinion of US administrators was that the Soviet FOBS did not violate the treaty, mostly for the reason that the system didn't go into a full orbit.
For instance, US Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara argued that the Soviet Union had only agreed "not to place [nuclear] warheads in orbit," continuing on to point out that the FOBS executes its mission on a "fractional orbit, not a full orbit."
Senator Henry M. Jackson, chairman of the Joint Atomic Energy Subcommittee on Military Applications, countered that the Soviet FOBS was at least a "good faith violation of the treaty," alluding to the notion that the weapon could go into technical orbit.
This is certainly true: the only thing stopping the Soviet FOBS' payload from completing a full revolution around the Earth (and thereby literally going orbital and violating the treaty) was the firing of the system's retrorocket.
Even so, McNamara also drew attention to the fact that the treaty didn't ban any form of weapons testing—not even the testing of an orbital nuclear weapons system.
None of the Soviet Union's test R-36Os were ever equipped with a nuclear warhead; so, even if it were the case that the launches went orbital, they still wouldn't have broken the treaty.
Unlike the Outer Space Treaty, the SALT II agreement of 1979 explicitly prohibited the pursuance and deployment of the FOBS:
Each Party undertakes not to develop, test, or deploy:
(...)
(c) systems for placing into Earth orbit nuclear weapons or any other kind of weapons of mass destruction, including fractional orbital missiles;
The SALT II agreement was never ratified by the United States Senate.
The Soviet Union ultimately complied with its terms anyway, decommissioning its FOBS in 1983 (see the 'End of deployment and associated reasons' section).
The agreement also stipulated that 12 of the 18 Soviet FOBS launchers in Kazakhstan were to be taken apart or demolished and never replaced.
This was meant to happen within an eight month period following the treaty's ratification.
The terms allowed the USSR to modify the six remaining launchers to fit missile modernization testing purposes.

==
American view ==
As early as 1962, the United States Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) suspected that the Soviet Union would develop a space-oriented bombardment system like the FOBS.
While it's true that the US thought about creating orbital bombardment weapons in the early 1960s, these inquires tapered off by 1963, the conclusion being that they didn't offer enough meaningful advantages over the ICBM.
The US conclusively decided not to develop a FOBS in particular in 1963.
American intelligence officials thus initially found no reason to believe that the Soviet Union was intending to deploy such a weapon in any militarily significant capacity, supposing that the Soviets instead sought to use this technology for "propaganda or political reasons" if anything.
The CIA made note of the Soviet Union's R-36O test launches and realized that they were more serious about the military applications of a FOBS-type weapon than originally expected.
Still, by October 1968, around a month before the R-36O was declared operational by the USSR, it remained unclear to the CIA whether the tests they had observed involved a FOBS or a "depressed trajectory"
ICBM.Prior to this report, the CIA had higher confidence in their belief that FOBS development was taking place in the USSR.
This assessment prompted Secretary of Defense McNamara to announce that the Soviet Union was possibly creating a FOBS at a news conference on November 3, 1967.
This was the first time that the FOBS project had ever been explicitly referred to in public (though Khrushchev alluded to this kind of weapon in the early 1960s).
McNamara emphasized that the potential Soviet FOBS did not worry him in consideration of its disadvantages compared to the ICBM.
At a congressional hearing soon after, John S. Foster Jr., Director of Defense Research and Engineering, stated that the US had been developing "over-the-horizon" radar networks capable of detecting a FOBS since 1963; these radars were designed to give approximately 30 minutes warning time in the case of a FOBS strike.
He went on to say that the US would continue to allocate significant funding to early warning radar projects of this sort.

It can be noted that the US' view that the FOBS wasn't particularly useful militarily is a possible explanation as to why the Soviet FOBS was defended by McNamara and others in the context of the 1967 Outer Space Treaty.
The idea is that they weren't willing to see the treaty break down over a single issue like the FOBS, especially given that they had already evaluated it as a minor threat in the grand scheme of that period's nuclear weapon landscape.

== See also ==
Timeline of Russian innovation


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
CIA (December 1962).
"
National Intelligence Estimate: The Soviet Space Program" (PDF).
CIA Library.
p. 22.

CIA (October 1968).
"
National Intelligence Estimate:
Soviet Strategic Attack Forces" (PDF).
CIA Library.
p. 2.

"Joint Committee Holds Hearings on ABM Defense".
CQ Almanac.
No.
1967.
09-963-9-965.

Diehl, Paul (Winter 1990–1991).
"
Ghosts of Arms Control Past".
Political Science Quarterly.
105 (4): 597–615.
doi:10.2307/2150937.
JSTOR 2150937.

"Treaty Between The United States of America and The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms (SALT II)".
U.S. Department of State.

"GR-1 / SS-X-10 SCRAG".
Federation of American Scientists.
Retrieved 15 April 2019.

"R-36O / SL-X-?
FOBS".
Federation of American Scientists.
Retrieved 15 April 2019.

"SALT II Treaty of 1979".
Federation of American Scientists.
Retrieved 15 April 2019.

Garthoff, Raymond L. (1987). "
Arms Control:
A View from inside [Book review]".
Science.
236 (4804):
975–977.
doi:10.1126
/science.236.4804.975.
PMID 17812758.

Goedhuis, D. (1968).
"
An Evaluation of the Leading Principles of the Treaty on Outer Space of 27th January 1967".
Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Internationaal Recht [Dutch Journal of International Law].
15 (1):
17–41.
doi:10.1017
/S0165070X00022920.

Bombs in Orbit – General (Ballistic missiles in orbit, FOBS, MOBS, etc).
News Conference of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara at Pentagon.
LBJ Library.
3 November 1967.
National Security File, Files of Charles E. Johnson, Box 11, Folder 4.

McCall, Gene H.; Darrah, John H. (2014). "
Space Situational Awareness:
Difficult, Expensive-and Necessary" (PDF).
Air & Space Power Journal.
Vol.
28
no.
6.
pp.
6–16.

Menon, P. K. (1987), "Problems and Prospects of Preserving Outer Space from Arms Race Escalation", Nordic Journal of International Law, 56 (3): 210–248, doi:10.1163/157181087X00048
Siddiqi, Asif A. (Spring 2000).
"
The Soviet Fractional Orbital Bombardment System: A Short Technical History" (PDF).
Quest:
The History of Spaceflight Quarterly.
Vol.
7
no.
4.
pp.
22–32.
Retrieved 13 April 2019.

Staff Report (30 August 1976). "
Soviet Space Programs, 1971-75".
George A Smathers Library.
Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.CS1 maint: uses authors parameter (link)
Wade, Mark. "
8D726".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Wade, Mark. "
GR-1".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Wade, Mark. "
GR-1:
11A513 Variant".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Wade, Mark. "
R-36O 8K69".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Wade, Mark. "
RD-854".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Wade, Mark. "
UR-200".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 19 April 2019.

Yusof, Nordin (1999).
Space Warfare: High-Tech War of the Future Generation.
Penerbit Universiti Teknologi Malaysia.
pp.
663–664.
ISBN 978-9835201547.

==
External links ==
The Soviet Fractional Orbital Bombardment System Program
Wade, Mark. "
OGCh".
Encyclopedia Astronautica.
Retrieved 21 April 2019.
The Shaurya missile is a canister launched hypersonic surface-to-surface tactical missile developed by the Indian Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) for use by the Indian Armed Forces.
It has a range of 700 to 1,900 km (430 to 1,180 mi) and is capable of carrying a payload of 200 kg to 1 tonne conventional or nuclear warhead.
It gives the potential to strike at very-long-range against any adversary.

== Description ==
The Shaurya missile is speculated to be the land version of the under-water Sagarika K-15 missile, although the DRDO officials have reportedly denied its connection with the K-15 programme.

Shaurya is stored in a composite canister, which makes it much easier to store for long periods without maintenance as well as to handle and transport.
It also houses the gas generator to eject the missile from the canister before its solid propellant motors take over to hurl it at the intended target.

At Defexpo 2010 the missile was displayed without the container shroud, mounted on a land-mobile erector-launcher.
Shaurya missiles can remain hidden or camouflaged in underground silos from enemy surveillance or satellites till they are fired from the special storage-cum-launch canisters.
If put in silos, the DRDO scientists state that given Shaurya's limited range at present, either the silos will have to be constructed closer to India's borders or an extended range version will have to be developed.
Defence scientists say the high-speed, two-stage Shaurya is highly manoeuvrable which also makes it less vulnerable to existing anti-missile defence systems.
Shaurya can reach a velocity of Mach 7.5 even at low altitudes.
On 12 November 2008, the missile reached a velocity of Mach 5 as it crossed a distance of 300 km, with a surface temperature of 700 °Celsius.
The missile performed rolls to spread the heat uniformly on its surface.
Flight time was between 500 seconds and 700 seconds.
It has been described as a complex system with high-performance navigation and guidance systems, efficient propulsion systems, state-of-the-art control technologies and canisterised launch.
It can be easily transported by road and launched by TEL.
The missile, encased in a canister, is mounted on a single vehicle, which has only a driver's cabin, and the vehicle itself is the launch platform.
This "single vehicle solution" reduces its signature – it cannot be easily detected by satellites – and makes its deployment easy.
The gas generator, located at the bottom of the canister, fires for about a second and a half.
It produces high pressure gas, which expands and ejects the missile from the tube.
The missile has six motors; the first one is the motor in the gas generator.
The centrepiece of a host of new technologies incorporated in Shaurya is its ring laser gyroscope and accelerometer.
The ring laser gyroscope was tested and integrated by the Research Centre Imarat (RCI) based in Hyderabad.
The Shaurya missile was revealed to be designed specifically to be fired from submarines.
A top DRDO scientist has confirmed this and further said that after taking off and reaching a height of about 50 km, the missile starts flying like a hypersonic cruise missile.
Once it reaches the target area it manoeuvres towards the target before striking with an accuracy of 20 to 30 m within the target area.

==
Testing ==
The missile was launched from an underground facility with an in-built canister from Complex-3 of the Integrated Test Range at Chandipur.
The missile was successfully test-fired for the third time, from the Integrated Test Range at Chandipur, Odisha, on Saturday 24 September 2011, in its final configuration.
The missile flew at 7.5 Mach, and covered its full range of 700 km in 500 seconds.
After this test, the missile is ready for production and induction into the Navy.

On 3 October 2020, DRDO successfully test-fired an advanced version of the Shaurya from Balasore as part of user trials.
The Shaurya missile can strike targets at a range of around 800 kilometres that will complement the existing class of missile systems.
The advance version of Shaurya is light weight and reaches hypersonic speed during the last phase of moving close to the target to render missile defense and countermeasure systems useless.

==
Operators ==
India - As of 6 October 2020, the Union Government of India under the guidance of National Security Council (NSC) approved induction and deployment of Shaurya in Strategic Forces Command (SFC).

== See also ==
Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 and Advanced Hypersonic Weapon – a similar US test vehicle and warhead
Yu-71 – a similar Russian test vehicle (warhead)
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle - an Indian hypersonic vehicle under development
U.S. DARPA Falcon Project - Prompt Global Strike - Advanced Hypersonic Weapon
HGV-202F - an Indian Hypersonic Glide Vehicle
Rockwell
X-30
Boeing X-51
Prompt Global Strike
Second Artillery Corps
BrahMos
BrahMos-II
Related development

Sagarika
K Missile family


=
=
References ==


==
External links ==
CSIS Missile Threat - Shaurya/Sagarika
Shourya/Sagarika Missile
BrahMos-II or BrahMos-2 or BrahMos Mark II
(note: not to be confused with BrahMos block-2)
is a hypersonic cruise missile currently under joint development by India's Defence Research and Development Organisation and Russia's NPO Mashinostroyenia, which have together formed BrahMos Aerospace Private Limited.
It is the second of the BrahMos series of cruise missiles.
The BrahMos-II is expected to have a range of 1,000 kilometres (620 mi; 540 nmi) and a speed of Mach 8.
During the cruise stage of flight the missile will be propelled by a scramjet airbreathing jet engine.
Other details, including production cost and physical dimensions of the missile, are yet to be published.

The planned operational range of the BrahMos-II has been restricted to 290 kilometres as Russia is a signatory to the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), which prohibits it from helping other countries develop missiles with ranges above 300 kilometres (190 mi; 160 nmi).
However, now that India is also a MTCR signatory, it is trying to extend the range of BrahMos.
Its top speed will be double that of the current BrahMos-I, and it has been described as the fastest cruise missile in the world.
Russia is developing a special and secret fuel formula to enable the BrahMos-II to exceed Mach 8.Design of multiple variants of the missile was completed by October 2011, with testing starting in 2012.
Fourth-generation multi-purpose Russian Naval destroyers (Project 21956) are also likely to be equipped with the BrahMos II.BrahMos Aerospace named the missile BrahMos-II (K) in honour of the former President of India, APJ Abdul Kalam.

== See also ==
DRDO HSTDV
Zircon  maneuvering hypersonic missile
Shaurya (missile)
YJ-12


==
References ==


==
External links ==
BrahMos Missile official website
A kinetic bombardment or a kinetic orbital strike is the hypothetical act of attacking a planetary surface with an inert projectile from orbit (orbital bombardment), where the destructive power comes from the kinetic energy of the projectile impacting at very high speeds.
The concept originated during the Cold War.

Typical depictions of the tactic are of a satellite containing a magazine of tungsten rods and a directional thrust system.
(
In science fiction, the weapon is often depicted as being launched from a spaceship, instead of a satellite.)
When a strike is ordered, the launch vehicle brakes one of the rods out of its orbit and into a suborbital trajectory that intersects the target.
The rods would typically be shaped to minimize air resistance and maximize velocity upon impact.

Kinetic bombardment has the advantage of being able to deliver projectiles from a very high angle at a very high speed, making them extremely difficult to defend against.
In addition, projectiles would not require explosive warheads, and—in the simplest designs—would consist entirely of solid metal rods, giving rise to the common nickname "rods from God".
Disadvantages include the technical difficulties of ensuring accuracy and the high costs of positioning ammunition in orbit.

==
Real life concepts and theories ==
During the Korean and Vietnam Wars, there was limited use of the Lazy Dog bomb, a kinetic projectile shaped like a conventional bomb but only about 1.75-inch-long (44 mm) and 0.50-inch-diameter (13 mm).
A piece of sheet metal was folded to make the fins and welded to the rear of the projectile.
These were dumped from aircraft onto enemy troops and had the same effect as a machine gun fired vertically.
Similar flechette projectiles have been used since the first World War.
Project Thor is an idea for a weapons system that launches telephone pole-sized kinetic projectiles made from tungsten from Earth's orbit to damage targets on the ground.
Jerry Pournelle created the concept while working in operations research at Boeing in the 1950s before becoming a science-fiction writer.
A system described in the 2003 United States Air Force report was that of 20-foot-long (6.1 m), 1-foot-diameter (0.30 m) tungsten rods that are satellite-controlled and have global strike capability, with impact speeds of Mach 10.The bomb would naturally contain a large kinetic energy because it moves at orbital velocities, around 8 kilometres per second (26,000 ft/s; 8,000 m/s;
Mach 24) in orbit and 3 kilometres per second (9,800 ft/s; 3,000 m/s; Mach 8.8) at impact.
As the rod reenters Earth's atmosphere it would lose most of the velocity, but the remaining energy would cause considerable damage.
Some systems are quoted as having the yield of a small tactical nuclear bomb.

These designs are envisioned as a bunker buster.
As the name suggests, the 'bunker buster' is powerful enough to destroy a nuclear bunker.
With 6–8 satellites on a given orbit, a target could be hit within 12–15 minutes from any given time, less than half the time taken by an ICBM and without the launch warning.

Such a system could also be equipped with sensors to detect incoming anti-ballistic missile-type threats and relatively light protective measures to use against them (e.g. Hit-To-Kill Missiles or megawatt-class chemical laser).
The time between deorbit and impact would only be a few minutes, and depending on the orbits and positions in the orbits, the system would have a worldwide range.
There would be no need to deploy missiles, aircraft or other vehicles.
In the case of the system mentioned in the 2003 Air Force report above, a 6.1 by 0.3 metres (20.01 ft × 0.98 ft) tungsten cylinder impacting at Mach 10 (11,160 ft/s; 3,403 m/s) has a kinetic energy equivalent to approximately 11.5 tons of TNT (48 GJ).
The mass of such a cylinder is itself greater than 9 short tons (8.2 t), so the practical applications of such a system are limited to those situations where its other characteristics provide a clear and decisive advantage—a conventional bomb/warhead of similar weight to the tungsten rod, delivered by conventional means, provides similar destructive capability and is far more practical and cost-effective.
The highly elongated shape and high mass of the projectiles are intended to enhance sectional density (and therefore minimize kinetic energy loss due to air friction) and maximize penetration of hard or buried targets.
The larger device is expected to be quite effective at penetrating deeply buried bunkers and other command and control targets.
The weapon would be very hard to defend against.
It has a very high closing velocity and small radar cross-section.
Launch is difficult to detect.
Any infrared launch signature occurs in orbit, at no fixed position.
The infrared launch signature also has a much smaller magnitude compared to a ballistic missile launch.
The system would also have to cope with atmospheric heating from re-entry, which could melt non-tungsten components of the weapon.
The phrase "rods from God" is also used to describe the same concept.
An Air Force report called them "hypervelocity rod bundles".
In June 2020, a senior Al Qaeda leader was killed by a kinetic weapon (a modified AGM-114 Hellfire missile) dropped by a United States Special Operations General Atomics MQ-1 Predator drone.

The weapon reportedly weighed 100 pounds and contained 6 deployed blades to destroy the passenger vehicle that was targeted.

==
In science fiction ==
In the mid-1960s, popular science interest in orbital mechanics led to a number of science fiction stories which explored their implications.
Among these was The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress by Robert A. Heinlein in which the citizens of the Moon bombard the Earth with rocks wrapped in iron containers which are in turn fired from an electromagnetic launch system at Earth-based targets.

In the 1970s and 1980s this idea was refined in science fiction novels such as Footfall by Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle (the same Pournelle that first proposed the idea for military use in a non-fiction context), in which aliens use a Thor-type system.
During the 1980s and 1990s references to such weapons became a staple of science fiction roleplaying games such as Traveller, Shadowrun and Heavy Gear (the latter game naming these weapons ortillery, a portmanteau of orbital artillery), as well as visual media including Babylon 5's "mass drivers" and the film Starship Troopers, itself an adaptation of a Heinlein novel of the same name.

A smaller "crowbar" variant is mentioned in David's Sling by Marc Stiegler (Baen, 1988).
Set in the Cold War, the story is based on the use of (relatively inexpensive) information-based "intelligent" systems to overcome an enemy's numerical advantage.
The orbital kinetic bombardment system is used first to destroy the Soviet tank armies that have invaded Europe and then to take out Soviet ICBM silos prior to a nuclear strike.

In Neal Stephenson's Anathem, a kinetic bombardment weapon is deployed from orbit to trigger the eruption of a dormant volcano.

The repurposing of space colonies for use in kinetic bombardment (referred as a "colony drop") is a frequent element of the Gundam franchise and is central to the plots of Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack, and Mobile Suit Gundam 0083:
Stardust Memory, while a more limited bombardment is key to the climax of Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans .

From the mid-1990s, kinetic weapons as science fiction plot devices appeared in video games.
Appearing in Syndicate Wars as a player-usable weapon, it also featured prominently in the plots of other video games, such as Tom Clancy's EndWar, Mass Effect 2, Call of Duty: Ghosts, and Halo.

Halo features the Magnetic Accelerator Cannon (MAC), or Mass Accelerator Cannon, as the primary weapon system employed by the United Nations Space Command (UNSC) on its warships and orbital defense platforms.
Essentially large coilguns, MACs are capable of firing a variety of ammunition types varying on the model and bore, ranging from hyper-dense kinetic kill slugs to sub-caliber rounds to semi-autonomous drone missiles.
Most predominantly featured in Halo Wars and Halo Wars 2, the MAC is an ability that allows the player to utilize the UNSC Spirit of Fire's point-defense MAC for pinpoint orbital bombardment, allowing the player to heavily damage or destroy enemy units.
However, there are variants of the MAC platforms mounted to various ships and stations, with the most powerful being able to fire a 3,000 ton projectile at anywhere between 0.4% and 25% the speed of light.

The movie G.I. Joe: Retaliation depicts the destruction of London with a tungsten rod dropped from a satellite system.

== See also ==
Concrete bomb
Kinetic energy penetrator
Prompt Global Strike
Railgun
Brilliant Pebbles
Flechette
Fractional Orbital Bombardment System


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Space Weapons, Earth Wars, RAND Corporation, 2002, ISBN 0-8330-2937-1


==
External links ==
"Rods from God".
weeklystandard.com.

"Rods from God".
Popular Science.
June 2004.

Richard L. Garwin (14 May 2003). "
Space Weapons, Not Yet" (PDF).
The AGM-158 JASSM (Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile) is a low observable standoff air-launched cruise missile developed by Lockheed Martin for the United States Armed Forces.
It is a large, stealthy long-range weapon with a 1,000 pound (454 kg) armor piercing warhead.
It completed testing and entered service with the U.S. Air Force in 2009, and has entered foreign service in Australia, Finland, and Poland as of 2014.
An extended range version of the missile, the AGM-158B JASSM-ER (Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missile-Extended Range), entered service in 2014.
By September 2016, Lockheed Martin had delivered 2,000 total JASSMs comprising both variants to the USAF.
==
Program overview ==


===
Origins ===
The JASSM project began in 1995 after the cancellation of the AGM-137 TSSAM project.
The TSSAM was designed as a high precision stealthy missile for use at stand-off ranges, but poor management of the project resulted in rising costs.
Since the requirement for such weapons still existed, the military quickly announced a follow-up project with similar goals.
Initial contracts for two competing designs were awarded to Lockheed Martin and McDonnell Douglas in 1996, and the missile designations
AGM-158A and
AGM-159A were allocated to the two weapons.
Lockheed Martin's AGM-158A won and a contract for further development was awarded in 1998.

The AGM-158A is powered by a Teledyne CAE J402 turbojet.
Before launch the wings are folded to reduce size.
Upon launch the wings deploy automatically.
There is a single vertical tail.
Guidance is via inertial navigation with global positioning system updates.
An imaging infrared seeker provides target recognition and terminal homing.
A data link allows the missile to transmit its location and status during flight, allowing improved bomb damage assessment.
The warhead is a WDU-42/B 450 kg (1000 lb) penetrator.
The JASSM may be carried by a wide range of aircraft: the F-15E; F-16; F/A-18; F-35; B-1B; B-2; and B-52 are all intended to carry the weapon.
The Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) has suggested lightening the warhead of the AGM-158A to increase its range.
That way it would be able to be fired a greater distance from enemy air defenses while being cheaper and available in greater numbers for protracted conflicts than the AGM-158B JASSM-ER variant.

===
Problematic development ===
In 1999, powered flight tests of the missile began.
These were successful, and production of the JASSM began in December 2001.
The weapon began operational testing and evaluation in 2002.
Late that year, two missiles failed tests and the project was delayed for three months before completing development in April 2003.
Two more launches failed, this time as a result of launcher and engine problems.
In July 2007, a $68 million program to improve JASSM reliability and recertify the missile was approved by the Pentagon.
A decision on whether to continue with the program was deferred until spring 2008.
Lockheed agreed to fix the missiles at its own cost and tightened up its manufacturing processes.
On 27 August 2009, David Van Buren, assistant secretary of the Air Force for acquisition, said that there would be a production gap for the JASSM while further tests were held.
Further tests in 2009 were more successful however, with 15 out of 16 rounds hitting the intended target, well above the 75% benchmark set for the test.
This cleared JASSM for entry into service.
The United States Air Force plans to acquire up to 4,900 AGM-158 missiles.
Meanwhile, the United States Navy had originally planned to acquire 453 AGM-158 missiles but instead pulled out of the program in favor of retaining the proven AGM-84 SLAM-ER.

===
Foreign sales ===


====
Australia ====
In 2006 the Australian government announced the selection of the Lockheed Martin JASSM to equip the Royal Australian Air Force's F/A-18 Hornet fighters.
This announcement came as part of a program to phase out the RAAFs F-111 strike aircraft, replacing the AGM-142 Popeye stand off missile and providing a long-range strike capability to the Hornets.
JASSM was selected over the SLAM-ER after the European Taurus KEPD 350 withdrew its tender offer, despite the KEPD 350 being highly rated in the earlier RFP process, due to their heavily involvement in the series preparation for the German Air Force, their troop trials in South Africa and their final negotiations with the Spanish Air Force which finally led to a contract.
As of mid-2010 the JASSM is in production for Australia and will soon enter service.

====
Finland ====
Finland had also previously planned to purchase JASSM missiles for the Finnish Air Force as part of modernization plans of its F/A-18 Hornet fleet.
However, in February 2007 the United States declined to sell the missiles, while agreeing to proceed as planned with other modernization efforts (the so-called Mid-Life Update 2, or MLU2).
This episode led to speculation in the Finnish media on the state of Finnish – American diplomatic relations.
However, in October 2011 the US DSCA announced that they had given permission for a possible sale to Finland.
An order, valued 178.5 million Euros was placed in March 2012.
and since Lockheed has received three Finnish integration-related projects.
Finland's integration work was originally scheduled to be completed by the end of 2016, but didn't complete until March 2018 when Finnish F/A-18 Hornets successfully test fired two JASSM missiles at Naval Air Weapons Station (NAWS)
China Lake.

"JASSM is just as much a deterrent capability, as it is a strike capability.
It makes the enemy pause and think twice about aggressive action, because it provides precision strike of a wide range of valuable targets."
====
South Korea ====
South Korea has sought the JASSM to boost the South Korean Air Force's striking capability but were rebuffed by Washington's unwillingness to sell the missile for strategic reasons.
The South Korean government instead turned their attention towards the Taurus KEPD 350 missile.

====
Poland ====
In 2014, Poland requested US Congressional approval for the purchase of the AGM-158 JASSM to extend the deep penetration strike capabilities of their F-16 Block 52+ fighters.
Congress approved the sale in early October, and negotiations concluded in early November 2014.
Poland signed a $250 million contract to upgrade its F-16s and equip the jets with (AGM-158) JASSM advanced cruise missiles in a ceremony at Poznan AB, Poland, on 11 December 2014.
The missiles are expected to enter operational service in 2017, and Poland is contemplating an additional purchase for the long-range JASSM-ER version.
In December 2015 the production contract for Lot 13 was signed.
The contract includes 140 JASSMs for Finland, Poland and the US, 140 JASSM-ER missiles for the US, and data, tooling and test equipment.
It is said to be the last production lot that will include non-ER versions.
Poland's first modified F-16s should be ready by 2017, when the first missiles are delivered.
The work is scheduled to be complete by June 29, 2019.
In November 2016 The U.S. State Department approved the possible sale of 70
AGM-158B JASSM-ER to Poland.

== Improved JASSM versions ==


===
AGM-158B
JASSM-ER ===
The US Air Force studied various improvements to the AGM-158, resulting in the development of the JASSM-Extended Range (JASSM-ER), which received the designation AGM-158B in 2002.
Using a more efficient engine and larger fuel volume in an airframe with the same external dimensions as the JASSM, the JASSM-ER is intended to have a range of over 575 miles (925 km) as compared to the JASSM's range of about 230 miles (370 km).
Other possible improvements were studied but ultimately not pursued, including a submunition dispenser warhead, new types of homing head, and a new engine giving ranges in excess of 620 miles (1,000 km).
The JASSM-ER has 70% hardware commonality and 95% software commonality with the original AGM-158 JASSM.The first flight test of the JASSM-ER occurred on May 18, 2006 when a missile was launched from a U.S. Air Force B-1 bomber at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico.
The initial platform for the JASSM-ER is the B-1.
While both the original JASSM and the JASSM-ER are several inches too long to be carried in the internal weapons bay of the F-35 Lightning II, the F-35 will be able to carry both missiles externally, which would compromise the aircraft's stealth features.
The JASSM-ER entered service with the USAF in April 2014.

Although the B-1 was initially the only aircraft able to deploy it, it was later integrated onto the B-52, F-15E, and F-16; the B-1B can carry a full load of 24 JASSM-ERs, the B-2 16 missiles, and the B-52 outfitted with the 1760 Internal Weapons Bay Upgrade (IWBU) is able to carry 20 JASSM-ERs, eight internally and 12 on external pylons.
The Air Force approved full-rate production of the JASSM-ER in December 2014.
Integration of the JASSM-ER onto the B-52 and F-16 was expected to wrap up in 2018, with the F-15E completed after that; it was announced that the JASSM-ER achieved full operational capability on the F-15E in February 2018.
Lot 15 production contract, awarded in June 2017 was the first consisting entirely JASSM-ER.On
14 May 2015,
the head of the Air Force Research Laboratory nominated the JASSM-ER as the optimal air vehicle to carry the Counter-electronics High Power Microwave Advanced Missile Project (CHAMP) payload.

CHAMP is an electronic warfare technology that fries electronic equipment with bursts of high-power microwave energy, non-kinetically destroying them.
The JASSM-ER was chosen because it is an operational system
, so CHAMP is to be miniaturized into the operationally relevant system.
In November 2019, the Air Force retired the AGM-86C/D air-launched cruise missile (ALCM), a conventional warhead-equipped version of the nuclear-tipped ALCM, with its role replaced by the JASSM-ER.
===
AGM-158C LRASM ===
The JASSM-ER is also the basis for Long Range Anti-Ship Missile, which is a JASSM-ER with a new seeker.
The Air Force used the B-1 Lancer to complete a captive carry test of an LRASM to ensure the bomber can carry it, as both missiles use the same airframe.
The LRASM was not originally planned to be deployed on the B-1, being intended solely as a technology demonstrator, but in February 2014 the Pentagon authorized the LRASM to be integrated onto air platforms, including the Air Force B-1, as an operational weapon to address the needs of the Navy and Air Force to have a modern anti-ship missile.
In August 2015, the Navy officially designated the air-launched LRASM as "AGM-158C".
The LRASM achieved Early Operational Capability on the B-1B in December 2018.

===
AGM-158D
JASSM-XR ===
In March 2016, Lockheed Martin began analysis on an enhanced wing design to further increase range.
In September 2018, the corporation was awarded a contract to develop an "Extreme Range" variant of the AGM-158.
The weapon would weigh about 5,000 lb (2,300 kg) and deliver a 2,000 lb (910 kg) warhead out to a range of 1,000 nmi (1,900 km; 1,200 mi).
The JASSM-XR, officially designated the AGM-158D, features a new missile control unit, changes to the wings, a different paint coating, an Electronic Safe and Arm Fuze, secure GPS receiver, and program protection requirements at a unit cost of $1.5 million.
Low-rate initial production is to begin in 2021 as part of Lot 19 with deliveries beginning in January 2024 at a rate of five per month for the first 40 missiles.

==
Operational history ==
The JASSM was first employed during the 14 April 2018 missile strikes against Syria during the Syrian Civil War.
Two B-1 Lancers fired a total of 19 JASSMs as part of strikes against three Syrian government alleged chemical weapons targets.
All 19 JASSM missiles were fired at the Barzah Research Center, which was destroyed in the strike.
According to Russian state media, two missiles that failed to detonate were found by the Syrian Arab Army and transferred to Russia on 18 April for study - no evidence of this claim has been provided; initial reports had stated JASSM-ER missiles were used, but it was later clarified that baseline JASSM models were employed.
On 27 October 2019, at the end of the Barisha raid to capture or kill Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the then-leader of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) terror organization, a number of AGM-158B missiles were used to completely level the compound where the raid took place, marking the second time the missile has been used in combat.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
AustraliaRoyal Australian Air Force FinlandFinnish Air Force
PolandPolish Air Force United StatesUnited States Air Force


==
Specifications ==


===
AGM-158A JASSM
===
Length: 4.27 m (14 ft)
Wingspan: 2.4 m (7 ft 11 in)
Mass: 975 kg (2,150 lb)
Speed:
Subsonic
Range: 370 km (230 mi)
Propulsion:
Teledyne CAE
J402-CA-100 turbojet
; thrust 3.0 kN (680 lbf)
Fuel:
JP10 fuel
Warhead: 450 kg (1000 lb)
WDU-42/B penetrator
Production unit cost:
$850K
Production dates:
1998–present
===
AGM-158B
JASSM (ER) ===
Speed:
Subsonic
Range: 925+ km (575+ mi)
Production unit cost: $1.327 million
Propulsion:
Williams International F107-WR-105 turbofan
Production dates:
2006–present


==
See also ==
AGM-137
TSSAM
Storm Shadow/SCALP EG
KEPD 350 (Taurus missile)
Hatf-VIII (Ra'ad)
SOM (missile)
Wan Chien
List of missiles


==
References ==


==
External links ==
CSIS Missile Threat – JASSM / JASSM-ER
Lockheed Martin JASSM Website
Lockheed Martin AGM-158 JASSM –
Designation Systems
GlobalSecurity.org
Falcon Down is a 2001 action film directed by Phillip J. Roth, and starring Dale Midkiff, William Shatner, Judd Nelson, Jennifer Rubin and Cliff Robertson.

== Story ==
DVD synopsis:
The biggest U.S. military project in history, the XB-1000 Mach-6 stealth bomber known as the Falcon Project is cancelled following a major disaster during its first test flight.

Undaunted, a group of ex-military strategists continue to develop the stealth in secret, knowing that once complete, a sale to the Chinese for billions of dollars is assured.
A team of experts is assembled to hijack the plane, including the one man capable of flying the new stealth technology, Hank Thomas (Midkiff), a staunchly American fighter pilot who unwittingly becomes involved in the operation.

Once on board, the hijack begins and the Russian-trained commandos demand that Hank land on an Arctic ice cap where the real battle of survival begins.
The ice is too thin to support the extraordinary weight of the Falcon.
Thousands of feet beneath the surface, Hank must not only battle the ruthless commandos, but also escape the icy grave which threatens the very fabric of national security.
==
Cast ==
Dale Midkiff — Captain Hank Thomas
William Shatner —
Major Robert Carson
Judd Nelson — Harold Peters
Jennifer Rubin — Sharon Williams
Cliff Robertson —
Buzz Thomas
Mark Kiely — Roger the Rat
Dean Biasucci —
Roth Jankins
Sandra Ferguson — Barbara Edwards
Natasha Roth —
Alisia Edwards
Allison Dunbar — Connie Eldridge
Que Kelly — Weapons Specialist
Donald Li — Captain Chow
William Zabka —
Security Guard John
Bo Eason — Security Guard
Jeff Rank —
Harmon Yaznah


==
Allusions ==
The design of the Falcon is loosely based on alleged designs of the Aurora, an alleged top-secret hypersonic spyplane developed by the U.S. Air Force in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Various parts of the plot (stealth aircraft equipped with advanced weapons, landing on frozen ice, etc.)
are loosely based on the book "Firefox" and its movie adaptation.

== See also ==
Aurora aircraft
DARPA Falcon Project


==
External links ==
Falcon Down at IMDb
Falcon Down at Rotten Tomatoes
Popeye is the name of a family of air-to-surface missiles developed and in use by Israel, of which several types have been developed for Israeli and export users.
A long-range submarine-launched cruise missile variant of the Popeye Turbo has been speculated as being employed in Israel's submarine-based nuclear forces.
The United States operates the Popeye under a different designation according to US naming conventions as the AGM-142
Have Nap.
== Design ==
The Popeye is designed for precision attack against large targets from stand off ranges.
The standard Popeye and smaller Popeye-Lite are powered by a single-stage solid rocket.
Rafael offered a Popeye Turbo air launched variant featuring a jet engine and folding wings for a UK competition specifying a cruise missile with range of at least 320 km (200 miles) in 1994; publicly exposing a lowest possible maximum range for that variant.
An inertial guidance system pilots the missile towards the target; for terminal homing the pilot can control the missile directly via an INS and data link, aiming via either a television or imaging infrared seeker depending on the missile model.
It is not necessary for the launching aircraft to direct the missile—control can be passed to another platform while the firing aircraft escapes the area.
There are two choices of warhead for the export versions, a 340 kg (750 lb) blast/fragmentation or 360 kg (800 lb) penetrator.

The alleged Israeli submarine-launched cruise missile variant is reported to be jet powered and nuclear armed with a greatly increased range, though according to the Federation of American Scientists "open literature provides little information on this system" but in a May 2000 test launch was tracked for 1500 km.

===
Air Launched
Variants ===
Popeye (also known as Have
Nap)—this is the standard solid-rocket–powered stand off missile, 4.82 m (15 ft 10 in)
long and weighing 1,360 kg (3,000 lb) with a 340 kg (750 lb) blast fragmentation or 360 kg (800 lb)
I-800 penetrating warhead, inertial and imaging infrared or TV guidance.

Popeye II or Popeye Lite (also known as Have
Lite)—this is a reduced size (shortened to 424 cm/167 in) and weight version (weight is now 1125 kg/2500 lb) of the Popeye to give light aircraft such as the F-16I Sufa a precision standoff strike capability.

Popeye Turbo ALCM—
The Popeye Turbo air-launched cruise missile, which uses a jet engine and liquid fuel, is approx 6.25 m
(20.5 ft) long, it is reported to have a range of more than 320 km (200 mi).

Crystal Maze or Raptor is developed for the Indian market with a range of 100 km, weighing 1,100 kg that carries 80 kg warhead.
It was developed in the year 2003-04 to be lighter than Popeye.

Have Rain—
A 2004 report indicated that Rafael was developing a new anti-ship version known as the “Have Rain.”
The new missile is believed to have a launch weight of 900 kg, for deployment aboard P-3 Orion aircraft.

SPICE
In 2000, Rafael promoted a "Smart Precise Impact Cost Effective" (SPICE) add-on "
smart bomb" guidance kit for Mk 84 bombs
, this system was based on the Popeye seekers.

==
Popeye Turbo Submarine Launched Cruise Missile ==
The Popeye Turbo SLCM is a reportedly stretched version of the Popeye Turbo developed for use as a submarine-launched cruise missile (SLCM) was widely reported in a US Navy observed 2002 test in the Indian Ocean to have hit a target 1500 km away.
It is reasonable to assume that the weapon's range has been extended to the point where it can launch against Tehran and even more Iranian cities from a relatively safe location.
It can allegedly carry a 200 kiloton nuclear warhead.
It is believed that the stretched Popeye Turbo is the primary strategic second strike nuclear deterrent weapon that can be fired from the 650 mm secondary torpedo tubes of the Israeli Dolphin-class submarines.
It is believed that the SLCM version of the Popeye was developed by Israel after the US Clinton administration refused an Israeli request in 2000 to purchase Tomahawk long range SLCM's because of international MTCR proliferation rules.
While the standard Popeye is 533 mm
the Dolphin class submarines have four 650 mm torpedo tubes in addition to the six standard 533 mm tubes allowing for the possibility that a SLCM Popeye derivative may be a larger diameter.

==
Overview ==
The Popeye is compatible with a variety of aircraft from tactical fighters to heavy bombers.
Since their inception, the missiles have gone through a variety of improvement programs designed to increase reliability and reduce costs.
These efforts have included changes in the materials and manufacturing processes of the wings, fins and rocket motor, new components in the inertial guidance unit, an upgraded processor, and an improved imaging infrared seeker.

Israel is thought to be using the airframe and avionics to produce a long-range submarine-launched cruise missile with a liquid-fueled jet engine similar to the Popeye Turbo rather than a rocket.
In US use, the Popeye designated as the AGM-142
Have Nap is intended primarily to equip the B-52H, allowing it to attack fixed targets of high value at sufficient range to provide protection from defences.
The missile represented the first precision guided munition to be carried by the B-52H.
The London Sunday Times newspaper reported that on 5 July 2013, Israeli Dolphin submarines fired long-range cruise missiles at stores of Russian-made P-800 Oniks anti-ship missiles kept at the Syrian port of Latakia, contradicting an earlier CNN report it had been an air strike.
Israel also deploys sub-Harpoon missiles capable of land attack on its Dolphin class submarines.
In the afternoon of 7 December 2014, two formations composed by two Israeli Air Force F-15Is each, fired Popeye missiles against two separate target sites in Syria.
Syrian air defense Buk-M2 missile batteries fired two missiles at the incoming attack planes, both were jammed and two Pechora 2M missiles were hastily launched at the four incoming Popeye missiles, shooting one down.
In the early hours of 30 November 2016, Israeli planes launched air-to-surface Popeye missiles from Lebanese airspace at targets at Sabboura, north-east of Damascus.

===
Deployment ===
First developed for use by the Israeli Air Force, it has been in service since 1985.

The United States Air Force first bought a batch of 154 missiles in 1989 followed by a second batch of 54 missiles in 1996.

The Royal Australian Air Force has also purchased a number of Popeye missiles in the late 1990s for use by the RAAF's F-111 bombers.
The F-111 was taken out of Australian service in 2010.Currently, the Turkish Air Force's
F-4 2020
Terminator aircraft (which were extensively upgraded by IAI) and
the TuAF F-16 CCIP are armed with a Turkish License production version of the Popeye.

===
Israel and Turkey co-production ===
In May 1997, Israel and Turkey signed an agreement valued in excess of US$500 million for the establishment of a joint-venture between Israel's Rafael and Turkey's Turkish Aerospace Industries for the co-production of Popeye I and Popeye II missiles in Turkey.

==
Operators ==
There have been reports that Israel has exported Popeye and its variants to various countries:
Australia: Royal Australian Air Force
India: 30 for Indian Air Force
Israel:
Israeli Air Force, Israeli Navy
 South Korea: Republic of Korea
Air Force
 Turkey:
Turkish Air Force
 United States:
United States Air Force (retired in 2004)


==
Specifications ==
Weight : 1,360 kg (3,000 lb)
Length: 4.82 m (15 ft 10 in)
Diameter: 533 mm (21 in)
Wingspan: 1.98 m (78 in)
Guidance: Inertial plus imaging infrared or TV
Engine:
Single-stage solid rocket
Range: 78 km (48 mi)
Warhead: 340 kg (750 lb) blast fragmentation, or 360 kg (800 lb)
I-800 penetrating


==
See also ==
Delilah (missile)
Cirit
Ra'ad
Ra'ad-II
Rocketsan
SOM
Bina
Ya-Ali
Ghassed-3
Zoobin
Sadid-1
Jask-2


==
References ==
Citations
Bibliography


==
External links ==
Popeye on Rafael's official site
AGM-142
The RAAF's New Standoff Weapon
Federation of American Scientist section page on Popeye
Excerpts from www.jinsa.org
The AGM-84E Standoff Land Attack Missile (SLAM) was a subsonic, over-the-horizon air-launched cruise missile that was developed by Boeing Integrated Defense Systems from the McDonnell Douglas Harpoon antiship missile.
The SLAM was designed to provide all-weather, day and night, precision attack capabilities against stationary high-value targets.
Except for new technologies in the guidance and seeker sections, which included a Global Positioning System receiver, a Walleye optical guidance system, and a newly developed Maverick missile datalink, all of the missile hardware came directly from the Harpoon missile.
The SLAM is also equipped with a Tomahawk missile warhead for better destructive force.
SLAM
missile uses an inertial navigation system, which is supplemented by Global Positioning System (GPS) input, and it also uses Infrared homing terminal guidance.
Developed in 48 months, a number of SLAMs were successfully employed during the Persian Gulf War, when it struck Iraqi coastal targets.
Also, the SLAM was used successfully in F/A-18 Hornet and A-6 Intruder air strikes during Operation Desert Storm even before official operational testing of the new missile had begun.
The SLAM was also used during United Nations air raids in Bosnia before "Operation Joint Endeavor".
In the year 2000, the SLAM was replaced in service by the AGM-84H SLAM-ER (Standoff Land Attack Missile Expanded Response), which had numerous new capabilities including increased target penetration and nearly twice the range of the older AGM-84E SLAM.

== See also ==
AGM-84H/
K SLAM-ER
BGM-109 Tomahawk Cruise Missile
AGM-84 Harpoon anti-ship missile


==
References ==


==
External links ==
US Navy Fact File: SLAM-ER
Boeing (McDonnell-Douglas) AGM/RGM/UGM-84 Harpoon, Designation Systems
spec sheet, Time
SLAM-ER, Boeing
A ballistic missile follows a ballistic trajectory to deliver one or more warheads on a predetermined target.
These weapons are guided only during relatively brief periods—most of the flight is unpowered.
Short-range ballistic missiles stay within the Earth's atmosphere, while intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) are launched on a sub-orbital trajectory.

These weapons are in a distinct category from cruise missiles, which are aerodynamically guided in powered flight.

==
History ==
The earliest form of ballistic missiles dates from the 13th century with its use derived from the history of rockets.
In the 14th century, the Ming Chinese navy used an early form of a ballistic missile weapon called the Huo long chu shui in naval battles against enemy ships.
A modern pioneer ballistic missile was the A-4, commonly known as the V-2 developed by Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s under the direction of Wernher von Braun.
The first successful launch of a V-2 was on October 3, 1942, and it began operation on September 6, 1944, against Paris, followed by an attack on London two days later.
By the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945, more than 3,000 V-2s had been launched.
The R-7 Semyorka was the first intercontinental ballistic missile.

A total of 30 nations have deployed operational ballistic missiles.
Development continues with around 100 ballistic missile flight tests in 2007 (not including those of the US), mostly by the People's Republic of China, Iran, and the Russian Federation.
In 2010, the U.S. and Russian governments signed a treaty to reduce their inventory of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) over a seven-year period (to 2017) to 1550 units each.

==
Flight ==
An intercontinental ballistic missile trajectory consists of three parts: the powered flight portion; the free-flight portion, which constitutes most of the flight time; and the re-entry phase, where the missile re-enters the Earth's atmosphere.
(
The flight phases for shorter-range ballistic missiles are essentially the first two phases of the ICBM, as some ballistic categories do not leave the atmosphere.)Ballistic missiles can be launched from fixed sites or mobile launchers, including vehicles (e.g., transporter erector launchers (TELs)), aircraft, ships, and submarines.
The powered flight portion can last from a few tenths of seconds to several minutes and can consist of multiple rocket stages.
When the fuel is exhausted, no more thrust is provided and the missile enters free flight.
In order to cover large distances, ballistic missiles are usually launched into a high sub-orbital spaceflight; for intercontinental missiles, the highest altitude (apogee) reached during free-flight is about 2,000 kilometers (1,200 mi).The re-entry stage begins at an altitude where atmospheric drag plays a significant part in missile trajectory, and lasts until missile impact.
Reentry vehicles reenter the Earth's atmosphere at very high velocities, on the order of 6–8 kilometers per second (22,000–29,000 km/h; 13,000–18,000 mph) at ICBM ranges.

==
Advantages ==
The course taken by ballistic missiles has two significant desirable properties.
First, ballistic missiles that fly above the atmosphere have a much longer range than would be possible for cruise missiles of the same size.
Powered rocket flight through thousands of kilometers of air would require vastly greater amounts of fuel, making the launch vehicles larger and easier to detect and intercept.
Powered missiles that can cover similar ranges, such as cruise missiles, do not use rocket motors for the majority of their flight, but instead use more economical jet engines.
However, cruise missiles have not made ballistic missiles obsolete, due to the second major advantage: ballistic missiles can travel extremely quickly along their flight path.
An ICBM can strike a target within a 10,000 km range in about 30 to 35 minutes.
With terminal speeds of over 5,000 m/s, ballistic missiles are much harder to intercept than cruise missiles, due to the much shorter time available.
Therefore, ballistic missiles are some of the most feared weapons available, despite the fact that cruise missiles are cheaper, more mobile, and more versatile.

== Types ==
Ballistic missiles do vary widely in range and use, and are often divided into categories based on range.
Various schemes are used by different countries to categorize the ranges of ballistic missiles:

Air-launched ballistic missile (ALBM)
Tactical ballistic missile:
Range between about 150 to 300 kilometres (93 to 186 mi)
Theatre ballistic missile (TBM):
Range between 300 to 3,500 kilometres (190 to 2,170 mi)
Short-range ballistic missile (SRBM):
Range between 300 to 1,000 kilometres (190 to 620 mi)
Medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM):
Range between 1,000 to 3,500 kilometres (620 to 2,170 mi)
Intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) or long-range ballistic missile (LRBM)
: Range between 3,500 to 5,500 kilometres (2,200 to 3,400 mi)
Intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM):
Range greater than 5,500 kilometres (3,400 mi)
Submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM): Launched from ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs)Most current designs have intercontinental range with a notable exception of Indian operational SLBM Sagarika and K-4 as well as
North Korea's currently operationally deployed KN-11 which might not have intercontinental range.
A comparable missile would be the decommissioned China's JL-1 SLBM with a range of less than 2,500 km.

Tactical short- and medium-range missiles are often collectively referred to as tactical and theatre ballistic missiles, respectively.
Long- and medium-range ballistic missiles are generally designed to deliver nuclear weapons because their payload is too limited for conventional explosives to be cost-effective in comparison to conventional bomber aircraft (though the U.S. is evaluating the idea of a conventionally armed ICBM for near-instant global air strike capability, despite the high costs).

==
Quasi ballistic missiles ==
A quasi ballistic missile (also called a semi ballistic missile) including anti-ship ballistic missiles is a category of missile that has a low trajectory
and/or is largely ballistic but can perform maneuvers in flight or make unexpected changes in direction and range.
At a lower trajectory than a ballistic missile, a quasi ballistic missile can maintain higher speed, thus allowing its target less time to react to the attack, at the cost of reduced range.

The Russian Iskander is a quasi ballistic missile.
The Russian Iskander-M cruises at hypersonic speed of 2,100–2,600 m/s (Mach 6–7) at a height of 50 km.
The Iskander-M weighs 4,615 kg carries a warhead of 710–800 kg, has a range of 480 km and achieves a CEP of 5–7 meters.
During flight it can maneuver at different altitudes and trajectories to evade anti-ballistic missiles.
China, India & Iran have recently developed anti-ship ballistic missiles;


===
List of quasi ballistic missiles ===
China
DF-15 (active)
DF-21D (active)
DF-26 (active)
B-611MR (active)
SY-400 (active)
France
Hadès (retired) India
Prithvi-III (active)
Dhanush (active)
Prahaar (under development)
Shaurya(active)
IranFateh-110 (active)
Qiam 1 (active)
Khalij Fars (active)
Israel
LORA (active)
North Korea
KN-23 (under development)
KN-24 (under development)
Pakistan
Nasr
(active) Soviet Union\
Russia
R-27K (cancelled)
Tochka (active)
Oka (retired)
Iskander (missile) Iskander (active)
United States
MGM-140B/E ATACMS (active)


==
Throw-weight ==
Throw-weight is a measure of the effective weight of ballistic missile payloads.
It is measured in kilograms or tonnes.
Throw-weight equals the total weight of a missile's warheads, reentry vehicles, self-contained dispensing mechanisms, penetration aids, and missile guidance systems
: generally all components except for the launch rocket booster and launch fuel.
Throw-weight may refer to any type of warhead, but in normal modern usage, it refers almost exclusively to nuclear or thermonuclear payloads.
It was once also a consideration in the design of naval ships and the number and size of their guns.

Throw-weight was used as a criterion in classifying different types of missiles during Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the Soviet Union and the United States.
The term became politically controversial during debates over the arms control accord, as critics of the treaty alleged that Soviet missiles were able to carry larger payloads and so enabled the Soviets to maintain higher throw-weight than an American force with a roughly comparable number of lower-payload missiles.
The missiles with the world's heaviest payloads are the Russian SS-18 and Chinese CSS-4 and as of 2017, Russia was developing a new heavy-lift, liquid-propellant ICBM called the Sarmat.
===
Depressed trajectory ===
Throw-weight is normally calculated using an optimal ballistic trajectory from one point on the surface of the Earth to another.
An optimal trajectory maximizes the total payload (throw-weight) using the available impulse of the missile.
By reducing the payload weight, different trajectories can be selected, which can either increase the nominal range or decrease the total time in flight.

A depressed trajectory is a non-optimal, as a lower and flatter trajectory takes less time between launch and impact but has a lower throw-weight.
The primary reasons to choose a depressed trajectory are to evade anti-ballistic missile systems by reducing the time available to shoot down the attacking vehicle (especially during the vulnerable burn-phase against space-based ABM systems) or a nuclear first-strike scenario.
An alternate, non-military, purpose for a depressed trajectory is in conjunction with the space plane concept with use of air-breathing engines, which requires the ballistic missile to remain low enough inside the atmosphere for air-breathing engines to function.

== See also ==
Missile (Guided)
Anti-ballistic missile
List of ICBMs
List of NATO reporting names for ballistic missile submarines
Surface-to-surface missile
Weapons of mass destruction
List of missiles
List of missiles by nation
List of currently active missiles of the United States military
NATO reporting name (has lists of various Soviet missiles)
Payload
MIRV
Ballistic missile flight phases
== Notes ==


==
References ==
Needham, Joseph (1986).
Science and Civilization in China: Volume 5, Chemistry and Chemical Technology, Part 7, Military Technology; the Gunpowder Epic.
Taipei:
Caves Books Ltd.


==
Further reading ==
Futter, Andrew (2013).
Ballistic Missile Defence and US National Security Policy:
Normalisation and Acceptance after the Cold War.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-0415817325.

Neufeld, Jacob (1990).
The Development of Ballistic Missiles in the United States Air Force, 1945-1960.
Office of Air Force History, U.S. Air Force.
ISBN 0912799625.

Swaine, Michael D.; Swanger, Rachel M.; Kawakami, Takashi (2001).
Japan and Ballistic Missile Defense.
Rand.
ISBN 0833030205.

==
External links ==
Missile Threat:
A Project of the Center for Strategic and International Studies
The BrahMos (designated PJ-10) is a medium-range ramjet supersonic cruise missile that can be launched from submarine, ships, aircraft, or land.
It is the fastest supersonic cruise missile in the world.
It is a joint venture between the Russian Federation's NPO Mashinostroyeniya and India's Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), who together have formed BrahMos Aerospace.
It is based on the Russian P-800 Oniks cruise missile and other similar sea-skimming Russian cruise missile technology.
The name BrahMos is a portmanteau formed from the names of two rivers, the Brahmaputra of India and the Moskva of Russia.

It is the world's fastest anti-ship cruise missile in operation.
The land-launched and ship-launched versions are already in service.
An air-launched variant of BrahMos appeared in 2012 and entered service in 2019.
A hypersonic version of the missile, BrahMos-II, is also presently under development with a speed of Mach 7–8 to boost aerial fast strike capability.
It was expected to be ready for testing by 2020.India
wanted the BrahMos to be based on a mid range cruise missile like the P-700 Granit.
Its propulsion is based on the Russian missile, and missile guidance has been developed by BrahMos Aerospace.
The missile is expected to reach a total order of US$13 billion.
In 2016, as India became a member of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), India and Russia are now planning to jointly develop a new generation of Brahmos missiles with 800 km-plus range and an ability to hit protected targets with pinpoint accuracy.
In 2019, India upgraded the missile with a new range of 650 km with plans to eventually upgrade all missiles to a range of 1500 km.

==
Origin ==
The BrahMos has been developed as a joint venture between the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) of India and the Federal State Unitary Enterprise NPO Mashinostroyenia (NPOM) of Russia as BrahMos Aerospace via an inter-government agreement.
The company was established on 12 February 1998 with an authorised share capital of US$250 million.
India holds 50.5% share of the joint venture and its initial financial contribution was US$126.25 million, while Russia holds 49.5% share with an initial contribution of US$123.75 million.
Since late 2004, the missile has undergone several tests from a variety of platforms, including a land based test from the Pokhran range in the desert, in which the evasive 'S' maneuver at Mach 2.8 was demonstrated for the Indian Army and a launch in which the land attack capability from sea was demonstrated.
Keltec (now known as BrahMos Aerospace Trivandrum Ltd or BATL), an Indian state-owned firm, was acquired by BrahMos Corporation in 2008.
Approximately ₹1,500 crore (equivalent to ₹34 billion or US$471.7 million in 2019) will be invested in the facility to make BrahMos components and integrate the missile systems.
This was necessitated by the increased order book of the missile system, with orders having been placed by both the Indian Army and Navy.

Initially, Russia supplied 65% of the BrahMos' components, including its ramjet engine and radar seeker.
Currently 65% of the missile is manufactured in India and there are plans to increase this to 85% by replacing the components with an Indian made seeker and booster.

==
Development ==


=== Surface-to-surface variants ===
BrahMos was first test-fired on 12 June 2001 from the Integrated Test Range (ITR), Chandipur in a vertical launch configuration.
On 14 June 2004, another test was conducted at ITR and BrahMos was fired from a mobile launcher.
On 5 March 2008, the land attack version of the missile was fired from the destroyer INS Rajput and the missile hit and destroyed the right target among a group of targets.
The vertical launch of BrahMos was conducted on 18 December 2008 from INS Ranvir.
The BrahMos I Block-I for the army was successfully tested with new capabilities in the deserts of Rajasthan, at a test range near Pokharan in December 2004 and March 2007.

During a user trial on 20 January 2009, BrahMos was tested with a new navigation system but it failed to hit the target.
BrahMos Aerospace Corporation's director Dr Sivathanu Pillai said, "The missile performance was absolutely normal until the last phase, but the missile missed the target, though it maintained the direction."
and that "The problem was in the software, not hardware".
The Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) said that there were "small hitches" in the last stage of the test firing due to delay in input of satellite navigation input to the Inertial Navigation System, the missile travelled for 112 seconds instead of the slated 84 seconds and fell 7 km away from the target.
According to BrahMos Corporation, another test of the new missile was to be conducted within one month, but it was eventually conducted on 4 March 2009 and was deemed successful.
BrahMos was test-fired again on 29 March 2009.
For the test, the missile had to identify a building among a cluster of buildings in an urban environment.
BrahMos successfully hit the intended target in two and a half minutes of launch.
According to official sources, "The new seeker is unique and would help us to hit our targets, which are insignificant in terms of size, in a cluster of large buildings.
India is now the only nation in the world with this advanced technology".
After the third test, Lt Gen Noble Thamburaj, said that the Indian Army wanted the BrahMos to achieve high standards of accuracy and congratulated the scientists on behalf of the Indian Army.
The Indian Army confirmed that the test was successful and the army is satisfied with the missile.
This marking the completion of the development phase of BrahMos Block-II, and it was ready for induction.

The 5 September 2010 test of BrahMos created a world record for being the first cruise missile to be tested at supersonic speeds in a steep-dive mode.
The missile was test-fired from the integrated test range launching complex-3 (LC-3) at Chandipur around 11.35 am.
With this launch, the Indian army's requirement for land attacks with Block-II advanced seeker software with target discriminating capabilities was met.
BrahMos became the only supersonic cruise missile possessing advanced capability of selection of a particular land target amongst a group of targets, providing an edge to the user with precise hit.
Block III has advanced guidance and upgraded software, incorporating high manoeuvres at multiple points and steep dive from high altitude.
The steep dive capability of the Block III enables it to hit targets hidden behind a mountain range.
It will be deployed in Arunachal Pradesh.
It can engage ground targets from an altitude as low as 10 metres for surgical strikes without any collateral damage.
It is capable of being launched from multiple platforms like submarines, ships, aircraft and land based Mobile Autonomous Launchers (MAL).
On 12 August 2011, it was test-fired by ground forces and met all mission parameters.

The new navigation system uses an Indian chip called G3OM (GPS, GLONASS, GAGAN on a Module).
The system weighs around 17 grams, and gives accuracy below five metres using Indian, US and Russian navigation satellites.
The system can be used in tandem with and Inertial Navigation System (INS) to provide high-accuracy targeting without using any seeker.
BrahMos was tested with an Indian seeker for the first time on 22 March 2018, and was tested with an India-developed propulsion system, airframe and power supply on 30 September 2019.On 30 September 2020
, India successfully test-fired an extended range BrahMos supersonic cruise missile.
The supersonic cruise missile is capable of hitting targets at more than 400-km range.
The test was carried out under PJ-10 project of the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), under which the missile was launched with an indigenous booster.
The missile was launched from a land-based facility in Odisha.

This is the second test-firing of the extended range version of the missile which has an indigenously developed airframe and booster.
===
Submarine-launched variant ===
The submarine-launched variant of Brahmos was test fired successfully for the first time from a submerged pontoon near Visakhapatnam at the coast of Bay of Bengal on 20 March 2013.
This was the first vertical launch of a supersonic missile from a submerged platform.
The missile can be launched from a depth of 40 to 50 m (130 to 160 ft).
In late January 2016, Russia confirmed that future Indian-made submarines would be armed with smaller version of the missile that could fit inside a torpedo tube.

===
Air-launched variant ===


====
BrahMos
-A ====
The BrahMos-A is a modified air-launched variant of the missile with a range of 500 km which can be launched from a Sukhoi Su-30MKI as a standoff weapon.
To reduce the missile's weight to 2.55 tons, many modifications were made like using a smaller booster, adding fins for airborne stability after launch, and relocating the connector.
It can be released from the height of 500 to 14,000 metres (1,640 to 46,000 ft).
After release, the missile free falls for 100–150 metres, then goes into a cruise phase at 14,000 metres and finally the terminal phase at 15 metres.
BrahMos Aerospace planned to deliver the missile to the IAF in 2015, where it is expected to arm at least three squadrons.
A Su-30MKI is able to only carry one BrahMos missile.

The missile was also planned to arm the Indian Navy's Ilyushin Il-38
and Tupolev Tu-142 maritime patrol and anti-submarine aircraft with 6 missiles per aircraft, but this could not be made possible due to insufficient ground clearance of the IL-38, high cost of modifying the Tu-142 and the questionable benefits of modifying an ageing fleet.
The air-launched version for the Indian Air Force was ready for testing in 2008.
An expert committee from the DRDO and the Indian Air Force (IAF) had ruled out any structural modifications to the Su-30MKI to carry the missile.
On 22 October 2008, A. Sivathanu Pillai, Chief Controller, R&D, DRDO and CEO and managing director of BrahMos Aerospace, announced that trials and tests were to be carried out by 2011, and the IAF would get its own version of BrahMos by 2012.On 10 January 2009, it was reported that two Indian Air Force Su-30MKI fighter jets were sent to Russia for a retrofit program that would enable them to launch the missile.
On 8 August 2009, Alexander Leonov, Director of the Russian Machine Building Research and Production Centre, said "we are ready for test launches."
He also said that a new takeoff engine for the launching of the missile in air and at extremely high altitudes had been developed, and the initial test firing of the missile would be undertaken from the Su-30 MKI but did not specify the dates.
On 26 February 2012, A. Sivathanu Pillai said that the air-launched version of BrahMos is being developed and will be tested by the end of 2012.
This version of the BrahMos missile will use air-breathing scramjet propulsion technology and would be more fuel-efficient than a traditional rocket-powered missile.
The purchase of over 200 air-launched BrahMos supersonic cruise missiles for the IAF was cleared by Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) on 19 October 2012, at the cost of ₹6,000 crore (equivalent to ₹91 billion or US$1 billion in 2019).
This would include funds for the integration and testing of the BrahMos on Su-30MKI of the IAF.
As per this plan, the first test of the air-launched version of the missile was to be conducted by December 2012.
Two Su-30MKI of the IAF would be modified by the HAL at its Nashik facility where they will also be integrated with the missile's aerial launcher.

A demonstration flight was carried out at Hindustan Aeronautics Limited Nashik on 25 June 2016 as a modified Su-30MKI carrying BrahMos-A underwent a successful trial flight, the first time a heavyweight supersonic cruise missile had been integrated on a long-range fighter aircraft; the project to adapt the weapon for air launch was approved in 2011, but was bogged down with technology transfer and intellectual property rights concerns.
To carry the missile, the Su-30MKI undercarriage had to be strengthened, which also required new hard points and structural modifications.
The cost of adapting the BrahMos for air launch was "phenomenal," but efforts to downsize the missile were abandoned after an attempt to reduce the size of the ramjet.
On 22 November 2017, the missile was successfully test fired for the first time from a Sukhoi-30MKI against a sea-based target in the Bay of Bengal.
This made Indian Air Force the first in the world to have successfully tested such a type of air launched trisonic-class missile on a sea-based target.
After the IAF successfully tested Brahmos from a Su-30MKI against a sea-based target, it declared on 17 December 2019 that the integration of BrahMos-A on Su-30 MKI is complete.40 IAF SU-30MKI are to undergo modifications to be equipped to carry the missile.
According to the CEO of BrahMos Aerospace, Sudhir Kumar Mishra,
Brahmos-A when fired from Su-30 aircraft can reach targets thousands of kilometres away.
On 20 January 2020, the IAF commissioned its first squadron of Su-30MKI fighters equipped with the PJ-10 BrahMos-A missile.

===
Testing ===


==
Further developments ==


===
Extended range ===
In 2016, India became a member of the MTCR.
India and Russia are now planning to jointly develop a new generation of Brahmos missiles with 1500 km-plus range and an ability to hit protected targets with pinpoint accuracy.
The upgrade will also be applied to all existing BrahMos missiles.

===
BrahMos-II ===

BrahMos-II is a hypersonic cruise missile currently under development and is estimated to have a range of 600 km.
With a speed of Mach 8, it will have double the speed of the current BrahMos missile, and it will be the fastest hypersonic missile in the world.
Development could take 7–8 years to complete.

=== BrahMos-NG ===

BrahMos-NG (Next Generation) is a mini version based on the existing BrahMos, will have same 290 km range and mach 3.5 speed
but it will weigh around 1.5 tons, 5 metres in length and 50 cm in diameter, making BrahMos-NG 50 percent lighter and three metres shorter than its predecessor.
The system is expected to be inducted in the year 2024.
BrahMos-NG will have lesser RCS (radar cross section) compared to its predecessor, making it harder for air defense systems to locate and engage the target.
BrahMos-NG will have Land, Air, ship-borne and Submarine tube-launched variants.
The first test flight is expected to take place in 2022–24.
Initially Brahmos-NG was referred to as Brahmos-M. Additionally, the BrahMos-NG will have an AESA radar rather than the mechanically scanned one on the PJ-10.The missile will arm the Sukhoi Su-30MKI,
Mikoyan MiG-29K, HAL Tejas and future inductions such as the Dassault Rafale,  and HAL MWF.
Submarine launched variant will be capable of being fired from the new P75I class of submarines.
A model of the new variant was showcased on 20 February 2013, at the 15th anniversary celebrations of BrahMos Corporations.
The Sukhoi SU-30MKI would carry three missiles while other combat aircraft would carry one each.
Missile is likely to be ready in late 2022.

===
UCAV variant ===
The former President of India, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam asked BrahMos Aerospace to develop an advanced version of the BrahMos cruise missile to maintain India's lead in the field.
He stated that a hypersonic version of BrahMos would be needed that could deliver its payload and return to base.

==
Specifications ==
BrahMos claims it has the capability of attacking surface targets by flying as low as five metres in altitude and the maximum altitude it can fly is 14,000 metres.
It has a diameter of 70 cm and a wingspan of 1.7 m.
It can gain a speed of Mach 2.8, and has a maximum range of 450 km.[1][2]
The ship-launched and land-based missiles can carry a 200 kg warhead, whereas the aircraft-launched variant (BrahMos A) can carry a 300 kg warhead.
It has a two-stage propulsion system, with a solid-propellant rocket for initial acceleration and a liquid-fuelled ramjet responsible for sustained supersonic cruise.
Air-breathing ramjet propulsion is much more fuel-efficient than rocket propulsion, giving the BrahMos a longer range than a pure rocket-powered missile would achieve.
The high speed of the BrahMos likely gives it better target-penetration characteristics than lighter subsonic cruise-missiles, such as Tomahawk.
Being twice as heavy and almost four times as fast as Tomahawk, the BrahMos has more than 32 times the on-cruise kinetic energy of a Tomahawk missile, although it carries only 3/5 the payload and a fraction of the range, which suggests that the missile was designed with a different tactical role.
Its 2.8 mach speed means that it cannot be intercepted by some existing missile defence systems and its precision makes it lethal to water targets.
Although BrahMos was primarily an anti-ship missile, the BrahMos Block III can also engage land-based targets.
It can be launched either in a vertical or inclined position and is capable of covering targets over a 360-degree horizon.
The BrahMos missile has an identical configuration for land, sea, and sub-sea platforms.
The air-launched version has a smaller booster and additional tail fins for added stability during launch.
The BrahMos has currently been configured for aerial deployment with the Su-30MKI as its carrier.
On 5 September 2010 BrahMos created a record for the first supersonic steep dive.

==
Variants ==
Surface-launched, Block IShip-launched, anti-ship variant (operational)
Ship-launched, land-attack variant (operational)
Land-launched, land-attack variant (operational)
Land-launched, anti-ship variant (In induction, tested on 10 December 2010)Surface-launched, upgraded variantsBrahMos Block II land-attack variant (Operational)
BrahMos Block III land-variant (being inducted)
Anti-aircraft carrier variant (tested in March 2012) – the missile gained the capability to attack aircraft carriers using the supersonic vertical dive variant of the missile that could travel up to 290 km.
Air-launchedAir-launched, anti-ship variant (
In induction)
Air-launched, land-attack variant (In induction)Submarine-launchedSubmarine-launched, anti-ship variant – Tested successfully for the first time from a submerged pontoon on 20 March 2013.

Submarine-launched, land-attack variant (under development, expected completion in 2011)


==
Production and deployment ==
India and Russia intend to make 2,000 BrahMos supersonic cruise missiles over the next ten years through their joint venture company, and nearly 50% of them are expected to be exported to friendly countries.
The Brahmos headquarters complex is located at New Delhi and consists of a design centre and aerospace knowledge centre.
The integration complex is located at Hyderabad and a production centre is located at Thiruvananthapuram.
Another assembly line is being established at Pilani.

===
India ===


====
Indian Navy ====
By April 2013, Brahmos has been inducted in eight warships of the Indian Navy.
The following ship classes of the navy are equipped with BrahMos:
Rajput-class destroyers – INS Rajput has four Brahmos missiles in 2 twin inclined launchers.
INS Ranvir and INS Ranvijay are armed with one stern mounted 8-cell Brahmos VLS launcher.

Talwar-class frigate – The three later ships, INS Teg, INS Tarkash, INS Trikand are armed with one bow mounted 8-cell Brahmos VLS launcher.

Shivalik-class frigate –
The three frigates in this class are armed with one bow mounted 8-cell Brahmos VLS launcher.

Kolkata-class destroyer – The three destroyers in this class are armed with two bow mounted 8-cell Brahmos VLS launchers.
The Kolkata class INS Chennai successfully tested Brahmos launch on October 18, 2020.

Visakhapatnam-class destroyer – The four destroyers in this class are planned to be armed with two bow mounted 8-cell Brahmos VLS launchers.

Nilgiri-class frigate -
The seven frigates in this class are planned to be armed with one 8-cell Brahmos VLS launchers.

====
Indian Army ====
The Brahmos Block I was inducted into the army on 21 June 2007.
The Brahmos has been inducted in three regiments of the Indian Army.
The army has raised one regiment (numbered 861) of the Mark I and two missile regiments of the BrahMos Mark II, numbered 881 and 1889.
The first regiment with five mobile launcher cost $83 million to set up.
Each of the two new regiments would have between four and six batteries of three to four Mobile Autonomous Launchers (72 missiles per regiment) that can be connected to a mobile command post.
All these regiments will be part of the army's existing 40th and 41st Artillery Divisions.
The operational BrahMos regiments are:
861 Missile Regiment (BrahMos Block
I, part of 40 Artillery Division)
881 Missile Regiment (BrahMos Block II, part of 41 Artillery Division)
1889 Missile Regiment (Kargil) (BrahMos Block II, part of 42 Artillery Division)India has deployed Brahmos along with long range cruise missile Nirbhay and Akash surface to air missile to deter Chinese aggression along the Line of Actual Control in eastern Ladakh.

====
Indian Air Force ====
Thanjavur AFS: 47 Wing
No.
222
Squadron (Tigersharks)
(Air launched Brahmos)


===
Russia ===


====
Russian Navy ====
According to unspecified sources the BrahMos could be fitted to the updated Gorshkov class of frigates which will be entering the Russian Navy soon.
The defence ministry reported that due to the size and hull specifications of the BrahMos, few if any of its new ships will be able to accommodate it.

====
Russian Air Force ====
In September 2016, it was revealed that the Russian Defense Ministry is interested in purchasing the air-launched BrahMos to arm their Su-30SM fighters.
Talks could begin in 2017.

===
Export ===
Several countries, including Vietnam, South Africa, Egypt, Oman, Chile and Brunei have expressed interest in the missile.
In February 2010, a senior executive said that BrahMos was in negotiations with Chile, Brazil, South Africa and Indonesia regarding the purchase of the missile.
Malaysia is also reported to be considering the purchase of the missile for use on its Kedah class warships and fighter jets.
Informal negotiations are ongoing between India and Vietnam for the sale of BrahMos missiles.
BrahMos Aerospace has said that several Southeast Asian and Latin American countries have expressed interest in the system, with particular interest in naval and coastal defense versions, and that a "definite list of countries" exists.
Industry sources say that interested countries include Vietnam, Indonesia, and Venezuela.
The intergovernmental agreement between India and Russia to develop the BrahMos stipulates that both countries would have to approve an export sale.
On 20 April 2016, BrahMos Aerospace spokesman Praveen Pathak said that the first export contract on delivering BrahMos to a country in the Asian-Pacific Region will be signed by the end of 2016.
The Asian-Pacific nation would be a friendly nation that neither Russia nor India has any conflicts with.
One of the major issues regarding sales of the missile is that the nations looking to buy may have stressful relations with allies and trading partners of Russia.
China is one of the main nations that has objections about its neighbours getting these missiles for their navies.
In recent years, the export of BrahMos to Vietnam has picked up pace with plans and negotiations reaching a possible conclusion in mid-2016.
The only objection could be from China, which sees the selling of these missiles to Vietnam as an act of belligerence and interference in the South China Sea dispute.
In October 2019, Philippines was reported to be in discussion with India for a possible BrahMos missile acquisition project.
In November 2020, Secretary of Defense Delfin Lorenzana said that the program to acquire medium-range ramjet supersonic BrahMos cruise missiles is moving forward but getting enough funds remains a challenge.
The plan is to acquire at least two batteries of the BrahMos cruise missiles with each battery having three mobile autonomous launchers.
Each mobile autonomous launchers will consist of two to three missile tubes.
The acquisition will be done through a "government-to-government deal".
The procurement process of BrahMos was already in the advanced stage by March 2020 but the COVID-19 pandemic halted the process and caused the Philippines reprioritizing its budget.
India has offered the Philippines an arrangement to acquire the missiles through soft loan but President Rodrigo Duterte is reportedly not keen on taking the offer.
However, the Philippines resumed the procurement process for the missle, signing an arms agreement with India in March 2021 to potentially acquire Indian weapons including the BrahMos missile.

== See also ==
P-800 Oniks
CX-1 Missile Systems
CVS401 Perseus
YJ-12
Boeing X-51
RATTLRS
XASM-3
Yun Feng


==
References ==


==
External links ==
BrahMos Missile official website
CSIS Missile Threat - BrahMos
The Brahmastra
The IT in India’s cruise missile
BrahMos production status
Features and advantages of the BrahMos supersonic missile.
INFOgraphics
Indian Army
To Get World's First Supersonic Cruise Missiles (SpaceDaily:SpaceWar)
26 July 2006
Effect of BrahMos hit on a Petya class frigate
Supersonic cruise missile BrahMos inducted into Indian defense forces – Govt.
of India press release – 29 November 2006


===
Video ===
Complete Video of BrahMos Missile Testing and Targeting
BrahMos video
BrahMos - Headlines Today
Precision Target hit
The Lockheed Martin SR-72, colloquially referred to as "Son of Blackbird", is an American hypersonic UAV concept intended for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance proposed privately in 2013 by Lockheed Martin as a successor to the retired Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird.
The company expected an SR-72 test vehicle could fly by 2023.
==
Design and development ==


===
Background and early work ===
The SR-71 Blackbird was retired by the USAF in 1998, leaving what was considered a coverage gap between surveillance satellites, manned aircraft, and unmanned aerial vehicles for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) and strike missions.
With the growth of anti-satellite weapons, anti-access/area denial tactics, and counter-stealth technologies, it was thought that a high-speed aircraft could penetrate protected airspace and observe or strike a target before enemies could detect or intercept it.
The proposed reliance on extremely high speed to penetrate defended airspace is considered a significant conceptual departure from the emphasis on stealth in fifth-generation jet fighter programs and projected drone developments.
There were unconfirmed reports about the SR-72 dating back to 2007, when various sources disclosed that Lockheed Martin was developing an airplane able to fly six times the speed of sound or Mach 6 (4,000 mph; 6,400 km/h; 3,500 kn) for the United States Air Force.
Lockheed Martin Skunk Works' development work on the SR-72 was first published by Aviation Week & Space Technology on 1 November 2013.
Public attention to the news was large enough to overwhelm the Aviation Week servers.
To attain its design speeds, Lockheed Martin has been collaborating with Aerojet Rocketdyne since 2006 on an appropriate engine.
The company is developing the system from the scramjet-powered HTV-3X, which was canceled in 2008.
The SR-72 is envisioned with an air-breathing hypersonic propulsion system that has the ability to accelerate from standstill to Mach 6 using the same engine, making it about twice as fast as the SR-71.
The challenge is to design an engine to encompass the flight regimes of subsonic, supersonic and hypersonic speeds.
Using turbine compression, turbojet engines can work at zero speed and usually perform best up to Mach 2.2.
Ramjets, using aerodynamic compression with subsonic combustion, perform poorly under Mach 0.5 and are most efficient around Mach 3, being able to go up to around Mach 6.
The SR-71's specially designed engines converted to low-speed ramjets by redirecting the airflow around the core and into the afterburner for speeds greater than Mach 2.5.
Finally, scramjets with supersonic combustion cover the range of high supersonic to hypersonic speeds.
The SR-72 is to use a turbine-based combined cycle (TBCC) system to use a turbine engine at low speeds and a scramjet engine at high speeds.
The turbine and ramjet engines share common inlet and nozzle, but with separate airflow paths.
At speeds of Mach 5 and above, aerodynamic heating creates temperatures hot enough to melt conventional metallic airframes, so engineers are considering composites such as high-performance carbon, ceramic, and metal mixes, for fabrication of critical components.
Such composites have been used in intercontinental ballistic missiles and the retired Space Shuttle.

As of May 2015, the SR-72 was envisioned as an ISR and strike platform, but no payloads were specified, likely because current payloads would be insufficient on an aircraft flying at Mach 6 up to 80,000 feet (24,400 m
) high requiring hundreds of miles to turn.

New sensors and weapons would likely have to be created specifically to operate at such speeds.
In November 2013, construction of an optionally-piloted scaled demonstrator was planned to start in 2018.

The demonstrator was to be
about 60 ft (18 m) long, about the size of a Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor, and powered by one full-scale engine to fly for several minutes at Mach 6.
SR-72 flight testing was planned to follow the timeline for the hypersonic High Speed Strike Weapon.

The SR-72 is to be similar in size to the SR-71 at over 100 ft (30 m) long and have the same range, with entry into service by 2030.
The SR-72 follows the US Air Force's hypersonic road map for developing a hypersonic strike weapon by 2020, and a penetrating ISR aircraft by 2030.
At the time of the concept's unveiling, Lockheed Martin had engaged in talks with government officials, but has not secured funding for the demonstrator or engine.
On 13 November 2013, Air Force Chief of Staff General Mark Welsh revealed that the service was interested in the SR-72's hypersonic capabilities, but had not spoken with Lockheed Martin about the aircraft.

Its high speed appeals to the service to reduce the time an adversary would have to react to an operation.

They are pursuing hypersonic technology, but don't yet have the material ability to construct a full-size plane like the unmanned
SR-72.

The SR-72 was unveiled in the midst of sequestration budget cuts that have required the Air Force to balance capability, capacity, and mission readiness.

By the mid-2020s, it is believed that foreign countries will produce and export advanced aerial technologies that could end up in battlespaces against the U.S.
This drives the Air Force to further develop new systems, including hypersonic, to replace outclassed legacy systems.
In 2013, it was reported that the SR-72 may face significant challenges to being accepted by the Air Force, as they are opting to develop the Northrop Grumman RQ-180 stealth UAV to perform the task of conducting ISR missions in contested airspace.

Compared to the SR-72, the RQ-180 is less complex to design and manufacture, less prone to problems with acquisition, and could enter service as soon as 2015.

===
2014
NASA contracts ===
In December 2014, NASA awarded Lockheed Martin a contract to study the feasibility of building the SR-72's propulsion system using existing turbine engine technologies, The $892,292 contract funds a design study to determine the viability of a TBCC propulsion system by combining one of several current turbine engines, with a very low Mach ignition Dual Mode Ramjet (DMRJ).

NASA previously funded a Lockheed Martin study that found speeds up to Mach 7 could be achieved with a dual-mode engine combining turbine and ramjet technologies.

The problem with hypersonic propulsion has always been the gap between the highest speed capabilities of a turbojet, from around Mach 2.2 to the lowest speed of a scramjet at Mach 4.
Typical turbine engines cannot achieve high enough speeds for a scramjet to take over and continue accelerating.

The NASA-Lockheed Martin study is looking at the possibility of a higher-speed turbine engine or a scramjet that can function in a turbine engine's slower flight envelope; the DARPA HTV-3X had demonstrated a low-speed ramjet (Dual Mode Ram Jet) that could operate below Mach 3.

Existing turbofan engines powering jet fighters and other experimental designs are being considered for modification.

If the study is successful, NASA will fund a demonstrator to test the DMRJ in a flight research vehicle.
Aerojet Rocketdyne was awarded a $1,099,916 contract by NASA's Glenn Research Center on December 15, 2014 December 15, 2014  during mode transition.
The two firms were reported to be collaborating on turbine-based combined cycle (TBCC) propulsion system prior to development of the SR-72 hypersonic demonstrator expected to commence in 2018, with the first flight expected in 2023.In March 2016, Lockheed Martin CEO Hewson stated that the company was on the verge of a technological breakthrough that would allow its conceptual SR-72 hypersonic plane to reach Mach 6.
A hypersonic demonstrator aircraft the size of an F-22 stealth fighter could be built for less than $1 billion.

===
From 2017 ===
In June 2017, Lockheed Martin announced that the SR-72 would be in development by the early 2020s, with top speed in excess of Mach 6.
Executive Vice President Rob Weiss commented that "We've been saying hypersonics [are] two years away for the last 20 years, but all I can say is the technology is mature and we, along with DARPA and the services, are working hard to get that capability into the hands of our warfighters as soon as possible.
"In
January 2018, Lockheed Vice President Jack O'Banion gave a presentation that credited the advancements in additive manufacturing and computer modeling, stating that it would not have been possible to make the airplane five years ago, and that 3D printing allowed a cooling system to be embedded in the engine.
In February 2018, Orlando Carvalho, Executive Vice President of aeronautics at Lockheed Martin, pushed back on reports of the SR-72's development stating that no SR-72 had been produced.
He also clarified that hypersonic research is fueling weapons systems development, and that "Eventually as that technology is matured, it could ultimately enable the development of a reusable vehicle.
Prior to this we may have referred to it as a "like an SR-72", but now the terminology of choice is "reusable vehicle".
In November 2018, Lockheed Martin stated that a prototype of the SR-72 was scheduled to fly by 2025.
The aircraft will be capable of firing hypersonic missiles.

== See also ==
DARPA Falcon Project
Boeing X-51
Prompt Global Strike
2037 Bomber
Aurora
(aircraft)
Reaction Engines Scimitar
Tupolev
Tu-360


=
= References ==
The Arleigh Burke class of guided missile destroyers (DDGs) is a United States Navy class of destroyer built around the Aegis Combat System and the SPY-1D multifunction passive electronically scanned array radar.
The class is named for Admiral Arleigh Burke, an American destroyer officer in World War II, and later Chief of Naval Operations.
The lead ship, USS Arleigh Burke, was commissioned during Admiral Burke's lifetime.

These warships were designed as multimission destroyers, able to fulfill the strategic land strike role with Tomahawk missiles; antiaircraft warfare (AAW) role with powerful Aegis radar and surface-to-air missiles; antisubmarine warfare (ASW) with towed sonar array, anti-submarine rockets, and ASW helicopter; and antisurface warfare
(ASuW) with Harpoon missile launcher.
With upgrades to their AN/SPY-1 phased radar systems and their associated missile payloads as part of the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System, the ships of this class have also begun to demonstrate some promise as mobile antiballistic missile and anti-satellite weaponry platforms, operating on 15 ships as of March 2009.
Some versions of the class no longer have the towed sonar, or Harpoon missile launcher.
Their hull and superstructure were designed to have a reduced radar cross-section.
The first ship of the class was commissioned on 4 July 1991.
With the decommissioning of the last Spruance-class destroyer, USS Cushing, on 21 September 2005, the Arleigh Burke-class ships became the U.S. Navy's only active destroyers, until the Zumwalt class became active in 2016.
The Arleigh Burke class has the longest production run for any post-World War II U.S. Navy surface combatant.
Besides the 62 vessels of this class (comprising 21 of Flight I, 7 of Flight II and 34 of Flight IIA) in service by 2016, up to a further 42 (of Flight III) have been envisioned.

With an overall length of 505 to 509.5 feet (153.9 to 155.3 m), displacement ranging from 8,230 to 9,700 tons, and weaponry including over 90 missiles, the Arleigh Burke class are larger and more heavily armed than most previous ships classified as guided missile cruisers.

== Characteristics ==
The ships of the Arleigh Burke class are among the largest destroyers built in the United States.
Only the Spruance, Kidd (
563 ft or 172 m) and Zumwalt classes (
600 ft or 180 m) are longer.
The larger Ticonderoga-class ships were constructed on Spruance-class hull forms, but are designated as cruisers due to their fundamentally different mission and weapons systems than the Spruance and Kidd-class destroyers.
The Arleigh Burke class were designed with a new, large, water-plane area-hull form characterized by a wide flaring bow which significantly improves sea-keeping ability.
The hull form is designed to permit high speed in high sea states.

The designers of Arleigh Burke incorporated lessons learned from the Ticonderoga-class guided-missile cruisers, which were deemed too expensive to continue building and too difficult to further upgrade.
With the Arleigh Burke class, the U.S. Navy also returned to all-steel construction.
An earlier generation had combined a steel hull with a superstructure made of lighter aluminum to reduce top weight, but the lighter metal proved vulnerable to cracking.
Aluminum is also less fire-resistant than steel; a 1975 fire aboard USS Belknap gutted her aluminum superstructure.
Battle damage to Royal Navy ships exacerbated by their aluminum superstructures during the 1982 Falklands War supported the decision to use steel.
Another lesson from the Falklands War led the navy to protect the ship's vital spaces with double-spaced steel armor (creating a buffer against modern rockets) and kevlar spall liners.

The Arleigh Burke design incorporates stealth techniques, such as the angled rather than traditional vertical surfaces and the tripod mainmast, which make the ship more difficult to detect, in particular by antiship missiles.
A Collective Protection System makes the Arleigh Burke class
the first U.S. warships designed with an air-filtration system against nuclear, biological, and chemical warfare (NBC).
Other NBC defenses include a "countermeasure wash down system".

Their Aegis Combat System differs from a traditional rotating radar that mechanically rotates 360 degrees for each sweep scan of the airspace.
Instead, Aegis uses a passive electronically scanned array, which allows continual tracking of targets simultaneous with area scans.
The system's computer control also allows centralization of the previously separate tracking and targeting functions.
The system is also resistant to electronic countermeasures.
Their stand-alone Harpoon antiship missile launchers give them an antiship capability with a range in excess of 64 nautical miles (119 km; 74 mi).

With the development of the Tomahawk Block V, all existing Block IV Tomahawks carried converted to the Block V version and become dual-role missiles with anti-ship capability along with their land attack role.
The Tomahawk Block Va version is called the Maritime Strike version, and the Block Vb version featues the Joint Multi-Effects Warhead System.
This provides Burke destroyers an additional missile for the anti-ship role along with the Harpoon, which is not carried on the Flight IIA ships.
The Tomahawk can be carried in much larger numbers than the Harpoon and has a much larger warhead.
"The
127 mm 5-inch/54 caliber Mark 45 gun, in conjunction with the Mark 34 Gun Weapon System, is an antiship weapon which can also be used for close-in air contacts or to support forces ashore with Naval gunfire support (NGFS), with a range of up to 20 miles (32 km) and capable of firing 20 rounds per minute.
"
The class's RIM-7 Sea Sparrow/RIM-162 ESSM missiles provide point defense against missiles and aircraft while the Standard Missile SM-2 and SM-6 provide area antiaircraft defense; the SM-6 provides over-the-horizon missile defense.
The Standard Missile 3 and 6 also provide Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD).The ship has an electronics warfare suite that provides passive detection and decoy countermeasures.

The class's Light Airborne Multi-Purpose System (LAMPS) helicopter system improves the ship's capabilities against submarines and surface ships, a helicopter able to serve as a platform to monitor submarines and surface ships, and launch torpedoes and missiles against them, as well as being able to provide fire support during insertions/extractions with machine guns and Hellfire antiarmor guided missiles.

The helicopters also serve in a utility role, able to perform ship replenishment, search and rescue, medical evacuation, communications relay, and naval gunfire spotting and controlling.

The Arleigh Burke class is a set of multimission ships with numerous combat systems, including a "combination of... an advanced antisubmarine warfare system (ASW), land attack cruise missiles, ship-to-ship missiles, and advanced antiaircraft missiles," Burkes have the Navy's latest antisubmarine combat system with active sonar, a towed sonar array, and antisubmarine rockets.
They support strategic land strikes with their VLS launched Tomahawks.

They are able to detect antiship mines at a range of about 1400 meters.
So vital has the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System (BMD) role of the class become that all ships of the class are being updated with BMD capability.
Burke production is being restarted in place of additional Zumwalt-class destroyers.

==
Development ==
In 1980, the U.S. Navy initiated design studies with seven contractors.
By 1983 the number of competitors had been reduced to three:
Bath Iron Works, Todd Shipyards, and Ingalls Shipbuilding.
On 3 April 1985 Bath Iron Works received a US$321.9 million contract to build the first of class, USS Arleigh Burke.
Gibbs & Cox was awarded the contract to be the lead ship design agent.
The total cost of the first ship was put at US$1.1 billion, the other US$778 million being for the ship's weapons systems.
She was laid down by the Bath Iron Works at Bath, Maine, on 6 December 1988, and launched on 16 September 1989 by Mrs. Arleigh Burke.
The Admiral himself was present at her commissioning ceremony on 4 July 1991, held on the waterfront in downtown Norfolk, Virginia.

The "Flight II Arleigh Burke" ships have the following improvement over the original Flight I: incorporation of combat direction finding, SLQ-32V-3, TADIX-B, JTIDS command and control processor, and the capability to launch and control SM-2 Block IV Extended Range Missile.
The "Flight IIA Arleigh Burke" ships have several new features, beginning with USS Oscar Austin (DDG-79).
Among the changes is the addition of two hangars for antisubmarine warfare (ASW) helicopters, and a new, longer 5-inch/62-caliber (127 mm)
Mark 45 Mod 4 naval gun (installed onto USS Winston S. Churchill (DDG-81) and later ships).
Later Flight IIA ships starting with USS Mustin (DDG-89) have a modified funnel design that buries the funnels within the superstructure as a signature-reduction measure.
TACTAS towed array sonar was omitted from Flight IIA ships and they also lack Harpoon missile launchers.
Ships from DDG-68 to DDG-84 have AN/SLQ-32 antennas that resemble V3 configuration similar to those deployed on Ticonderoga-class cruiser, while the remainder has V2 variants externally resembling those deployed on some Oliver Hazard Perry-class frigate.
V3 has an active electronic countermeasures component while V2 is passive only.
AN/SLQ-32 is being upgraded under the Surface Electronic Warfare Improvement Program (SEWIP), the first SEWIP Block 2 upgrades were installed in 2014 with full-rate production scheduled for mid-2015.A number of Flight IIA ships were constructed without a Phalanx CIWS because of the planned Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile, but later the Navy decided to retrofit all IIA ships to carry at least one Phalanx CIWS by 2013.
The 60 kW High Energy Laser and Integrated Optical-dazzler and Surveillance (HELIOS) will be tested on an Arleigh Burke ship in 2021.USS Pinckney, USS Momsen, USS Chung-Hoon, USS Nitze, USS James E. Williams and USS Bainbridge have superstructure differences to accommodate the Remote Mine-hunting System (RMS).
Mk 32 torpedo tubes were moved to the missile deck from amidships as well.

===
Modernization ===
In an effort to address congressional concerns over the retirement of the Iowa-class battleship, the Navy began a modernization program for the Arleigh Burkes aimed at improving their gun systems.
This modernization was to include an extension of the range of the 5-inch (127 mm) guns on the flight
I Arleigh Burke-class destroyers (USS Arleigh Burke to USS Ross) with extended range guided munitions (ERGMs) that would have given the guns a range of 40 nautical miles (74 km).

However, the ERGM was cancelled in 2008.The modernization program is designed to provide a comprehensive mid-life upgrade to ensure that the class remains effective.
Reduced manning, increased mission effectiveness, and a reduced total cost including construction, maintenance, and operation are the goals of the modernization program.
Modernization technologies will be integrated during new construction of DDG-111 and 112, then retrofitted into DDG flight I and II ships during in-service overhaul periods.
The first phase will update the hull, mechanical, and electrical systems while the second phase will introduce an open architecture computing environment (OACE).
The result will be improved capability in both ballistic missile defense (BMD) and littoral combat.
By 2018, all Arleigh Burke-class ships homeported in the Western Pacific will have upgraded ASW systems, including the new AN/SQR-20, renamed the TB-37/U, Multi-Function Towed Array (MFTA) sonar systems.
The Navy is also upgrading the ships' ability to process data.
Beginning with USS Spruance (DDG-111), the Navy is installing an internet protocol (IP) based data backbone, which enhances the ship's ability to handle video.
Spruance is the first destroyer to be fitted with the Boeing Company's gigabit Ethernet data multiplex system (GEDMS).In July 2010, BAE Systems announced that they had been awarded a contract to modernize 11 ships.
In May 2014, Sam LaGrone reported that 21 of the 28 Flight I/II Arleigh Burke-class ships would not receive a mid-life upgrade that included electronics and Aegis Baseline 9 software for SM-6 compatibility, instead they would retain the basic BMD 3.6.1 software in a $170 million upgrade concentrating on mechanical systems and on some ships, their antisubmarine suite.
Seven Flight I ships – DDG 51–53, 57, 61, 65, 69 – will get the full US$270m Baseline 9 upgrade.
Deputy of surface warfare Dave McFarland said that this change was due to the budget cuts in the Budget Control Act of 2011.In 2016, the Navy announced they would begin the outfitting of 34 Flight IIA Arleigh Burke vessels with a hybrid-electric drive (HED) to lower fuel costs.
While the four LM-2500 gas turbines of the Arleigh Burkes are most efficient at high speeds, an electric motor is to be attached to the main reduction gear to turn the drive shaft to propel the ship at speeds under 13 knots (24 km/h), such as during ballistic missile defense or maritime security operations.
Use of the HED for half the time could extend time on station by 2.5 days before refueling.
In March 2018, the Navy announced the HED would complete installation onto USS Truxtun (DDG-103) but upgrades of further destroyers would be halted.
Budget priorities and design issues caused the move, and Truxtun will be used to test the technology and see if it can be improved.
Also in 2016, four destroyers patrolling with the U.S. 6th Fleet based in Naval Station Rota, Spain (USS Porter, USS Carney, USS Ross, USS Donald Cook) received self-protection upgrades, replacing a Phalanx CIWS with the SeaRAM close-range ship defense system combining the Phalanx sensor dome with an 11-cell missile launcher.
This was the first time the system was paired with an Aegis ship.
In February 2018, Lockheed Martin received a contract to deliver their High Energy Laser and Integrated Optical-dazzler with Surveillance (HELIOS) system for installation onto an Arleigh Burke destroyer.
The laser can output 60–150 kW of power to "dazzle" or destroy small boats and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and be the first time a laser weapon will be put on a warship.
The HELIOS is to be delivered in 2020.
In November 2019, USS Dewey (DDG-105) had the Optical Dazzling Interdictor, Navy (ODIN) system installed, which was publicly revealed in February 2020.
Going from an approved idea to installation in two and a half years, ODIN differs from the XN-1 LaWS previously mounted on USS Ponce from 2014 to 2017 in that it functions as a dazzler, the first operational employment of such a stand-alone system, which blinds or destroys delicate optical sensors on drones rather than fully shooting down the aircraft.
In October 2020, National Security Advisor Robert C. O'Brien said that the Common Hypersonic Glide Body (C-HGB) missile developed under the Conventional Prompt Strike program would be fielded on all three flights of Arleigh Burke-class destroyers.
The U.S. Navy would field the weapon on surface ships after first putting them on submarines in the late 2020s.
However, the C-HCB is expected to be around 3 ft (0.91 m) wide, making it too large to fit in Mk 41 VLS tubes or on deck launchers.
Installing them on Arleigh Burke destroyers would require removing a number of Mk 41 cells to accommodate the larger weapon, which would be an expensive and time-consuming process.
There is some criticism to this idea, including the oldest Flight I ships needing a service life extension to justify refit costs that would only prolong their service lives a short time when they are already more expensive to operate, and the newest Flight III ships being optimized for BMD so they would be given a new, complex mission requiring a major refit so soon.

===
Production restarted and further development ===
The class was scheduled to be replaced by Zumwalt-class destroyers beginning in 2020, but an increasing threat from both long- and short-range missiles caused the Navy to restart production of the Arleigh Burke class and consider placing littoral combat mission modules on the new ships.
In April 2009, the Navy announced a plan that limited the Zumwalt class to three units while ordering another three Arleigh Burke-class ships from both Bath Iron Works and Ingalls Shipbuilding.

In December 2009 Northrop Grumman received a $170.7 million letter contract for DDG-113 long-lead-time materials.
Shipbuilding contracts for DDG-113 to DDG-115 were awarded in mid-2011 for US$679.6m–$783.6m; these do not include government-furnished equipment such as weapons and sensors which will take the average cost of the FY2011/12 ships to US$1.843b per vessel.
DDG-113 to DDG-115 will be "restart" ships, similar to previous Flight IIA ships, but including modernization features such as Open Architecture Computing Environment.
DDG-116 to DDG-121 will be "Technology Insertion" ships with elements of Flight III.
Flight III proper will begin with the third ship procured in 2016.Flight III ships, construction starting in FY2016 in place of the canceled CG(X) program,
have various design improvements including radar antennas of mid-diameter increased to 14 feet (4.3 m) from the previous 12 feet (3.7 m).
These Air and Missile Defense Radars (AMDR) use digital beamforming, instead of the earlier passive electronically scanned array radars.
Costs for the Flight III ships increased rapidly as expectations and requirements for the program have grown.
In particular, this was due to the changing requirements needed to carry the proposed Air and Missile Defense Radar system required for the ships' ballistic missile defense role.
The Government Accountability Office found that the design of the Flight IIIs was based on "a significantly reduced threat environment from other Navy analyses" and that the new ships would be "at best marginally effective".
The U.S. Navy disagrees with the GAO findings, claiming the DDG-51 hull is "absolutely" capable of fitting a large enough radar to meet requirements.
Installation of the AMDR would require double the power and double the cooling, but there is room to fit what is needed inside the hull.
In spite of the production restart, the U.S. Navy is expected to fall short of its requirement for 94 destroyer or cruiser platforms capable of missile defense starting in FY 2025 and continuing past the end of the 30-year planning window.
While this is a new requirement as of 2011, and the U.S. Navy has never had so many large missile-armed surface combatants, the relative success of the Aegis ballistic missile defense system has shifted this national security requirement onto the U.S. Navy.
The shortfall will arise as older platforms that have been refitted to be missile-defense-capable (particularly the cruisers) are retired in bulk before new destroyers are planned to be built.
The U.S. Navy was considering extending the acquisition of Arleigh Burke-class destroyers into the 2040s, according to revised procurement tables sent to Congress, with the procurement of Flight IV ships from 2032 through 2041.
This was canceled to cover the cost of the Columbia-class submarines, with the air defense commander role retained on one cruiser per carrier battle group.

==
Future replacement ==
USS Michael Murphy
(DDG-112) was originally intended to be the last of the Arleigh Burke class.
However, with reduction of the Zumwalt-class production, the U.S. Navy requested new DDG-51-class ships.
Long-lead materials contracts were awarded to Northrop Grumman in December 2009 for
DDG-113 and in April 2010 for DDG-114.
General Dynamics received a long-lead materials contract for DDG-115 in February 2010.
It was anticipated that in FY2012 or FY2013, the U.S. Navy will commence detailed work for a Flight III design and request 24 ships to be built from 2016 to 2031.

In May 2013, a total of 76 Arleigh Burke-class ships were planned.
The Flight III variant is in the design phase as of 2013.
In June 2013, the U.S. Navy awarded $6.2 billion in destroyer contracts.
Up to 42 Flight III ships may be procured by the U.S. Navy with the first ship entering service in 2023.

===
Future Surface Combatant ===
In April 2014
the U.S. Navy began the early stages of developing a new destroyer to replace the Arleigh Burke class called the "Future Surface Combatant".
The new class is expected to enter service in the early 2030s and initially serve alongside the 22 Flight III DDGs.

No hull design or shape has been speculated yet, although the destroyer class will incorporate emerging technologies like lasers, on-board power-generation systems, increased automation, and next-generation weapons, sensors, and electronics.
They will leverage technologies in use on other platforms such as the Zumwalt-class destroyer, Littoral Combat Ship, and Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier.
The Future Surface Combatant may place importance on the Zumwalt-class destroyer's electric drive system that propels the ship while generating 58 megawatts of on-board electrical power, levels required to operate future directed energy weapons.

Laser weapon systems are likely to become more prominent to engage threats without using missiles that could potentially cost more than the target it is engaging.
Less costly weapon systems may help keep the destroyer class from becoming too expensive.
Initial requirements for the Future Surface Combatant will emphasize lethality and survivability, as well as being able to continue to protect aircraft carriers.

The ships also have to be modular to allow for inexpensive upgrades of weaponry, electronics, computing, and sensors over time as threats evolve.

==
Operational history ==
In October 2011 it was announced that four Arleigh Burke-class destroyers would be forward-deployed in Europe to support the NATO missile defence system.
The ships, to be based at Naval Station Rota, Spain, were named in February 2012, as Ross, Donald Cook, Porter, and Carney.
By reducing travel times to station, this forward deployment will allow for six other destroyers to be shifted from the Atlantic in support of the Pivot to East Asia.
Russia has threatened to quit the New START treaty over this deployment, calling it a threat to their nuclear deterrent.
In 2018, however, Chief of Naval Operations ADM John Richardson criticized the policy of keeping six highly mobile BMD platforms "in a little tiny box, defending land," a role which he believed could be performed equally well at less cost by shore-based systems.

==
Accidents and major incidents ==


===
USS Cole bombing ===
USS Cole was damaged on 12 October 2000 in Aden, Yemen while docked, by an attack in which an apparently shaped charge of 200–300 kg in a boat was placed against the hull and detonated by suicide bombers, killing 17 crew members.
The ship was repaired, and returned to duty in 2001.

===
USS Porter and MV Otowasan collision ===
On 12 August 2012, USS Porter collided with the oil tanker MV Otowasan near the Strait of Hormuz.
Though there were no injuries on the ships, the US Navy removed the Porter's commanding officer from duty.
Repairs took two months at a cost of $700,000.
===
USS Fitzgerald and MV ACX Crystal collision ===
On 17 June 2017, USS Fitzgerald collided with the MV ACX Crystal cargo ship near Yokosuka, Japan.
Seven sailors drowned.
Following an investigation, the ship's commanding officer, executive officer, and Command Master Chief Petty Officer were relieved of their duties.
In addition, close to a dozen sailors were given non-judicial punishment for loss of situational awareness.
Repairs were to be completed by summer 2019 originally.
However, initial repairs were made by February 2020.
After the subsequent sea trials, she was brought in for additional repairs.
The ship departed for home port in June 2020.

===
USS John S. McCain and Alnic MC collision ===
On 21 August 2017, USS John S. McCain collided with container ship Alnic MC.
The collision injured 48 sailors and killed 10, whose bodies were all recovered by 27 August.
The cause of the collision was determined to be poor communication between the two ships and the bridge crew lacking situational awareness.
In the aftermath, the ship's top leadership including the commanding officer, executive officer and Command Master Chief Petty Officer were removed from command.
In addition top leadership of the US Seventh Fleet including the commander, Vice Admiral Joseph Aucoin, were relieved of their duties due to loss of confidence in their ability to command.
Other commanders who were relieved included Rear Admiral Charles Williams, commander of the Task Force 70, and Captain Jeffrey Bennett, commodore of Destroyer Squadron 15.
This was the third incident involving a US Navy ship in 2017, with a repair cost of over $100 million.

==
Contractors ==
Builders: 34 units constructed by General Dynamics, Bath Iron Works Division, and 28 by Huntington Ingalls Industries (formerly Northrop Grumman Ship Systems),
Ingalls Shipbuilding
AN/SPY-1 radar and combat system integrator:
Lockheed Martin


==
Ships in class ==


==
In popular culture ==
The 2012 film Battleship features the Arleigh Burke-class destroyer USS John Paul Jones as a major setting for most of the film scenes.
The 2014 television series The Last Ship, loosely based on the 1988 novel of the same name, is set on the fictional USS Nathan James.
Its hull designation in the book is DDG-80, but was changed to DDG-151 for the television series, to avoid confusion with the real-life USS Roosevelt (DDG-80), which did not exist when the book was written.

USS Halsey (DDG-97), a real Flight IIA Arleigh Burke-class destroyer, stood in for Nathan James during filming.

== See also ==
List of naval ship classes in service
List of current ships of the United States Navy


==
References ==
Baker, A.D.
The Naval Institute Guide to Combat Fleets of the World 1998–1999.
Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1998.
ISBN 1-55750-111-4.

Gardiner, Robert and Chumbley, Stephen.
Conway's All the World's Fighting Ships 1947–1995.
Annapolis, Maryland: Naval Institute Press, 1995.
ISBN 1-55750-132-7.

==
Further reading ==
Sanders, Michael S. (1999).
The Yard: Building a Destroyer at the Bath Iron Works.
New York: HarperCollins.
ISBN 0-06-019246-1.
Describes the construction of Donald Cook (DDG-75) at Bath Iron Works.

==
External links ==
Arleigh Burke-class destroyers at Destroyer History Foundation
Arleigh Burke unit list on globalsecurity.org
Arleigh Burke-class (Aegis) page on naval-technology.com
Arleigh Burke Flight I & Flight II Class destroyer-
United States Navy on navyrecognition.com
A shotgun wedding is a wedding which is arranged in order to avoid embarrassment due to premarital sex which can possibly lead to an unintended pregnancy.
The phrase is a primarily American colloquialism, termed as such based on a stereotypical scenario in which the father of the pregnant bride-to-be threatens the reluctant groom with a shotgun in order to ensure that he follows through with the wedding.

==
Rationale ==
One purpose of such a wedding can be to get recourse from the man for the act of impregnation; another reason is trying to ensure that the child is raised by both parents.
In some cases, as in early America and in the Middle East, a major objective was the restoring of social honour to the mother.
The practice is a loophole method of preventing the birth of legally illegitimate children, or if the marriage occurs early enough, to conceal the fact that conception occurred prior to marriage.
In some societies the stigma attached to pregnancy out of wedlock can be enormous, and coercive means (in spite of the legal defense of undue influence) for gaining recourse are often seen as the prospective father-in-law's "right", and an important, albeit unconventional, coming of age event for the young father-to-be.
Often a couple will arrange a shotgun wedding without explicit outside encouragement, and some religious teachings consider it a moral imperative to marry in that situation.

==
By culture ==


===
Middle East ===
Pre-marital sexual relations remain taboo across all social strata throughout the Middle East.

In many cases, fornication is illegal and even a criminal offence.
Even when it is not, the social response can be extreme, especially against women who have lost their virginity prior to marriage.

In this cultural milieu, shotgun weddings serve to obscure the fact that a baby was conceived prior to marriage.
When that proves impossible, the social standing of the couple involved is irreparably damaged.
Nevertheless, shotgun weddings serve to prevent the individuals involved, especially the women, from becoming social pariahs.

Apart from instances of regional slang, there is no special term for "shotgun weddings" in Arabic.
This is because they are not recognised as a regular social phenomenon and because a successful Middle Eastern shotgun wedding is not known to be a shotgun wedding by the guests.

===
East Asia ===
In Japan, the slang term Dekichatta kekkon (出来ちゃった結婚), or Dekikon (デキコン) for short, emerged in the late 1990s.
The term can literally be translated as "oops-we-did-it-marriage", implying an unintended pregnancy.
Notable celebrities with these marriages include Namie Amuro, Takako Uehara, Yōko Oginome, Hitomi Furuya, Ami Suzuki, Kaori Iida, Nozomi Tsuji, Anna Tsuchiya, Meisa Kuroki, Leah Dizon, Melody Miyuki Ishikawa, Riisa Naka, Rie Miyazawa and Emi Takei.
A quarter of all Japanese brides are pregnant at the time of their wedding, according to the Health Labor and Welfare Ministry, and pregnancy is one of the most common motivations for marriage.
The prevalence and celebrity profile of dekichatta-kon has inspired Japan's wedding industry to introduce an even more benign phrase, sazukari-kon (授かり婚, blessed wedding).

In China, the term 奉子成婚
(pinyin: Fèngzǐchénghūn; lit. '
married by the order of child') means that the couple married because conception occurred outside of marriage.
It is a pun on the phrase 奉旨成婚, pronounced Fengzhichenghun and implying that a wedding is approved by imperial edict.
It is becoming increasingly common among China's youngest generation.

However, in the same age group, there is objection and criticism to such a practice.

In Korea, the slang term 속도위반 (RR: Sokdowiban; literally: "speeding over the limit") refers to the situation in which the pregnancy preceded the marriage.

In Vietnam, the term "Bác sĩ bảo cưới" (literally meaning "because [the] doctor said so") is often used with humorous intention.

===
Southeast Asia ===
The Philippines also has a shotgun wedding tradition wherein a man shall be forced to marry a woman whom he impregnates.
Other forms of this tradition include a girl's parents forcing the man to marry their daughter due to the latter's social status or wealth (rather than his desire to marry the girl) and others.
Firearms may or may not be used during the coercion but other forms of threats include litigation (which is common in cases of impregnation wherein the girl's family threatens to file rape charges against the man).

Indonesia has a similar condition with the Philippines; this is usually called "married by accident".
===
Europe ===
Because of the sexual revolution beginning in the 1960s, the concepts of love, sexuality, procreation and marriage began to separate after being intimately entangled in social consciousness for centuries.
However, sexual practice had not always followed social convention, resulting in shotgun or Knobstick weddings.

In the United Kingdom, one source reports that almost 40% of all brides were pregnant in 1850.

In Denmark, a 1963 study found that 50% of all brides were pregnant.

In the Netherlands and Belgium, the Dutch term moetje was a commonly used euphemism for marriage resulting from unintended pregnancy.
The noun is formed from imperative of the verb moeten ("must", "to have to") with the added suffix -je, indicating a diminutive.
Thus, it might be translated as a "little must" or a "little you-have-to", i.e. one is compelled to marry to avoid the shame of giving birth out of wedlock.
Moetjes were a common occurrence in Belgium and the Netherlands until the first half of the 20th century.
In the early 1960s, about a quarter of all marriages in the Netherlands were shotgun marriages; however, in some areas, up to 90% of the brides were pregnant.
By the late 2000s, the practice had become so rare that the term was growing obsolete.
According to a 2013 by the Centrum voor Leesonderzoek, the word moetje was recognised by 82.5% of the Dutch and 43.1% of the Flemish.

===
North America ===
In the United States, the use of duress or violent coercion to marry is no longer common, although many anecdotal stories and folk songs record instances of such coercion in 18th- and 19th-century America.
The phenomenon has become less common as the stigma associated with out-of-wedlock births has declined and the number of such births has increased.
Effective birth control and legalized abortion have also resulted in fewer unplanned pregnancies carried to term.
Nonetheless a marriage which occurs when the bride is pregnant, even when there is no family or social pressure involved, is still sometimes referred to as a "shotgun wedding".

==
In popular culture ==


===
Films ===
Acht Mädels
im Boot (1932),
German musical film
Eight Girls in a Boat (1934), American feature film, refilming of Acht Mädels im Boot
Seven Brides for Seven Brothers (1954)
Jenny, first Dutch fullcolour feature film, refilming of Acht Mädels im
Boot
A Kind of Loving (1962), British feature film
Girl with Green Eyes (1964), Irish feature film


===
Books ===
The Lonely Girl (1962), Irish novel on which Girl with Green Eyes is based


===
TV Shows ===
The Simpsons, where Homer married Marge when she was pregnant with Bart.

== See also ==
Cohabitation
Forced marriage
Knobstick wedding
Marry-your-rapist law
Premarital sex
Oklahoma!,
a play where one character, Ali Hakim, is forcibly coerced towards marriage on two occasions.

Marriage of convenience


==
References ==
The AGM-86 ALCM is an American subsonic air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) built by Boeing and operated by the United States Air Force.
This missile was developed to increase the effectiveness and survivability of the Boeing B-52H Stratofortress strategic bomber.
The missile dilutes an enemy's forces and complicates air defense of its territory.
The concept started as a long-range drone aircraft that would act as a decoy, distracting Soviet air defenses from the bombers.
As new lightweight nuclear weapons emerged in the 1960s, the design was modified with the intent of attacking missile and radar sites at the end of its flight.
Further development extended its range so much that it emerged as a weapon allowing the B-52s to launch their attacks while still well outside Soviet airspace, saturating their defenses with hundreds of tiny, low-flying targets that were extremely difficult to see on radar.

The ALCM so improved the capabilities of the US bomber force that the Soviets developed new technologies to counter the weapon.
Among these were airborne early warning aircraft and new weapons like the MiG-31 and Tor missile system specifically to shoot down the AGM-86.
The Air Force responded with the development of the AGM-129 ACM, which included stealth capabilities.
The ending of the Cold War led to cutbacks in this program, and its expensive maintenance eventually resulted it in being abandoned in favor of life extensions to the original ALCM.

Examples of the AGM-86A
and AGM-86B are on display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum, near Washington, D.C.


==
History ==


===
Quail ===
The ALCM traces its history to the ADM-20 Quail missile, which began development in February 1956.
Quail was the ultimate outcome of several similar programs to develop a small decoy aircraft that would be launched from bombers during their approach to targets, presenting false targets in order to saturate the defenses and allow the bombers to escape an attack.
The small jet-powered drone aircraft had a simple inertial navigation system (INS) that allowed it to fly a pre-programmed course that would make it visible to known Soviet defensive sites.
A number of radar jammers and radar reflectors were intended to make it appear like a B-52 on a radar display.

Quail was designed in the mid-1950s when the normal attack profile for a strategic bomber was to fly as high and fast as possible in order to reduce the time the defenders had to respond to the aircraft before it flew out of range.
This was effective against interceptor aircraft but of little use against surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), whose attack times were measured in seconds.

This led to the adoption of low-level attacks, where the bombers would fly below the radar horizon
so they could not be seen on ground-based radars.
Quail, originally designed for the high-altitude mission, was modified with the addition of a barometric altimeter to allow it to fly at lower altitudes.
Doing so seriously limited its effective range and flight time.
In the early 1960s, the Air Force began to question the usefulness of Quail in the face of improving Soviet defenses.

===
SRAM ===
Looking for another solution to the Soviet SAM problem, in 1964 the Air Force began developing a new system that would directly attack the missile sites rather than confuse them.
This emerged as the AGM-69 SRAM, with a range of about 50 nautical miles (93 km; 58 mi), allowing it to be launched from outside the roughly 20 nautical miles (37 km; 23 mi) range of the SA-2 Guideline missiles it faced.
Flying at Mach 3, it quickly flew out in front of the bombers, reaching the missile site before the bomber flew into the range of the SA-2.

While highly capable against known missile locations, SRAM could do nothing to defend against unknown sites, nor help with the problem of interceptor aircraft.
To deal with these threats, Quail continued to be carried, typically in pairs, providing some defense against these other threats.
However, by the late 1960s the Air Force concluded "that the Quail was only slightly better than nothing."
===
SCAD ===
In January 1968, a new requirement emerged for a modern version of Quail for this new mission, the Subsonic Cruise Aircraft Decoy, or SCAD.
SCAD was designed specifically to fit onto the same rotary launcher used by SRAM, allowing a single aircraft to carry multiple SRAM and SCAD and launch either at any time.
This led to it being the same 14 foot (4.3 m) length as SRAM, and the use of a fuselage with a triangular cross-section, which maximized the usable volume on the rotary launchers.
The system was otherwise similar to Quail, using a simple inertial navigation system (INS) allowing the missile to fly a pre-programmed course.

Soon after development began, it was noted that the very small nuclear warheads being developed at that time could be fit to SCAD without seriously affecting its performance as a decoy.
This would allow it to act as a decoy for much of its flight, and then deliberately approach a selected defensive site and attack it.
As such, the program was renamed Subsonic Cruise Armed Decoy, retaining the SCAD acronym.

For this role, the accuracy of the original INS system was not enough.
While a similar system was also used in SRAM, its shorter range and much shorter flight times meant the drift rate of the system was not a serious concern as long as the bomber could feed it accurate information just before launch, to "zero out" the drift.
In contrast, SCAD was designed to fly over much longer ranges and slower speeds, resulting in longer flight times and increasing the problem with drift.
To provide the accuracy needed to attack the SAM sites with a small warhead, some system was needed to zero out the drift in-flight, and for this need, a radar-based TERCOM system was added.

Development was approved in July 1970, and it was given the designation ZAGM-86A, the Z indicating its initial development status.
===
ALCM ===
As SCAD moved from the pure-decoy role to decoy-and-attack, this meant it would be able to carry out the same mission as SRAM, but from much longer range.
This would reduce the need for a decoy.
Accordingly, in June 1973, SCAD was canceled in favor of a system dedicated purely to the long-range attack mission.
The original designation number remained, but the name changed to reflect the new mission, becoming the Air Launched Cruise Missile, or ALCM.

The first example, similar to the original SCAD in most ways, flew for the first time in March 1976, and its new guidance system was first tested that September.
In January 1977, the missile was ordered into full-scale production.
Compared to the models that entered service in the 1980s, the A-model had a distinctive look; the nose tapered sharply to a triangular point giving it a shark-like appearance, compared to the later models which had a more rounded conventional appearance.

===
ERV and JCMP ===
Meanwhile, the Air Force had also issued a requirement for a version with a much longer 1,500 nautical miles (2,800 km; 1,700 mi) range.
This would allow the bombers to launch their missiles from far off the Russian coast, placing it outside the range of the interceptors as well.
To reach the intended range, this new Extended Range Version (ERV) would have to be lengthened to contain more fuel, or external fuel tanks would have to be added.
Either change would make it too large to fit on the SRAM launchers, and more annoyingly, the extended-fuselage version would be too large to fit in the bomb bay of the new B-1 Lancer bomber.
The Air Force intended to replace the original ALCM with the new version at some future date.

The Navy was also in the midst of its own cruise missile project, the Sea-Launched Cruise Missile (SLCM), which ultimately emerged as the BGM-109 Tomahawk, which was similar to ALCM in many ways.
In 1977, the Air Force and Navy were ordered to collaborate under the "Joint Cruise Missile Project", JCMP, with the intention of using as many parts in common as possible.
After considering the two designs, the Air Force agreed to modify the ALCM with the SLCM's McDonnell Douglas AN/DPW-23 TERCOM system, as well as using its Williams F107 turbofan engine.

While the JCMP program was taking place, the B-1 was canceled.
This eliminated the need for ALCM to fit in the B-1's bomb bay, and the length limitations that implied.
The Air Force decided to cancel production of the A-model ALCM, and replace it with either an air-launched version of the SLCM, or the ERV.
The ERV flew in August 1979, and was declared the winner of the head-to-head fly-off against the SLCM in March 1980.

===
Initial production ===
Production of the initial 225 AGM-86B missiles began in fiscal year 1980.
It entered operational use on the B-52H in August 1981 and became its primary weapon in December 1982.
Production of a total 1,715 missiles was completed in October 1986.
The air-launched cruise missile had become operational four years earlier, in December 1982.
More than 100 launches have taken place since then, with a 90% approximate success rate.
===
CALCM ===
In June 1986 a limited number of AGM-86B missiles were converted to carry a high-explosive blast/fragmentation warhead and an internal GPS.
They were redesignated as the AGM-86C CALCM.
This modification also replaced the B model's TERCOM and integrated a GPS capability with the existing inertial navigation system computer .In
1996 and 1997, 200 additional CALCMs were produced from excess ALCMs.
These missiles, designated Block I, incorporate improvements such as a larger and improved conventional payload (1,360 kg, 3,000 lb blast class), a multi-channel GPS receiver and integration of the buffer box into the GPS receiver.
The upgraded avionics package was retrofitted into all existing CALCM (Block 0)
so all AGM-86C missiles are electronically identical.

== Design ==
All variants of the AGM-86 missile are powered by a Williams F107 turbofan jet engine that propels it at sustained subsonic speeds and can be launched from aircraft at both high and low altitudes.
The missile deploys its folded wings, tail surfaces and engine inlet after launch.

AGM-86B/C/D missiles increase flexibility in target selection.
AGM-86B missiles can be air-launched in large numbers by the bomber force.
B-52H bombers carry six AGM-86B or AGM-86C missiles on each of two externally mounted pylons and eight internally on a rotary launcher, giving the B-52H a maximum capacity of 20 missiles per aircraft.

An enemy force would have to counterattack each of the missiles, making defense against them costly and complicated.
The enemy's defenses are further hampered by the missiles' small size and low-altitude flight capability, which makes them difficult to detect on radar.

===
AGM-86B ===
The nuclear armed AGM-86B uses a terrain contour-matching guidance system (TERCOM) to fly to its assigned target.

=== AGM-86C/D ===
The AGM-86C/D CALCM carries a conventional fragmentation payload rather than a thermonuclear payload.
The AGM-86C/D uses an onboard Global Positioning System (GPS) coupled with its inertial navigation system (INS) to navigate in flight.
This allows the missile to guide itself to the target with pinpoint accuracy.
Litton Guidance and Control, and Interstate Electronics Corp. were the guidance contractors for the C-model.

==
Operations ==
The CALCM became operational in January 1991 at the onset of Operation Desert Storm.
Seven B-52Gs from Barksdale AFB launched 35 missiles at designated launch points in the U.S. Central Command's area of responsibility to attack high-priority targets in Iraq.
These "round-robin" missions marked the beginning of the operation's Air Force component and were the longest known aircraft combat sorties in history at the time (more than 14,000 miles and 35 hours of flight).

CALCM's next employment occurred in September 1996 during Operation Desert Strike.
In response to Iraq's continued hostilities against the Kurds in northern Iraq, the Air Force launched 13 CALCMs in a joint attack with the Navy.
This mission has put the CALCM program in the spotlight for future modifications.
Operation Desert Strike was also the combat debut of the B-52H and the carriage of the CALCM on the weapons
bay-mounted Common Strategic Rotary Launcher (CSRL).
During the Operation Desert Storm, the CALCM had been carried on the B-52G and wing-mounted pylons.

The CALCM was also used in Operation Desert Fox in 1998, Operation Allied Force in 1999, and Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2003.
Operation Iraqi Freedom was also the combat debut of the AGM-86D, a further development of the missile which replaced the blast/fragmentation warhead of the AGM-86C with a penetrating warhead.

==
Future of the ALCM ==
In 2007 the USAF announced its intention to retire all of its AGM-129 ACMs and to reduce the ALCM fleet by more than 500 missiles, leaving 528 nuclear cruise missiles.
The ALCM force will be consolidated at Minot Air Force Base, North Dakota, and all excess cruise missile bodies will be destroyed.
The reductions are a result of the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty requirement to go below 2,200 deployed nuclear weapons by 2012, with the AGM-129 ACM chosen for disposal because it has reliability problems and high maintenance costs.
Even with the SLEP (service life extension program), the remaining AGM-86s were to reach their end of service by 2020, leaving the B-52 without a nuclear mission.
However, in 2012, the USAF announced plans to extend the useful life of the missiles until at least 2030.To replace the ALCM, the USAF planned to award a contract for the development of the new Long-Range Stand-Off (LRSO) weapon in 2015.
Unlike the AGM-86, the LRSO will be carried on multiple aircraft, including the B-52, the B-2 Spirit, and the Northrop Grumman B-21.
Like the AGM-86, the LRSO can be armed with either a conventional or nuclear warhead.

The LRSO program is to develop a weapon that can penetrate and survive integrated air defense systems and prosecute strategic targets.

Both conventional and nuclear versions of the weapon are required to reach initial operational capability (IOC) before the retirement of their respective ALCM versions, around 2030.The technology development contracts were to be submitted before the end of 2012.
In March 2014 a further three-year delay in the project was announced by the Department of Defense, delaying a contract award until fiscal year 2018.
The House Armed Services Committee moved to reject this delay.
The delay was caused by financial pressures and an uncertain acquisition plan, and allowed by the long remaining service life left for the AGM-86 and lack of urgent necessity compared to other defense needs.
As of August 24, 2017, the Department of Defense has awarded both Lockheed Martin and Raytheon Corporations with $900 million to develop the LRSO.
Contracts end in 2022, when the Department of Defense will select one design to continue further developments.
The CALCM was retired on 20 November 2019, replaced in the conventional standoff strike role by the AGM-158B JASSM-ER.

== See also ==
AGM-154
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Boeing.com ALCM/CALCM Photo Gallery
Designation Systems' Directory of U.S. Military Rockets and Missiles: AGM-86
Global Security's AGM-86C/D Conventional Air Launched Cruise Missiles
The Delilah missile is a cruise missile or loitering munition developed in Israel by Israel Military Industries (IMI).
It is designed to target moving and re-locatable targets with a circular error probable (CEP) of 1 metre (3 ft 3 in).
Unlike a typical cruise missile, which is locked onto a pre-programmed target prior to launch, the Delilah missile's unique feature, as claimed by the manufacturer, is being able to loiter and surveil an area before a remote weapon systems officer, usually from the launching fighter aircraft, identifies the specific target of the attack.

==
Overview ==
The name Delilah had been used by an anti-radiation attack drone configured after the US MQM-74 Chukar aerial target.
It entered service in the Israeli Air Force in the mid-1980s.
This air-launched drone identifies radar sites, allowing them to be found and destroyed.
The Delilah missile is the name of a missile family built by IMI.
Delilah was initially created as an aerial decoy, and was later developed into an offensive strike weapon in the 1990s, used by Israeli F-16 and upgraded F-4E attack aircraft.
It is multi-platform and has multi-target capability.
Its uses include Air-to-Surface (AS) and Surface-to-Surface (SS), targeting ground targets, vehicles and sea vessels, either stationary or moving.
It is classed as a Medium Range, Multi-Purpose Guided Missile (MRMPGM), as All-in-One.

The Delilah is an air-launched stand-off missile and cruise missile with a range of 250 km.
It can be fitted with a variety of warheads which can be targeted on both land and sea targets.
It has a turbo jet engine that is able to loiter, allowing it to target well-hidden threats in addition to moving targets.
Its maneuverability makes the missile ideal for destroying surface-to-air missile threats.
The on-board autopilot and inertial navigation/global positioning navigation systems (INS/GPS) allow the missile to perform its mission autonomously.
A data link enables intervention and target validation.
The Delilah missile was first used in combat by Israel over Lebanon in July and August 2006 and launched by F-16D fighter aircraft.
The missile can be fired from most aircraft, helicopters, or ground launchers.
Its compact dimensions allow it to be carried by the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk and SH-60B helicopters.

== Delilah-GL missile ==
The Delilah-GL is a ground-launched version of the Delilah cruise missile that has a range of 250 km.
It is equipped with a 30 kg conventional explosive warhead.
It can be modified to carry other payloads, such as infrared target seeking and guidance devices.
It is guided by GPS and has the ability to loiter in the target area, before confirming the target through real-time visual intelligence.

==
Operational history ==
On 9 May 2018, Delilah missiles were fired at Syrian and Iranian targets, including anti-aircraft systems, such SA-5, SA-2, SA-22, and SA-17 units.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operator ===
Israel
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Delilah-AL on IMI website
Delilah-SL on IMI website,
Brochure
Delilah-HL on IMI website
Delilah-GL on IMI website,
Brochure
Delilah AL and Delilah HL,
Air-to-surface missiles - Stand-off and cruise
Delilah Precision Surface Attack Weapon
Delilah - The IAF Loitering Missile
Israel used Delilah missile in Lebanon
Babur (Urdu: بابر; named after the first Mughal Emperor Zahir-ud-Din Babur), also designated Hatf-VII, Translit: Target, is a medium range turbojet powered subsonic cruise missile that can be launched from land or underwater seaborne platforms.
The missile was first tested in 2005 and is widely believed to have entered service with the Pakistan Army in 2010, and the Pakistan Navy in 2018.

==
Origin ==
Pakistan claims to have developed the Babur in response to alleged reports that India was planning to acquire Patriot missiles from the US, in order to set up a ballistic missile defense system to counter Pakistan's arsenal of ballistic missiles.
Babur is the first cruise missile to be developed and designed by Pakistan.
Some analysts have pointed out similarities of the missile with Chinese and American designs, namely the DH-10 and Tomahawk.
Former Pakistani PM Nawaz Sharif claimed that Pakistani scientists reverse-engineered the American Tomahawk missile to make the Babur missile.

== Design ==
The Babur's airframe is made up of a tubular fuselage, with a pair of folded wings attached to the middle section and the empennage at the rear along with the propulsion system.

Propelled by a jet engine (either turbofan or turbojet), the Babur has a maximum speed of approximately 550 mph.

Launched from ground-based mobile transporter erector launchers (TELs), the Babur can be armed with both conventional and nuclear warheads and has a reported range of 750 km (470 mi).
On launch, a booster (rocketry) provides additional thrust to accelerate the missile away from the launch vehicle.
After the launch the wings unfold, the booster rocket is jettisoned and the jet engine started.
The missile is stated to have a high degree of maneuverability, allowing it to "hug" the terrain, and "near-stealth" capabilities.
Terrain-hugging ability helps the missile avoid enemy radar detection by utilizing "terrain masking", giving Babur the capability to penetrate enemy air defence systems undetected.
The Babur's guidance system uses a combination of inertial navigation systems (INS), terrain contour matching (TERCOM) and GPS satellite guidance.
The guidance system reportedly gives the missile pinpoint accuracy.
GPS access is not guaranteed under hostile conditions so the latest production models have also reportedly incorporated the Russian GLONASS.
Future software and hardware updates could include the European Union's GALILEO and China's BeiDou Navigation Satellite System.

An upgraded variant tested on the 14 December 2016 included upgraded avionics where now the missile is able to accurately hit land and sea based targets without the aid of GPS.
Also the missile is able to hit targets more accurately.

==
Operational history ==
On August 12, 2005, Pakistan publicly announced that it had successfully test-fired a nuclear-capable cruise missile with a range of 500 km.
The missile was launched from a land-based transporter erector launcher (TEL).
Pakistan did not notify India of its test-firing as the existing notification agreement is limited to ballistic missile testing only.
On March 22, 2007, Pakistan test-fired an upgraded version of the Babur with an extended range of 700 km.
On May 6, 2009, Pakistan conducted another test-firing but did not announce the event until 9 May 2009, citing political reasons.
On October 28, 2011, Pakistan successfully test-fired its Babur cruise missile which has a range of 700 km.
The ISPR said Babur was capable of carrying conventional and atomic warheads.
A special feature of this launch was the validation of a new multi-tube missile launch vehicle (MLV) during the test.
The three-tube MLV enhances manifold the targeting and deployment options in the conventional and nuclear modes.
With its shoot-and-scoot capability, the MLV provides a major force multiplier effect for target employment and survivability.
On June 6, 2012 Pakistan conducted a successful test-fire of the multi-tube, indigenously developed cruise missile Hatf-VII (Babur), which can carry both nuclear and conventional warheads with stealth capabilities.
It was the third test-fire conducted by Pakistan in the recent past, of different capacity and load.
“
It can carry both nuclear and conventional warheads and has stealth capabilities”, said an official announcement of the ISPR.
“
It also incorporates the most modern cruise missile technology of Terrain Contour Matching (Tercom) and Digital Scene Matching and Area Co-relation (DSMAC), which enhances its precision and effectiveness manifolds.”
A new variant of the missile, termed Babur-1B, was test fired on 14 April 2018.Pakistan conducted a successful launch of an enhanced version of the Babur II missile On December 14, 2016.
Enhancements include upgraded aerodynamics and avionics where now the missile is able to accurately hit targets without the aid of GPS, and also target sea-based targets as well land based targets.
On 9 January 2017, Pakistan conducted a successful launch of the Babur III missile from an underwater mobile platform.
The Babur-III has a range of 450 km and can be used as a second-strike capability.
It has been speculated that the missile is ultimately designed to be incorporated with the Agosta 90B class submarine which has been reported to have been modified.
On 29 March 2018, Pakistan reported that the missile had again been successfully tested.

==
Harbah ==
Harbah is a ship and submarine launched  anti-ship and land-attack cruise missile believed to have been derived from Babur.
ISPR, media wing of the Pakistan Armed Forces, reported that the missile was test fired on 3 January 2018 from PNS Himmat, an Azmat-class missile boat.

== See also ==
Related developmentsHatf-VIII (Ra'ad)Similar missilesTomahawk
(missile)
CJ-10 (missile)
Hyunmoo-3
NirbhayRelated listsList of missiles
List of missiles by country


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Jane's Information article on Hatf 7 (Babur)
Jane's Information article on Hatf 7 (Babur)
https://web.archive.org/web/20071213215008/http://www.pakmilitary.net/army/arsenal/cruise_missile.html
A cruise missile is a guided missile used against terrestrial targets, that remains in the atmosphere and flies the major portion of its flight path at approximately constant speed.
Cruise missiles are designed to deliver a large warhead over long distances with high precision.
Modern cruise missiles are capable of travelling at supersonic or high subsonic speeds, are self-navigating, and are able to fly on a non-ballistic, extremely low-altitude trajectory.

==
History ==
The idea of an "aerial torpedo" was shown in the British 1909 film The Airship Destroyer, where flying torpedoes controlled wirelessly are used to bring down airships bombing London.
In 1916, American aviator Lawrence Sperry built and patented an "aerial torpedo", the Hewitt-Sperry Automatic Airplane, a small biplane carrying a TNT charge, a Sperry autopilot and a barometric altitude control.
Inspired by these experiments, the United States Army developed a similar flying bomb called the Kettering Bug.
Germany had also flown trials with remote-controlled aerial gliders (Torpedogleiter) built by Siemens-Schuckert beginning in 1916.In the period between the World Wars the UK developed the Larynx (Long Range Gun with Lynx Engine), which underwent a few flight tests in the 1920s.
In the Soviet Union, Sergei Korolev headed the GIRD-06 cruise missile project from 1932 to 1939, which used a rocket-powered boost-glide bomb design.
The 06/III (RP-216) and 06/IV (RP-212) contained gyroscopic guidance systems.
The vehicle was designed to boost to 28 km altitude and glide a distance of 280 km, but test flights in 1934 and 1936 only reached an altitude of 500 meters.

In 1944, Germany deployed the first operational cruise missiles in World War II.
The V-1, often called a flying bomb, contained a gyroscope guidance system and was propelled by a simple pulsejet engine, the sound of which gave it the nickname of "buzz bomb" or "doodlebug".
Accuracy was sufficient only for use against very large targets (the general area of a city), while the range of 250 km was significantly lower than that of a bomber carrying the same payload.
The main advantages were speed (although not sufficient to outperform contemporary propeller-driven interceptors) and expendability.
The production cost of a V-1 was only a small fraction of that of a V-2 supersonic ballistic missile, carrying a similar-sized warhead.
Unlike the V-2, the initial deployments of the V-1 required stationary launch ramps which were susceptible to bombardment.
Nazi Germany, in 1943, also developed the Mistel composite aircraft program, which can be seen as a rudimentary air-launched cruise missile, where a piloted fighter-type aircraft was mounted atop an unpiloted bomber-sized aircraft that was packed with explosives to be released while approaching the target.
Bomber-launched variants of the V-1 saw limited operational service near the end of the war, with the pioneering V-1's design reverse-engineered by the Americans as the Republic-Ford JB-2 cruise missile.

Immediately after the war the United States Air Force had 21 different guided missile projects, including would-be cruise missiles.

All but four were cancelled by 1948, — the Air Materiel Command BANSHEE, the SM-62 Snark, the SM-64 Navaho, and the MGM-1 Matador.
The BANSHEE design was similar to Operation Aphrodite; like Aphrodite, it failed, and was cancelled in April 1949.
Concurrently, the US Navy's Operation: BUMBLEBEE, was conducted at Topsail Island, North Carolina, from c. 1 June 1946, to 28 July 1948.
Operation: BUMBLEBEE produced proof-of-concept technologies that influenced the US military's other missile projects.

During the Cold War period both the United States and the Soviet Union experimented further with the concept, deploying early cruise missiles from land, submarines and aircraft.
The main outcome of the United States Navy submarine missile project was the SSM-N-8 Regulus missile, based upon the V-1.

The United States Air Force's first operational surface-to-surface missile was the winged, mobile, nuclear-capable MGM-1 Matador, also similar in concept to the V-1.
Deployment overseas began in 1954, first to West Germany and later to the Republic of China (Taiwan) and South Korea.
On 7 November 1956, U.S. Air Force deployed Matador units in West Germany, whose missiles were capable of striking targets in the Warsaw Pact, from their fixed day-to-day sites to unannounced dispersed launch locations.
This alert was in response to the crisis posed by the Soviet attack on Hungary which suppressed the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.

Between 1957 and 1961
the United States followed an ambitious and well-funded program to develop a nuclear-powered cruise missile, Supersonic Low Altitude Missile (SLAM).
It was designed to fly below the enemy's radar at speeds above Mach 3 and carry hydrogen bombs that it would drop along its path over enemy territory.
Although the concept was proven sound and the 500 megawatt engine finished a successful test run in 1961, no airworthy device was ever completed.
The project was finally abandoned in favor of ICBM development.

While ballistic missiles were the preferred weapons for land targets, heavy nuclear and conventional weapon tipped cruise missiles were seen by the USSR as a primary weapon to destroy United States naval carrier battle groups.
Large submarines (for example, Echo and Oscar classes) were developed to carry these weapons and shadow United States battle groups at sea, and large bombers (for example, Backfire, Bear, and Blackjack models) were equipped with the weapons in their air-launched cruise missile (ALCM) configuration.

==
General design ==
Cruise missiles generally consist of a guidance system, payload, and aircraft propulsion system, housed in an airframe with small wings and empennage for flight control.
Payloads usually consist of a conventional warhead or a nuclear warhead.
Cruise missiles tend to be propelled by jet engine, with turbofan engines in particular being preferred due to their greater efficiency at low altitude and subsonic speed.

===
Guidance systems ===
Guidance systems also vary greatly.
Low-cost systems use a radar altimeter, barometric altimeter and clock to navigate a digital strip map.
More advanced systems use inertial guidance, satellite guidance and terrain contour matching (TERCOM).
Use of an automatic target recognition (ATR) algorithm/device in the guidance system increases accuracy of the missile.
The Standoff Land Attack Missile features an ATR unit from General Electric.

==
Categories ==
Cruise missiles can be categorized by size, speed (subsonic or supersonic), and range, and whether launched from land, air, surface ship, or submarine.
Often versions of the same missile are produced for different launch platforms; sometimes air- and submarine-launched versions are a little lighter and smaller than land- and ship-launched versions.

Guidance systems can vary across missiles.
Some missiles can be fitted with any of a variety of navigation systems (Inertial navigation, TERCOM, or satellite navigation).
Larger cruise missiles can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead, while smaller ones carry only conventional warheads.

===
Hypersonic ===
A hypersonic speed cruise missile would travel at least five times the speed of sound (Mach 5).

3M22 Zircon  Hypersonic anti-ship cruise missile.

14-X  is a hypersonic glide vehicle mounted on a VSB-30 rocket, currently under development by Brazil.

BrahMos-II (≈800-1000 km) / is a hypersonic missile currently under development in India and Russia.

Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle  Hypersonic scramjet demonstration.

Kh-90
(3,000–4,000 km) / is a hypersonic air-to-surface cruise missile developed in 1990 by the USSR and later by Russia.
This missile was designed to cruise from Mach 4 to Mach 6, eventually being able to travel at speeds lower than Mach 10–15.But
this cruise missile systems didn't enter service.

DF-ZF  hypersonic glide vehicle mounted on a DF-17.
===
Supersonic ===
These missiles travel faster than the speed of sound, usually using ramjet engines.
The range is typically 100–500 km, but can be greater.
Guidance systems vary.

Examples:

3M-54 Kalibr (up to 4,500 km)
Russia (the "Sizzler" variant is capable of supersonic speed at the terminal stage only)
3M-51 Alfa (250 km) 
Kh-15 (300 km)  
AGM-69 SRAM (200 km)
United States
Air-Sol Moyenne Portée (300–500 km+)
France – supersonic stand-off nuclear missile
BrahMos (290-500 km) /
India / Russia – fastest supersonic cruise missile and the only one to complete the tactical cruise missile triad
DF-100
China
C-101  China
C-301  China
C-803  China – supersonic terminal stage only
C-805  China
CX-1
China
YJ-12 (250–400 km)
China
YJ-18 (220–540 km)
China
YJ-91  China
CVS401 Perseus (300 km) /
United Kingdom / France (Under development) – stealth supersonic cruise missile
Hsiung Feng III (400 km)
Taiwan
KD-88
China
Kh-20
(380–600 km)   USSR
Kh-31
(25–110 km)
Russia
Kh-32
(600–1,000 km)
Russia
Kh-61 / USSR / Russia
Kh-80
(3,000–5,000 km) /
P-270 Moskit (120–250 km)  / USSR / Russia
P-500
Bazalt (550 km) /
USSR / Russia
P-700 Granit (625 km) /
USSR / Russia
P-800 Oniks (600-800 km)  Russia
P-1000
Vulkan (800 km) /
USSR / Russia
SSM-N-9 Regulus II (1,852 km)
United States


====
Intercontinental-range supersonic ====
9M730 Burevestnik (> 7–9,000 km)
Russia
Burya (8,500 km)  USSR
MKR (8,000 km)  USSR
RSS-40
Buran (8,500 km)
USSR
SLAM (cancelled in 1964)
United States
SM-62
Snark (10,200 km)
United States
SM-64
Navaho (canceled in 1958)
United States


===
Long-range
subsonic ===
The United States, Russia, India, United Kingdom, Iran, South Korea, Israel, China and Pakistan have developed several long-range subsonic cruise missiles.
These missiles have a range of over 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) and fly at about 800 kilometres per hour (500 mph).
They typically have a launch weight of about 1,500 kilograms (3,300 lb) and can carry either a conventional or a nuclear warhead.
Earlier versions of these missiles used inertial navigation; later versions use much more accurate TERCOM and DSMAC systems.
Most recent versions can use satellite navigation.

Examples:

3M-54 Kalibr (up tp 4,500 km)
Russia
AGM-86B  United States
AGM-129
ACM  United States
BGM-109
Tomahawk (up 1,700 km) /
United States/United Kingdom
BGM-109
G Ground
Launched Cruise Missile (2,500 km)
DF-10/CJ-10  China
Hsiung Feng IIE
Taiwan
Hyunmoo III  South Korea
(Hyunmoo IIIA 500 km, Hyunmoo IIIB 1000 km, Hyunmoo IIIC 1500 km)
Kh-55 (3,000 km) and
Kh-65
Russia
Kh-101
(4500–5500 km)  Russia
RK-55 (3,000 km)
Soviet Union
Nirbhay  India (≈1000 km)
Meshkat
Iran (Range 2000 km)
Soumar Iran (Range allegedly 2,000–3,000 km)
Hoveyzeh (Cruise Missile)
Iran (Range 1,350 km)
Quds 1 Houthi 
MGM-13
Mace  United States
Popeye Turbo SLCM
Israel
Yun Feng (~2,000 km)
Taiwan
GEZGİN (800-1,200km)
Turkey


===
Medium-range subsonic ===
These missiles are about the same size and weight and fly at similar speeds to the above category.
Guidance systems vary.

Examples:

Storm Shadow/SCALP (560 km) //
UK / France / Italy
Taurus KEPD 350 (500+ km) //
Germany / Sweden / Spain
Babur-1
Pakistan (Powerful missile)(700 km)
Babur-1 Alpha  Pakistan (450 km)
Babur-2
Pakistan (750 km)
Babur-3
Pakistan (450 km)
Ra'ad ALCM (350 km)
Pakistan
Ra'ad
Mark-2 ALCM (600 km)
Pakistan
Zarb (320 km)  Pakistan
Harbah (750 km)
Pakistan
Kh-50
(Kh-SD) and
Kh-101 Kh-65 variants
Russia
P-5 Pyatyorka (450–750 km)   Russia,  North Korea
Raad  Iran (360 km)
Ya-Ali (700 km)
Iran
Hyunmoo-3 (within 1500 km)  South Korea
KD-63  China
SOM
(SOM B Block I)
Turkey (350 km range under serial production, 500 km + range under development) – 500 km, 1500 km and 2500 km versions
AGM-158
JASSM (370–1000 km)
United States
AGM-158C LRASM (USA) (370 km+-560 km+)
United States
MGM-1
Matador (700 km)
United States
SSM
-N-8 Regulus (926 km)
United States


===
Short-range subsonic ===
These are subsonic missiles which weigh around 500 kilograms (1,102 lb) and have a range of up to 300 km (190 mi).

Examples:

Apache (100–140 km)
France
AVMT-300 (300 km)
Brazil
MICLA-BR (300 km)
Brazil
C-801 (40 km)
China
C-802 (120 km-280 km)  China
C-803  China
C-805  China
C-602  China
CM-602G  China
Delilah missile (250 km)
Israel
Gabriel IV (200 km)
Israel
Hyunmoo-3 (over 300 km)
shorter range  South Korea
SSM-700
K Haeseong (180+ km)  South Korea
Kh-35 (130-300 km)
Russia, KN-19 Ks3/4  North Korea
Kh-59 (115–550 km)
Russia
P-15 (40-80 km)
Russia, KN-1  North Korea
Nasr-1
Iran
Zafar (25 km)
Iran
Noor
Iran
Qader  Iran
Naval Strike Missile (185 km–555 km)
Norway
RBS-15
Sweden
Korshun
a locally derivative of Kh-55 and RK-55, made by Artem Luch Vizar (ZhMZ), KhAZ,
Yuzhnoe Pivdenmash, powered by an AI Progress Motor Sich MS-400 like Neptun missile and same builders designer.

Neptune  Ukraine
Otomat (180 km) /
France / Italy
V-1 flying bomb (250 km)  Nazi Germany

Hsiung Feng II
Taiwan
Wan Chien  Taiwan
Popeye turbo ALCM (78 km)
Israel
RGM-84
Harpoon (124-310 km)
United States
AGM-84E
Standoff Land Attack Missile (110 km)
United States
AGM-84H/K SLAM-ER (270 km)
United States
Silkworm (100–500 km)
China
SOM
Turkey
==
Deployment ==
The most common mission for cruise missiles is to attack relatively high-value targets such as ships, command bunkers, bridges and dams.
Modern guidance systems permit accurate attacks.

As of 2001 the BGM-109 Tomahawk missile model has become a significant part of the United States naval arsenal.
It gives ships and submarines an extremely accurate, long-range, conventional land attack weapon.
Each costs about US$1.99 million.
Both the Tomahawk and the AGM-86 were used extensively during Operation Desert Storm.
On 7 April 2017, during the Syrian Civil War, U.S. warships fired more than 50 cruise missiles into a Syrian air base in retaliation for a Syrian Sarin gas attack against a rebel stronghold.
The United States Air Force (USAF) deploys an air-launched cruise missile, the AGM-86 ALCM.
The Boeing B-52 Stratofortress is the exclusive delivery vehicle for the AGM-86 and AGM-129 ACM.
Both missile types are configurable for either conventional or nuclear warheads.

The USAF adopted the AGM-86
for its bomber fleet while AGM-109 was adapted to launch from trucks and ships and adopted by the USAF and Navy.
The truck-launched versions, and also the Pershing II and SS-20 Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles, were later destroyed under the bilateral INF (Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces) treaty with the USSR.

The British Royal Navy (RN) also operates cruise missiles, specifically the U.S.-made Tomahawk, used by the RN's nuclear submarine fleet.
UK conventional warhead versions were first fired in combat by the RN in 1999, during the Kosovo War (the United States fired cruise missiles in 1991).
The Royal Air Force uses the Storm Shadow cruise missile on its Tornado GR4 aircraft.
It is also used by France, where it is known as SCALP EG, and carried by the Armée de l'Air's Mirage 2000 and Rafale aircraft.

India and Russia have jointly developed the supersonic cruise missile BrahMos.
There are three versions of the Brahmos: ship/land-launched, air-launched and sub-launched.
The ship/land-launched version were operational as of late 2007.
The Brahmos has the capability to attack targets on land.
Russia also continues to operate other cruise missiles:
the SS-N-12 Sandbox, SS-N-19 Shipwreck, SS-N-22 Sunburn and SS-N-25 Switchblade.
Germany and Spain operate the Taurus missile while Pakistan has made the Babur missile Both the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) have designed several cruise missile variants, such as the well-known C-802, some of which are capable of carrying biological, chemical, nuclear, and conventional warheads.

===
Nuclear warhead versions ===


====
China ====
China has CJ-10 land attack cruise missile which is capable of carrying a nuclear warhead.

====
France ====
The French Force de Frappe nuclear forces include both land and sea-based bombers with Air-Sol Moyenne Portée high speed medium range nuclear cruise missiles.

Two models are in use, ASMP and a newer ASMP-A.
Approximately 60 nuclear missiles are in service, 50 land based and 10 sea-based.

====
India ====
India in 2017 successfully flight-tested its indigenous Nirbhay ('Fearless') land-attack cruise missile, which can deliver nuclear warheads to a strike range of 1,000-km
Nirbhay had been flight tested successfully.
====
Israel ====
The Israel Defense Forces reportedly deploy the medium-range air-launched Popeye Turbo ALCM and the Popeye Turbo SLCM medium-long range cruise missile with nuclear warheads on Dolphin class submarines.

====
Pakistan ====
Pakistan currently has four cruise missile systems: the air-launched Ra'ad and its enhanced version Ra'ad II; the ground and underwater launched Babur; ship-launched Harbah missile and surface launched Zarb missile.
Both, Ra'ad and Babur, can carry nuclear warheads between 10 and 25 kt, and deliver them to targets at a range of 350 km (220 mi) and 700 km (430 mi) respectively.
Babur has been in service with the Pakistan Army since 2010.

====
Russia ====
Russia has Kh-55SM cruise missiles, with similar to United States' AGM-129 range of 3000 km, but are able to carry a more powerful warhead of 200 kt.
They are equipped with a TERCOM system which allows them to cruise at an altitude lower than 110 meters at subsonic speeds while obtaining a CEP accuracy of 15 meters with an Inertial navigation system.
They are air-launched from either Tupolev Tu-95s, Tupolev Tu-22Ms, or Tupolev Tu-160s, each able to carry 16 for the Tu-95, 12 for the Tu-160, and 4 for the Tu-22M.
A stealth version of the missile, the Kh-101 is in development.
It has similar qualities as the Kh-55, except that its range has been extended to 5,000 km, equipped with a 1,000 kg conventional warhead, and has stealth features which reduces its probability of intercept.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the most recent cruise missile developed was the Kalibr missile which entered production in the early 1990s and officially inducted into the Russian arsenal in 1994.
However, it only saw its combat debut on 7 October 2015, in Syria as a part of the Russian military campaign in Syria.
The missile has been used 14 more times in combat operations in Syria since its debut.

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the Soviet Union was attempting to develop cruise missiles.
In this short time frame, the Soviet Union was working on nearly ten different types of cruise missiles.
However, due to resources, most of the initial types of cruise missiles developed by the Soviet Union were Sea- Launched Cruise Missiles or Submarine-Launched Cruise Missiles (SLCMs).
The SS-N-1 cruise missile was developed to have different configurations to be fired from a submarine or a ship.
However, as the time progressed, the Soviet Union began to work on air launched cruise missiles as well (ALCM).
These ACLM missiles were typically delivered via bombers designated as "Blinders" or "Backfire".
The missiles in this configuration were called the AS-1, and AS-2 with eventual new variants with more development time.
The main purpose of Soviet-based cruise missiles was to have defense and offensive mechanisms against enemy ships; in other words most of the Soviet cruise missiles were anti-ship missiles.
the 1980s the Soviet Union had developed an arsenal of cruise missiles nearing 600 platforms which consisted of land, sea, and air delivery systems.
====
United States ====
The United States has deployed four nuclear cruise missiles at one time or another.

SSM-N-8 Regulus submarine-launched missile, out of service
AGM-86
ALCM air-launched cruise missile, 350 to 550 missiles and W80 warheads still in service
BGM-109
Tomahawk cruise missile in nuclear submarine-, surface ship-, and ground-launched models, nuclear models out of service but warheads kept in reserve.

AGM-129 ACM Advanced Cruise missile, out of service


===
Efficiency in modern warfare ===
Currently cruise missiles are among the most expensive of single-use weapons, up to several million dollars apiece.
One consequence of this is that its users face difficult choices in target allocation, to avoid expending the missiles on targets of low value.
For instance, during the 2001 strikes on Afghanistan the United States attacked targets of very low monetary value with cruise missiles, which led many to question the efficiency of the weapon.
However, proponents of the cruise missile counter that the weapon can not be blamed for poor target selection and the same argument applies to other types of UAVs: they are cheaper than human pilots when total training and infrastructure costs are taken into account, not to mention the risk of loss of personnel.
As demonstrated in Libya in 2011 and prior conflicts, cruise missiles are much more difficult to detect and intercept than other aerial assets (reduced radar cross-section, infrared and visual signature due to smaller size), suiting them to attacks against static air defense systems.

== See also ==
Affordable Weapon System
Cruise missile submarine
Eugene Vielle (pioneer of technology that led to the Cruise missile)
Expendable launch system
List of cruise missiles
List of rocket aircraft
Lists of weapons
Low Cost Miniature Cruise Missile
NATO reporting name (has lists of various Soviet missiles)
Weapon of mass destruction


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Evolution of the Cruise Missile by Werrell, Kenneth P.
The Cruise Missile: Precursors and Problems by Werrell, Kenneth P.
An introduction to cruise missiles — From the website of the Federation of American Scientists (FAS)
Missile Threat:
A Project of the Center for Strategic and International Studies
Samuel Thomas Fender (born 25 April 1994) is an English singer, songwriter, musician, and actor.
After commencing a career as an actor, he was signed as a singer and released several singles independently, being named one of the BBC's Sound of 2018.
He signed to Polydor Records and released his debut EP, Dead Boys, in November 2018.
He won the Critics' Choice Award at the 2019 Brit Awards and released his debut album, Hypersonic Missiles, in September 2019.
The album entered the UK Albums Chart at No.
1.
==
Early life ==
Samuel Thomas Fender was born on 25 April 1994 in North Shields, Tyne and Wear to Alan and Shirley Fender.
He has a brother, Liam, who is ten years older than him.
Fender had a tumultuous childhood -
his mother left when he was eight years old, but he later moved back in with her after he was kicked out of his father’s house by his stepmother as a teenager.
He attended John Spence Community High School and the sixth form college of Whitley Bay High School, attending the latter alongside bandmate Joe Atkinson.
During and after college he had a number of jobs; working in a call centre, a restaurant and a local pub where he was subsequently discovered by his manager.
At the age of 20, Fender was diagnosed with a potentially life-threatening illness, shortly after which his father moved to France.
His father, Alan, and brother, Liam, are also both singer-songwriters; Liam also plays drums and piano.
Fender started playing the guitar when he was 10 and began to write songs at 14.
==
Career ==


===
2013-2015:
Early beginnings ===
Fender began writing songs at the age of 14, being influenced by Bruce Springsteen and Jeff Buckley, after being introduced to the albums ‘Born To Run’, ‘Darkness On The Edge Of Town’, and ‘Grace’ by his brother.
He started to play at his brother’s open mic nights and formed his first band when he was 15.
In 2010, the band entered a Teenage Cancer Trust competition, where Matty Healy was a judge, and won.
Fender acted in the 2011 pilot episode of the ITV drama series Vera and a 2012 episode of the CBBC fantasy series Wolfblood.
When he was about 18 he began performing paid gigs at restaurants.
In 2013, Fender was spotted performing in the pub where he worked by Ben Howard's manager Owain Davies, who took him on as a client.
Throughout 2013, Fender played a series of gigs aross the country supporting a number of artists including Ben Howard and Willy Mason.
Fender then took two years out for health reasons.
Fender has said that prior to this time he tried to write songs that he thought would be popular as he was ‘desperate to do well’ to get himself and his mother out of their financial and living situation.
However, Fender said that having a major health scare and facing the possibility of death, changed his outlook on life.
His recovery refocused his songwriting efforts and he began to write songs for himself.
It was out of this period that Fender wrote a number of the songs he went on to release.

=== 2017-2018: Singles and Dead Boys EP ===
On 30 March 2017, Fender independently released his first single
"Play God" which was featured in the video game FIFA 19.
The track has since been BRIT Certified Silver.
Fender played the first shows with his full band in June 2017.
The band consists of Dean Thompson and Joe Atkinson - who are both childhood friends of Fender - Tom Ungerer, Drew Micheal and later Johnny "Blue Hat" Davis.
Throughout this period Fender toured with support slots for acts such as Bear’s Den, Declan Mckenna, and Micheal Kiwanuka.
He also played a BBC Music Introducing session at Maida Vale.
At the end of the year, Fender announced his first headline tour for the beginning of 2018.

In 2018, Fender was placed on BBC's Sound of 2018 shortlist alongside Billie Eilish, Khalid, Lewis Capaldi and winner Sigrid.
He continued to put out singles, releasing the tracks ‘Friday Fighting’ and ‘Leave Fast’, before signing to Polydor Records in June.
The single ‘Dead Boys’ was premiered as Annie Mac’s Hottest Record in the World on 14 August.
The track could be considered to be Fender’s breakthrough song as it was the first to bring him mainstream attention and was subsequently nominated for an Ivor Novello.
The song deals with the subject of male suicide, and was written by Fender as a reaction to losing a close friend to suicide.
He later performed the track, alongside ‘Leave Fast’, on BBC’s Later With Jools Holland.
Fender released the Dead Boys EP on 20 November 2018, which also featured the tracks ‘Spice’, ‘Poundshop Kardashians’ and ‘That Sound’.
Alongside the EP’s release, he embarked on a headline tour which included three sold out nights at the ‘Omeara’ in London.
Fender received widespread recognition winning the Critics' Choice Award at the 2019 Brit Awards.

=== 2019-present:
Hypersonic Missiles ===
In anticipation of his debut album, Fender re-released ‘Play God’ on 14 January 2019.
He performed the track in his first Live Lounge alongside a cover of Ariana Grande's ‘Break Up With Your Girlfriend, I’m Bored’.
On 6 March, Fender released the title track of the album ‘Hypersonic Missiles’, which he described as an ‘unorthodox love song’.
The single has since been BRIT certified Gold.
Fender performed the song on his US television debut on Jimmy Kimmel Live before embarking on playing his first shows in North America.
Fender made an appearance on the The Graham Norton Show to promote the album and performed at Radio 1’s Big Weekend in Middlesbrough.
On 6 July, Fender announced the album alongside the release of the single
"Will We Talk?",
which has since been BRIT certified Silver.
After extensive touring, including playing two sold out shows at Shepherds Bush Empire, Fender had to cancel several gigs, including Glastonbury Festival, after experiencing severe bleeding in his vocal cords.
After a month of rest, he recovered sufficiently to perform as support act for Bob Dylan and Neil Young in Hyde Park and play the fastest ever selling date at the Mouth of the Tyne Festival.
In July, Fender announced his biggest UK tour, up until that point, which completely sold out and included two nights at O2 Brixton Academy and a record four nights at O2 Academy Newcastle.
The track ‘The Borders’ was released two weeks prior to the album on 1 September.
Fender has said the track is the most personal on the album and that it shows the musical direction that he will be going in, both sonically and thematically.
Fender released his debut studio album, Hypersonic Missiles, on 13 September 2019.
It topped the UK Albums Chart selling 41,000 copies in the first week; outselling the rest of the Top 5 combined.
Fender was awarded the number one album trophy by Alan Shearer for BBC’s Match of the Day.
The album was certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for selling over 100,000 units in the UK, two months after the album release, on 13 December 2019.Following
the release of his album
, Fender announced his biggest sell-out UK tour to date, for the beginning of 2020, with his first ever arena shows, including dates at Newcastle’s Utilita Arena and London’s Alexandra Palace.
Fender supported Liam Gallagher at a gig for Radio x at the O2 Ritz Manchester on 21 September.
On 10 December 2019, ‘All Is On My Side’ was released being described as one of his oldest songs and a staple of his live set, which didn’t make it on the album.
Fender was nominated for Best New Artist at the 2020 Brit Awards, losing out to Lewis Capaldi.
He performed in the Live Lounge playing a cover of ‘Back To Black’ by Amy Winehouse, a previous Brit Award winner, which was later officially released.
Elton John personally invited Fender to perform at his annual AIDS Foundation Academy Awards Party after the 2020 Oscars and joined Fender on stage for a rendition of ‘Will We Talk?’.
On 13 February, the track ‘Hold Out’ was released which Fender said was to be the last song released of the ‘Hypersonic Missiles’ era.
In March, Fender was forced to reschedule the tour due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Later that year he was the first act to perform at the Virgin Money Unity Arena, a specially created socially distanced venue.
He played three unreleased songs at the gig; 17 Going Under’, ‘Angel In Lothian’, and ‘The Kitchen’.

On 24 November 2020, Fender released the track ‘Winter Song’, a cover of a 1970s track by Lindisfarne, which was premiered as Annie Mac's Hottest Record in the World.
The track was released to raise money for Big Issue in collaboration with homelessness charity People Of The Streets.
Fender has said that the issue is ‘close to home’ for him as he has ‘family members and friends’ who have been homeless.
He performed the song with the Royal Northern Sinfonia at Sage Gateshead Christmas Cracker event on 18 December.

==
Personal life ==
Fender is a Newcastle United F.C. fan.
He was asked to be in the Ariana Grande video for ‘Break Up With Your Girlfriend, I’m Bored’, however he turned it down as he was shooting a video for his own single ‘Play God’ on the same day.
He later covered the song in the Live Lounge.
Fender had his Brit Award "made into a beer pump" at the Low Lights Tavern in North Shields.

==
Discography
==
===
Studio albums ===
Hypersonic Missiles (2019)


===
Extended plays ===
Dead Boys (2018)


==
Backing band members ==
Dean Thompson – lead guitar
Tom Ungerer – bass guitar
Joe Atkinson – keyboards, synthesizers, guitar
Drew Michael – drums
Johnny "Blue Hat" Davis –
saxophone


== Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Sam Fender – official site
Sam Fender discography at Discogs
This is a list of apocalyptic feature-length films.
All films within this list feature either the end of the world, a prelude to such an end (such as a world taken over by a viral infection), and/or a post-apocalyptic setting.

==
Pre-1950 ==
The End of the World (1916)
End of the World (1931)
Deluge (1933)
Things to Come (1936)


==
1950–1959
==
== 1960–1969 ==
==
1970–1979 ==
== 1980–1989
==
== 1990–1999 ==
== 2000–2009
==
==
2010–2019
==
== 2020-2029 ==
#
Alive (2020)
Alone (2020)
Greenland
(2020)
 Justice League Dark:
Apokolips War (2020)
Love and Monsters
(2020)
The Midnight Sky (2020)
Peninsula (2020)
A Quiet Place Part II
(2020)
Resident Evil:
Welcome to Raccoon City (2021)


==
See also ==
List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction
List of disaster films
List of dystopian films
The insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, also known as the War in North-West Pakistan, is an armed conflict involving Pakistan, and armed militant groups such as the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), Jundallah, Lashkar-e-Islam (LeI), TNSM, al-Qaeda, and their Central Asian allies such as the ISIL–Khorasan (ISIL), Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, East Turkistan Movement, Emirate of Caucasus, and elements of organized crime.
The armed conflict began in 2004 when tensions rooted in the Pakistan Army's search for al-Qaeda fighters in Pakistan's mountainous Waziristan area (in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas) escalated into armed resistance.
Pakistan's actions were presented as its contribution to the international War on Terror.
Clashes further erupted between unified Pakistan Armed Forces and the Central Asian militant groups, allied with the Arab fighters, in 2008–2010.
The foreign militants were joined by Pakistani non-military veterans of the Afghan War to the west, which subsequently established the TTP and other militant umbrella organizations, such as LeI. The TNSM established in 1992 allied with the TTP,LeI.
The war depleted the country's manpower resources, and the outcomes outlined a deep effect on its national economy, since Pakistan had joined the United States-led War on Terror.
According to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) statistics and mathematical data survey collections, the economy has suffered direct and indirect losses of up to $67.93 billion since 2001 due to its role as a "frontline state."
According to the MoF-issued Pakistan Economic Survey 2010–2011, "Pakistan has never witnessed such a devastating social and economic upheaval in its industry, even after dismemberment of the country by a direct war with India in 1971."By 2014, the casualty rates from terrorism in the country as a whole dropped by 40% as compared to 2011–2013, with even greater drops noted in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa despite the province being the site of a large massacre of schoolchildren by TTP terrorists in December 2014.

==
Names for the war ==
Various names have been applied to the conflict by the authors and historians.
Names used in English include: Insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, War in North-West Pakistan, Waziristan War, or the War in Waziristan.
On the other hand, political scientist, Farrukh Saleem, termed the war as the "Fourth Generation War" or the "4G War".

==
Background ==
In the aftermath of Battle of Tora Bora (lit.
Black Caves)
, formal troop deployment was begun by the Pakistan Army, at the behest of the Pakistan Government, in 2002.
The conservative parties, most notably the Pakistan Muslim League, were very critical of such troop deployments in the region.
The XI Corps, under its commander Lieutenant-General Jan Aurkzai, entered the Tirah Valley in the Khyber Agency for the first time since Pakistan's independence in 1947.
The army troops later moved into the Shawal Valley of North Waziristan, eventually entering South Waziristan.
A monitoring reconnaissance base was established by the Special Service Group [Navy] in 2003.
Criticism of Musharraf and the United States grew in Peshawar by a massive communist party in 2003, demanding an end to the operations.
In 2003, the troubles mounted as the Tribes began to see military's deployment and repeated PAF's flights in the region as an act of subjugation.
In 2003–04 public speeches, Musharraf repeatedly called for the eviction of the foreign fighters from the South Waziristan and justified the army deployments in the region despite the concerns.
In December 2003, at least two assassination attempts against President Pervez Musharraf were traced to South Waziristan.
The government responded by intensifying military pressure on the area.
However, the fighting was costly: government forces sustained heavy casualties throughout 2004 and into early 2005, when the government switched to a tactic of negotiation instead of direct conflict.

==
Fighting breaks out ==
On 16 March 2004, a bloody mountainous battle between the Pakistan Army troops and the foreign fighters of al-Qaeda was fought in the White Mountains of South Waziristan.
The Pakistani media speculated that Pakistan Army had surrounded a "high value target" in the mountainous region, possibly al-Qaeda's then-second-in-command Ayman al-Zawahiri.
According to the military intelligence in 2004, all militants were Chechens, Uzbeks, and Tajiks who were trying to flee Black Caves (Tora Bora of Afghanistan).
After a week of the battle, the entire area was captured and as many as 400 al-Qaeda operatives were apprehended by the Pakistan Army.
In spite of its success, the army failed to capture Zawahiri.
The ISPR later admitted that it was Soviet Uzbek Tohir Yo'ldosh who was surrounded, not Zawahiri.
By 2004, additional battalions were stationed by General Musharraf to help curb infiltration into Pakistan through its porous border.
The Military Intelligence, Covert Action Division (CAD) and army troops found many caves and tunnels in White Mountain range used by the foreign fighters before the military action took place.
The Military Intelligence accounts maintained that the tunnels were led into Afghanistan, possible Tora Bora region.
Though it is difficult to know how effective the cordon was on the first night of the military suspension but the military intelligence accounts did confirm that many high-value foreign fighters might have escaped through these tunnels and caves back to Afghanistan.
On 7 October 2004, Musharraf approved the appointment of his close aide, General Ehsan-ul-Haq from ISI, who superseded seven colleagues; his appointment was brutally criticized by the media.
After becoming the chairman joint chiefs, General Ehsan-ul-Haq oversaw the ground troops deployment of army only, while the air force and navy were kept out of the region.

===
Peace deals ===
In April 2004, the Government of Pakistan signed the Shakai agreement, first of three peace agreements with militants in South Waziristan.
It was signed by militia commander Nek Muhammad Wazir, but was immediately abrogated once Nek Muhammad was killed by an American Hellfire missile in June 2004.

The second one, Sararogha Peace Agreemen, was signed in February 2005 with Nek's successor Baitullah Mehsud, which brought relative calm in the South Waziristan region.
This deal would later, in September 2006, be mimicked in the neighboring North Waziristan territory as the third and final truce, Miranshah Peace Accord, between the government and the militants.
However, all of these truces would not have a substantial effect in reducing bloodshed.
The latter two deals were officially broken in August 2007 with the start of Operation Silence which was initiated by Islamabad, and resulted in a tenfold increase in suicide attacks on Pakistan Armed Forces.
The strategy of keeping the air force and navy out from the conflict proved to be ineffective, as the violence spread out all over the country, and the army came under great pressure from the militants in 2004–07.
In 2007, General Ehsan-ul-Haq admitted publicly that keeping the navy and the air force out of the conflict was a mistake.

== Transition in tribal areas:
2005–06 ==
The ISI's Covert Action Division (CAD) and the Special Services Group conducted a secret paramilitary operation to capture a high-ranking al-Qaeda operative Abu Faraj al-Libbi on 4 May 2005, after a raid outside the town of Mardan, 50 kilometres (30 mi) northeast of Peshawar.
His arrest was confirmed by the Government sources and noted as "al-Libbi was a high ranking al-Qaeda official, rumored to be third after Osama bin Laden and Ayman al-Zawahiri."
Al-Libbi replaced Khalid Shaikh Mohammed after his arrest in March 2003 in connection with the 11 September attacks.
The Pakistan government arrested al-Libbi and held him on charges in relation to being a chief planner in two assassination attempts on the life of President Pervez Musharraf in December 2003.On 13 January 2006, the United States Air Force launched an airstrike on the village of Damadola.
The attack occurred in the Bajaur tribal area, about 7 km (4 1⁄2 mi) from the Afghan border, and killed at least 18 people.
The attack again targeted Ayman al-Zawahiri, but later evidence suggests he was not there.
===
Ceasefire ===
On 21 June 2006, pro-Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan militants in the Bannu region of North Waziristan stated they shot down a Bell military helicopter that was reported to have crashed.
The government denied missile fire as the cause, stating it was due to technical faults.
The helicopter had taken off from a base camp in Bannu at around 7 am for Miramshah and crashed 15 minutes later into the Baran Dam in the Mohmandkhel area on Wednesday morning.
Four soldiers were killed while three others were rescued.
On the same day militants killed an inspector and two constables on a road connecting Bannu and the main town of Miranshah.
On 21 June 2006, Afghan Taliban leader Sirajuddin Haqqani issued a decree that it was not (Afghan) Taliban policy to fight the Pakistan Army.
However, the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan intentionally did not circulate the decree in North Waziristan thereby keeping pressure on the government.

===
Waziristan peace accord signed ===
In 2006, the government witnessed the successful implementation of the peace deal between two tribes in Kurram Agency over the issue of distribution of irrigation water.
Promptly, the government accepted the tribal recommendation to sign a peace deal with the militants in North Waziristan.
Signed on 5 September 2006, the agreement was called the "Waziristan Accord"— an agreement among tribal leaders, militants, and the Pakistan government was signed in Miranshah, North Waziristan.
to end all fighting.
The agreement includes the following provisions:
The Pakistan military will help reconstruct infrastructure in tribal areas of North and South Waziristan.

The Pakistan military will not tolerate any assistance to intruders in North Waziristan, and will monitor actions in the region.

The Pakistan government is to compensate tribal leaders for the loss of life and property of innocent tribesmen.

"Foreigners" (informally understood to be foreign jihadists) are not allowed to use Pakistani territory for any terrorist activity anywhere in the world.

2,500 foreigners who were originally held on suspicion of having links to the Taliban were to be detained for necessary action against them.
The agreement, dubbed the Waziristan accord, has been viewed by some political commentators as a success for Pakistan.
Even the military commander of the Pakistan Army, Lieutenant-General Ali Jan Aurakzai, also welcomed the peace agreement as "unprecedented in tribal history" and credited the intertribal jirga with amicably resolving a complicated issue within a few weeks.
Others were far more critical, seeing it as allowing militants to regroup and reorganize after military operations.
However, in 2007, accord's chief architect and chairman joint chiefs General Ehsan-ul-Haq openly admitted to the media that the only ground troops deployment was wrong as the "Waziristan truce went wrong".
===
2006
Madrassah air strike ===
On 30 October 2006, United States conducted a deadly missile airstrike on a madrassa in the Bajaur region bordering Afghanistan.
The strike killed 82 seminary students.
Long War Journal blamed U.S. for the air strike as only U.S. was able to conduct precision night strikes in the region.
Sahibzada Haroonur Rashid, MNA from Bajaur Agency, resigned from the National Assembly on Monday to protest against the bombing of a madressah in his constituency.
In retaliation for the attack the militants unsuccessfully fired a series of RPG rockets on the heavily fortified security camp of Governor and Lieutenant-General Jan Aurkzai; though his convey escaped unharmed on 8 November 2006.
The same day, the militants coordinated a successful suicide bomb attack on military base in Dargai, about 100 km north of Peshawar.
The suicide attack killed nearly 42 Pakistani soldiers and wounding 20 others.
Military intelligence investigators later testified in media that suicide bombing had a direct link with the air strike.

==
Insurgency in the north, 2007 ==
As early as 2007, the northern region had been suffering with an insurgency and President Musharraf was increasingly under great pressure from the militants when several army operations outlined mixed results.
In March, his government was forced to sign a peace treaty with Fakir Mohamad, the main militant leader in Bajaur.
Militant groups then held three districts in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas: South Waziristan, North Waziristan and Bajaur Agency.

===
Waziri–Uzbek
tensions ===
In South Waziristan, the Uzbek militancy had been growing as many former Soviet fighters–turned
militants were reportedly seen encircling in the area; many of the military intelligence reports indicated the movements of former Soviet fighters in the region, mostly Uzbeks and Chechens from the troubled areas of the Russian Federation.
In 2007, the fighting sparked between the Uzbek fighters and the native militant groups by the killing of Arab fighter Saiful Adil, an al-Qaeda operative, blamed on the Uzbeks fighters by Maulvi Nazir, described as a top pro-Taliban militant commander in the region.
According to the other version, the fighting started after Maulvi Nazir, whom the government claimed had come over to its side, ordered the Uzbek followers of former Soviet fighters, Tohir Abduhalilovich Yo'ldoshev and Kamolitdinich Jalolov, to disarm, both were formerly the close confidants of Osama bin Laden.
It was also preceded by the clashes between the Yo'ldoshev-led IMU and a pro-government tribal leader in Azam Warsak, in which 17–19 people died before a ceasefire was announced.

===
Defeat of the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan ===
According to the military intelligence officials in 2007, there were many key reasons why the Uzbeks had been dominating the area.
Military intelligence reports testified that the locals were scared to mobilize the opposition against the Uzbek militants due to their reputations as fierce fighters with long memories and very strong military backgrounds.
Some of these fighters used to be soldiers and officers in the Soviet Army during the Russian invasion of Afghanistan in the 1980s, and some of them had military training given by the CIA during the 1990s; hence they were experts in guerrilla warfare.
The IMU fighters had little to lose and it was difficult for them to escape somewhere else.
They couldn't go back to Uzbekistan, and after 2009, re-infiltration back to Afghanistan also started becoming more difficult.
Thus, they made Waziristan their home.
Local militants allied to the tribesmen were reported attacking and seizing the IMU's private jail in Azam Warsak.
The Pakistan Army intelligence said it did not intend to step in, but witnesses say government artillery fired on the Uzbek fighters they set up to fight the tribesmen.
Heavy fighting resumed on 29 March 2007, ending a week-long ceasefire between tribal fighters and foreign militants.
According to initial reports, tribesmen attacked a checkpoint manned by former Soviet Uzbek fighters and captured two of them.
The clashes also left one tribal fighter dead and three wounded.
The following day, a senior Pakistani official announced that 52 people were killed during the past two days; 45 of them were Uzbeks and the rest tribesmen.
One of Maulvi Nazir's aides put the death toll at 35 Uzbeks fighters and 10 tribal fighters.
However, residents in the area said that the death toll on both sides was inflated.
The conflict further escalated on 2 April when a council of elders declared jihad against foreign militants and started to raise an army of tribesmen.
According to Pakistani intelligence officials, heavy fighting concentrated in the village of Doza Ghundai left more than 60 people dead, including 50 foreigners, 10 tribal fighters and one Pakistani soldier.
Intelligence officials also said that "dozens of Uzbeks" had surrendered to tribal forces and that many bunkers used by militants were seized or destroyed.
On 12 April 2007, the army general in charge of South Waziristan said that tribal fighters had cleared the Soviet Uzbeks out of the valleys surrounding Wana and the foreign fighters had been pushed back into the mountains on the Afghan border.
Four days later, the local tribesmen has urged Islamabad to resume control of law and order in the area.

===
Lal Masjid siege and truce
broken ===
The siege of Lal Masjid was one the serious breach in the conflict and escalated the conflict in the summer of 2007.
On 3 July 2007, the militant supporters of Lal Masjid and the Pakistan police clashed in Islamabad after the students from the mosque attacked and stoned the nearby MoE secretariat.
Their resultant faceoff with the military escalated, despite the intervention of then-ruling PML(Q)
leaders Shuja'at Hussain and Ijaz-ul-Haq.
The Pakistan police, aided by the Pakistan Army Rangers immediately put up a siege around the mosque complex which lasted until 11 July and resulted in 108 deaths.
This represented the main catalyst for the conflict and eventual breakdown of the truce that existed between Pakistan and the Taliban groups.
Already during the siege, there were several attacks in Waziristan in retaliation for the siege.

As the siege in Islamabad ensued, several attacks on Pakistan army troops in Waziristan were reported.
First attack was reported on 14 July 2007 when a suicide bomber attacked a Pakistan Army convoy killing 25 soldiers and wounding 54.
Second attack was on 15 July 2007, two suicide bombers attacked another Pakistan Army convoy killing 16 soldiers and 5 civilians and wounding another 47 people.
And in a separate incident, a fourth suicide bomber attacked a police headquarters killing 28 police officers and recruits and wounding 35 people.
The assault on the Red Mosque prompted Islamic militants along the border with Afghanistan to scrap the controversial Waziristan Accord with Musharraf.

Under pressured, Musharraf moved the army in large concentration of troops into Waziristan and engaged in fierce clashes with militants in which at least 100 militants were killed, including wanted terrorist and former Guantanamo Bay detainee, Abdullah Mehsud.
The militants also struck back by attacking Army convoys, security check points and sending suicide bombers killing dozens of soldiers and police and over 100 civilians.
In one month of fighting during the period from 24 July to 24 August 2007, 250 militants and 60 soldiers were killed.
On 2 September 2007, just a few dozen militants led by Baitullah Mehsud managed to ambush a 17-vehicle army convoy and captured an estimated 247 soldiers without a shot being fired, an event that shocked the nation.
Several officers were among the captured, the public criticism grew hard on Musharraf.

After the army returned to Waziristan, they garrisoned the areas and set up check-points, but the militants hit hard.
In mid-September, the TTP and other forces attacked a number of Pakistan army outposts all across North and South Waziristan.
This resulted in some of the heaviest fighting of the war.
Following the Lal Masjid Siege, the first outpost was attacked and overrun by the militants resulting in the capture of 12 Pakistani soldiers.
The next day on 13 September 2007, a suicide bomber in Tarbela Ghazi attacked a Pakistan army base, destroying the main mess hall and killing 20 members of the SSG Karrar Commando Unit; Pakistan's most elite army unit.
A series of attacks ensued and by 20 September 2007, a total of five Pakistan Army military outposts had been overrun and more than 25 soldiers captured.
More than 65 soldiers were either killed or captured and almost 100 wounded.
A little over two weeks later, the Army responded with helicopter gunships and ground troops.
They hit militant positions near the town of Mir Ali.
In heavy fighting over four days, 257 people were killed, including 175 militants, 47 soldiers and 35 civilians.

===
Operation Rah-e-Haq ===
By the end of October 2007, another heavy fighting erupted in the Swat district of the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province between the Frontier Police and the large portion of far right-wing TNSM organization, under the command of Maulana Fazlullah who was trying to impose Sharia law.
In a response, the military deployed a combat brigade under a local Brigadier-General to confront them.
After week of heavy fighting with the brigade combat teams, the battle came to a standstill with both sides suffering heavy casualties.
On 3 November 2007, around ~220 paramilitary soldiers and policemen surrendered or deserted after a military position on a hill-top and two police stations were overrun.
This left the TNSM in control of most of the Swat district.

The fighting in Swat is the first serious insurgent threat from terrorist groups in what is known as a settled area of Pakistan.
Following this, foreign fighters of al-Qaeda loyal to TNSM's Maulana Fazlullah tried to implement strict Islamic law in November 2007.
In November 2007, another brigade combat team was deployed with the help of helicopter gunships to crush the uprising.
By the beginning of December 2007, the fighting had ended and the military recaptured Swat.
Almost ~400 foreign fighters of Maulana Fazlullah were dead along with 15 Pakistani soldiers and 20 civilians in the military suspension.
Despite the victory by the military, the foreign fighters of TNSM slowly re-entered Swat over the coming months and started engaging security forces in battles that lasted throughout 2008.
By early February 2009, the whole district was in military control.

===
Rawalpindi attacks and state of emergency in 2007 ===
On 3 September 2007, the two coordinated suicide bombers targeted an ISI bus and a line of cars carrying ISI officers.
The bus attack killed a large number of Defence Ministry workers and the other attack killed an Army colonel.
In all 31 people, 19 soldiers and 12 civilians, were killed.

Two months later on 24 November, another military intelligence (MI) bus was again attacked.
Almost everyone on the bus was killed.
Another bomber blew up at a military checkpoint.
35 people were killed, almost all military officials.
Facing with an intense criticism from media regarding the Red Mosque siege, President Musharraf became involved in a confrontation with the country's judiciary who began taking suo motu actions against the directives issued by Musharraf and his Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz on issues involving the forming of the investigative commission on Red Mosque as well as hearings of victims of the siege, the findings of missing persons, issuing verdicts against the controversial NRO and privatization, and issuing subpoena regarding the extrajudicial killing of Akbar Bugti, in 2006.
Failing to reach a compromise and subdue the judiciary, Musharraf authorized the decree of sacking around ~70 senior justices including, the Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, immediately and declared the state of emergency on 9 November 2007.
Virtually suspending the supreme law of the land, the constitution of the country, the massive nationwide demonstration and anger erupted against President Musharraf.

Though, this action and its responses are generally related to the controversies surrounding the re-election of Musharraf during the presidential election that had occurred on 6 October 2007, and also was claimed by the government to be the reaction to the actions by militants in Waziristan.
===
2008
general election ===
On 27 December 2007, Pakistani opposition leader and former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was assassinated upon leaving a political rally for the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) in Rawalpindi, Pakistan.
A suicidal assassin reportedly fired shots in Bhutto's direction just prior to detonating an explosive pellet-laden vest, killing approximately 24 people and wounding many more.
Ultimately, President General Musharraf and his military establishment blamed the attack on al-Qaeda, but this was contradicted following day, when Baitullah Mehsud sent a statement to the media saying that he and al-Qaeda had "no involvement in the murder of the former Prime Minister", and that they believed that Musharraf was responsible.
The violence spread all over the country and national media broadcast the wave of violence across the country that left 58 people dead, including four police officers.
Most of the violence was directed at Musharraf and his political party, PML(Q).
Opposition parties, notably the PPP, branded PML(Q) as "Qatil League" (lit.
Murderer's League).
Benazir Bhutto had previously survived an assassination attempt made on her life during her homecoming which left 139 people dead and hundreds wounded.

==
Escalation, air and ground war ==
In January 2008, the foreign fighters overran Sararogha Fort, and may have overrun a fort in Ladah as well.
Both forts are in South Waziristan, and were held by the Pakistan Army.
After the general elections in 2008, the army's fighting capability was depleted under the command of President Musharraf and many in the media had scrutinized the role of the army in the national politics.
On 25 February 2008, a suicide bomber struck in the garrison-town of Rawalpindi which targeted and killed top military medic and Medical Corps Surgeon-General, Lieutenant-General Mushtaq Baig, along with two more soldiers and five civilians.

In a secretive appointment by Musharraf personally, General Baig had been an operational commander of the army fighting in the region and was the highest-level military official to be assassinated since 1971 war.
In 2008, General Musharraf was soon relieved off his command, succeeding General Ishfaq Pervez Kiani as chief of army staff.
Events led by successful movement pushed Musharraf to downfall, followed by the consolidated impeachment movement led by Prime minister Yousaf Raza Gillani
ousted Musharraf from the presidency in 2008.
The new socialist government led by Prime minister Yousaf Raza Gillani of the PPP made critical decisions and appointment in the key combatant staff of the armed forces, including the new chief of naval staff (Admiral Noman Bashir) and endorsing air chief marshal Rao Soleman as chief of air staff; all in late 2008.

The upcoming and then-newly appointed Chairman Joint Chiefs General Tariq Majid formalized a plan and strategy to tackle the insurgency.
Terming as "tri-services framework (TSW)", the chairman joint chiefs emphasized the role of inter-services to tackle the insurgency with full force, and joint army-navy-airforce "efforts that are synergized within a framework of jointness and inter-operability to meet present and future challenges".
His plan was submitted to Prime minister Yousaf Raza Gillani who approved the new strategy, which followed the new order of battle and new deployments of combat units of joint army–navy–air force in the north-western region.

===
Operation Zalzala ===
After a brief intense change in chain of command in the Pakistan Armed Forces, a full-fledged military operation called 'Zalzala (lit.
earthquake) was undertaken by 14th Army Division in January with the goal of flushing out Baitullah Mehsud's TTP fighters from the area.
The area had previously been a more or less safe zone for militants, with some villagers providing them support and shelter.
The operation resulted in tactical success and scores of militants were killed during the operation, and within three days the armed forces were in full control of the area.
The army later captured a few other villages and small towns as part of their attempt to pressure Baitullah Mehsud.
However, the operation led to a huge displacement of local population.
According to the GOC of the 14th Army Division's Major-General Tariq Khan, about 200,000 men, women and children, were displaced.
Khalid Aziz, former chief secretary of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa and expert on tribal affairs, said the displacement was "one of the biggest in tribal history".

===
Peace agreement and Bajaur offensive
===
Earlier on 7 February 2008, the TTP had offered a truce to Musharraf and peace negotiations resulting in a suspension of violence.
On 21 May 2008, the Government signed a peace agreement with the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP).Despite the agreement
sporadic fighting continued until late June and escalated with the takeover of the town of Jandola on 24 June, by the militants.
Around 22 pro-government tribal fighters were captured and executed by the TTP at that time.
On 28 June 2008, Pakistan Army started another offensive against militia fighters in Kyhber, codenamed Sirat-e-Mustaqeem (lit.
Righteous Path).
The military took control of a key town and demolished an insurgent group's building.
In this offense, one militant was reportedly killed while two soldiers died in Swat valley.
The operation was halted in early July.
On 19 July 2008, clashes erupted between the TTP and a faction of pro-government Taliban militants.
The fighting ended with 10–15 of the pro-government fighters were killed and another 120 were captured.
Among the captured were two commanders who were tried under "Islamic" law by the Taliban and then executed.

On 21 July 2008, heavy fighting with another separatist group, the BLA in Baluchistan Province, killed 32 militants, 9 soldiers and 2 civilians.
More than two dozen militants were captured and a large weapons cache was found.
Between 28 July and 4 August 2008, heavy fighting flared up in the northwestern Swat valley leaving 94 militants, 28 civilians and 22 soldiers and policemen, were dead.
On 6 August 2008, the heavy ground fighting erupted in the Loisam area of the Bajaur district.
The Loisam lies on the strategically important road leading towards the main northwestern city of Peshawar.
The fighting started when hundreds of foreign fighters poured into the area and began attacking armed forces.
After four days of fighting on 10 August 2008, the military was forced to withdraw from the area.
It resulted in confirmed killing of 100 militants and 9 soldiers, and another 55 soldiers were missing, at least three dozen of them captured by the militants.
While the fighting was going on in Bajaur, in the Buner area of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province, the militants killed at least nine policemen in an attack on a check post.
The checkpoint was then abandoned, and the army troops withdrew to Khar, the main town of Bajaur Agency.
There were reports that the town of Khar was then besieged by tribal militants.
On 21 August 2008, in response to the military offensive in Bajaur, two suicide bombers attacked the POF Laboratories in Wah while workers were changing shifts.
The attack killed at least 70 people.

===
Tribal tension with TTP and US support for tribes ===
As military retreat from Bajaur Agency, the Pakistani tribal elders began organizing a private army of approximately 30,000 tribesmen to fight the TTP, with the support of the Provincial government in September 2008.
This local private military company, known as lashkar (lit.
brigade), had composed of Pakistani tribesmen who began burning the houses of militant commanders in Bajaur and vowed to fight them until they are expelled.
During this campaign, the Lashkar torched the house of local militant commander named Naimatullah, who had occupied several government schools and converted them into seminaries.
A tribal elder named Malik Munsib Khan quoted in media that tribes would continue their struggle until the foreign fighters were expelled from the area, adding that anyone found sheltering militants would be fined one million rupees and their houses will be burned.
The tribesmen also torched two important centres of local militant activity and gained control of tribal areas.

One of the main motivations for this activity was the operations that were taking place in the FATA that had displaced some 300,000 people while dozens of citizens had been killed in clashes between the militants and military.
Since the start of operations against the foreign fighters, some 150,000 tribesmen have sided with them.
The American military proposals outlined an intensified effort to enlist tribal leaders in the frontier areas of Pakistan in the fight against al-Qaeda.
The proposal was modeled in part on a similar effort by American forces in Iraq that had been hailed as a great success in fighting foreign insurgents there.
But it raised the question of whether such partnerships can be forged without a significant American military presence in Pakistan.
The American military raised great questions whether it is enough support can be found among the tribes.
Small numbers of high-ranking officers of American military have served as advisers to the Pakistan Armed Forces in the tribal areas, giving planning advice and helping to integrate American intelligence.
Under this new approach, the number of advisers had to increase.

The U.S. Government said these security improvements complemented a package of assistance from the US AID for the seven districts of the tribal areas that amounted to $750 million over five years, and would involve work in education, health and other sectors.
The BINLEA of the US Government also assisted the Frontier Corps with financing for counter-narcotics work.

===
Islamabad Marriott Hotel Bombing ===
In 2008, the al-Qaeda struck its largest terrorist attack in Islamabad when a truck bomb targeted the Marriott Hotel.
This attack was a defining moment in the war; 54 people were killed and around 266 others injured.
According to the testimonies, numbers of U.S. Marines and U.S. Navy personnel also died in the attack; many believed the Americans were the target of the terrorist attacks.
In a response to attack on 23 September 2008, the PAF launched its aerial bombing mission which resulted in ultimate success.
Military reports indicating that more than 60 insurgents were killed in northwest Pakistan.
In the nearby Bajur tribal region, the air force strikes killed at least 10 militants, according to government officials.
The Bajur operations, which the army said left more than 700 suspected militants dead, won praise from U.S. officials.

===
Renewed Bajaur offensive ===
In a television emergency address, President Zardari and Prime Minister Gillani publicly vowed revenge in response to the Marriott Hotel bombing.
By 26 September 2008, Pakistan air force and army had successfully conducted and completed a major joint offensive in the Bajaur and the Tang Khata regions of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas, codenamed Operation Sherdil.
Thist joint operation had killed over 1,000 militants in a huge offensive, a day after President Asif Ali Zardari lashed out at US forces over a clash on the Afghan border.

Major-General Tariq Khan, now Inspector General of the Frontier Corps, mentioned to journalists that since the beginning of the Bajaur operations, there were up to 2,000 militant fighters including hundreds of foreign fighters who were fighting with the soldiers and the armed forces.
The overall death toll was over ~1,000
militants and also adding that 27 Pakistani soldiers had also been killed with 111 soldiers seriously wounded.
In this major aerial offense, five of the most wanted al-Qaeda operatives and Central Asian militant commanders were among those killed in a month-long operation in Bajaur.
According to PAF reports, "out of the five militant commanders killed, four appeared to be foreigners: Egyptian abu Saeed Al-Masri; Abu Suleiman, also an Arab; an Uzbek fighter named Mullah Mansoor; and an Afghan commander called Manaras.
The fifth was a Pakistani commander named only Abdullah, a son of aging hardline leader Maulvi Faqir Mohammad who is based in Bajaur and has close ties to Al-Qaeda second-in-command Ayman al-Zawahiri.
Between 22 and 24 October, the armed forces engaged in another hard-push against militants in the restive Bajaur and Khyber tribal regions.
The army troops did not enter in the region until the PAF conducted its precision bombings.
The PAF intense high-altitude air strikes missions were carried out in the Nawagai and Mamond sub-districts of Bajaur Agency.
The advancing troops destroyed several centers of militants at Charmang, Chinar and Zorbandar and inflicted heavy losses on them.
The army gunship helicopters shelled in Charming, Cheenar, Kohiand Babarha areas of Nawagai and Mamund Tehsil of Bajaur agency, destroying various underground hideouts and bunkers of militants.
The armed forces also took control of different areas of Loisam, a militant headquarters, and advanced towards other areas for complete control.

=== Intensified drone strikes and border skirmishes with United States ===
At the end of August 2008, the USAF stepped up its air attacks in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas.
On 3 September 2008, the United States Army Special Forces teams laid a commando attack in a village near the Afghan border in South Waziristan.
Additional air strikes from unmanned drones in North Waziristan culminating on 8 September 2008, when a United States Air Force drone aircraft fired a number of missiles at a "guest house for militants arriving in North Waziristan.
"
Around ~23 people were killed, but the operation's target, Jalaluddin Haqqani, was not among them.
On 25 September 2008, the Pakistan military and the US military became involved in heavy border fighting on the Frontier border.
The incident happened after two US military helicopters came under fire from Pakistan army troops.
A US military spokesman insisted that they had been about 2.5 kilometres (1 1⁄2 miles) inside Afghanistan.
Speaking at the United Nations, President Asif Zardari maintained that Pakistan would not tolerate violations of its sovereignty, even by its allies.
President Zardari told the United Nations, "Just as we will not let Pakistani's territory to be used by terrorists for attacks against our people and our neighbours, we cannot allow our territory and our sovereignty to be violated by our friends", he said, without specifically citing the United States or the border flareup.

===
Militants targeting of tribes ===
On 10 October 2008, TTP militants beheaded four kidnapped pro-government tribal elders in the Charmang area of Bajaur.
On 11 October 2008, a suicide bomber struck an anti-militant gathering of tribal elders just as they had decided to form a lashkar (tribal militia).
At least 110 anti-Taliban tribesmen were killed and a further 125 were wounded.
The suicide bomber drove his car into the gathering itself and blew himself up.
The attack on the tribal council took place in Orakzai, normally a relatively quiet corner of the nation's chaotic tribal areas.

===
Fighting for the NATO supply lines ===
On 19 October 2008, the news media began to broadcast the news of Pakistan Army troops, led by an army lieutenant, being locked in a fierce battle with foreign militants to keep open the line routes to NATO forces in Afghanistan.
For several months, the foreign militants had been trying to either attack or seal off the supply routes.
The army battle reports indicated that the local commander, Mohammad Tariq al-Fridi, had seized terrain around the 1.5-kilometre-long (1 mi) Kohat Tunnel.
The military intelligence reports had held al-Fridi responsible for coordinated suicide bomb attacks and rocket strikes against convoys emerging from it.
The TTP spokesman, Maulvi Omar, claimed that his foreign fighters would lay down their arms if the Pakistan Army ceased intense fighting.
The military refused his offers and a tactical military operation was launched to secure the tunnel routes after TTP seized five trucks carrying weapons and ammunition.
They held the tunnel for a week before they were driven out in fierce fighting with the military.
Since then, Tariq and his men have returned several times to attack convoys, in a response, the army launched its latest onslaught after a suicide bomb attack at one of its bases near the tunnel six weeks ago.
In a massive manhunt operation, Tariq was killed along with hundreds of militants while trying to flee the battle in a combat air operation.
The operation ended with five civilians were killed and 45 were injured, including 35 soldiers, when a pickup truck packed with explosives was driven into a checkpoint.
On 11 November 2008, another group of militants attacked two convoys at the Khyber Pass capturing 13 trucks which were headed for Afghanistan.
One convoy was from the United Nations World Food Programme and was carrying wheat.
The second was intended for NATO troops and one of the captured trucks was carrying with it two U.S. military Humvees, which were also seized.
On 8 December 2008, the militants torched more than 160 vehicles destined for US-led troops in Afghanistan.
The militants attacked the Portward Logistic Terminal (PTL) in the northern city of Peshawar at around 02:30 am, destroying its gate with a rocket-propelled grenade and shooting dead a guard.
They then set fire to about 100 vehicles, including 70 Humvees, which shipping documents showed were being shipped to the US-led coalition forces and the Afghan National Army.
At the same time, militants torched about 60 more vehicles at the nearby Faisal depot, which like Portward is on the ring road around Peshawar, where convoys typically stop before heading for the Khyber Pass.
On 3 February 2009, the militant group again blew up a bridge at the Khyber Pass, temporarily cutting a major supply line for Western troops in Afghanistan.
After the attack supplies along the route had been halted "for the time being", according to NATO.

==
Public support and unified military operations ==


===
Swat ceasefire ===
Since 2008–09, the Chairman joint chiefs General Tariq Majid, working with his JS HQ staffers, had been running several meetings of planning to conduct the joint warfare operations against the TTP militants.
A new strategy of joint-military operations and studies were conducted under General Majid.
During this time, the Government agreed to impose the Sharia ordnance law and temporarily suspended the military suspension in the Swat Valley in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province.
This decision was troubling for the United States in Afghanistan, which believed that it would embolden militant groups fighting US military–led ISAF in Afghanistan.

The US government also believed it would provide another safe haven for the militants within 130 kilometres (80 mi) of Islamabad, as well as a corridor between the North-Western border with Afghanistan and North–Eastern border with India.

The Pakistan Government officials rationalized that "such agreement was the only way to pacify a fierce insurgency and avoid more civilian casualties in Swat Valley – whose ski resort and mountain scenery once made it a popular tourist destination."
The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa's Chief Minister, Amir Hoti, announced that the local authorities would impose Islamic law across Malakand Division, which includes Swat.
The Government officials maintained that President Asif Zardari would sign off on the deal once peace had been restored.
However, the agreement was never signed by President Zardari soon after the TTP militants violated the treaty.

The agreement came the day after the militants in Swat said that it would observe a ten-day ceasefire in support of the peace process.
Pakistani officials say that the laws allow Muslim clerics to advise judges, but not to outlaw female education, music or other activities once banned by the Afghan Taliban in Afghanistan.

===
Defeat of the militants in Bajaur ===
On 1 March 2009, the Pakistan Army troops finally defeated the foreign fighters in Bajaur, which is a strategically important region on the Afghan border.
The 40th Army Division commander, Major-General Tariq Khan reported that the army and the Frontier Corps had killed most militants in Bajaur, the smallest of the agencies but a major infiltration route into Afghanistan, after a six-month offensive.
By the time the battle in Bajaur was over, the Pakistan Army killed over 1,500 militants while losing 97 of their own soldiers and 404 soldiers seriously injured.
In retaliation on 30 March, the militant groups attacked the Police Academy in Munawan town, killing and taking hostage police cadets.
In an operation led by Punjab Police, the units of Elite Police had managed to retake the academy.
Lasting about eight hours, the police suspension ended with 18 people killed in the attack, including eight policemen, eight militants and two civilians deaths.
At least, ~95 policemen were wounded and four gunmen were captured by the Elite Police.

In a similar attack on 4 April 2009, another suicide bomber attacked a military camp in Islamabad killing eight soldiers; less than 24 hours later, two more suicide attacks occurred.
One bomber targeted a market on the border with Afghanistan killing 17 people and the other attacked a mosque in Chakwal, in the Eastern Pakistan province of Punjab, killing 26 more civilians.
The next day, the leader of the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan, Baitullah Mehsud, promised that there were to be two suicide attacks per week in the country until the Pakistani army withdrew from the border region and the United States stopped its missile attacks by unmanned drones on militant bases.

===
Militant violation of Swat ceasefire ===
In March 2009, many Pakistanis were horrified when a videotape was broadcast in news channels that showed militant enforcers were publicly whipping a 17-year-old girl in Swat accused of having an affair.
The girl had not committed fornication or adultery but was flogged simply because she refused her brother's demand to marry someone of his choosing.
Protests against the TTP broke out all over the country to demonstrate against the flogging.
Conservative thinker Raja Zafar ul Haq of Pakistan Muslim League, appearing in news channels, maintained that "this summary punishment of flogging simply for refusing a marriage proposal was totally un-Islamic and had nothing to do with Sharia."
He went on to say that Muhammad had strictly forbidden the practice of forced marriages and in this case, the girl had not done anything wrong by refusing a marriage proposal.
Sensing the sensitivity of the issue, the Supreme Court of Pakistan appointed a five-member team appointed to investigate the video's origins, and concluded that it had been faked, raising questions at Pakistani intelligence services.
In Buner, the TTP continued their criminal activities when residents said TTP fighters had been stealing cattle for meat, stealing other livestock, berating men without beards and recruiting teenagers into their ranks.
The TTP also began to steal vehicles belonging to government officials and ransacked the offices of some local non-government organisations for no apparent reason.
12 schoolchildren were killed by a bomb contained in a football.
===
Operation Black Thunderstorm ===
On 26 April 2009, the unified Pakistan Armed Forces started the strategic and tactical airborne attack, codename Black Thunderstorm, with the aim of retaking Buner, Lower Dir, Swat and Shangla districts from the TTP.
This joint army–navy-
air force unified operation was well rehearsed and prepared.
The fighter jets of Navy and air force began pounding the militant hideouts while army kept advancing in the militant hideouts.
The combat fighter pilots of the navy and air force flew their aerial bombing mission together in high altitude at continuous 24-hour period, to avoid being hit from the anti-aircraft guns.
During the initial stages of the unified operations, the ground troops and paratroopers performed combat HALO/HAHO techniques to hold the control of high strategic mountains and hills surrounding the Taliban-controlled cities.

The operation largely cleared the Lower Dir district of militia forces by 28 April and Buner by 5 May 2009.
The same day, the ground fighting in Swat was particularly fierce since the TTP threw away their insurgent tactics and the ground forces obtained the counter-insurgency tactics.
By 14 May 2009, the military was only six kilometers south of Mingora, the militia-held capital city of Swat, and preparations for all-out street fighting were underway.

On 23 May 2009, the battle for Mingora started and by 27 May, approximately 70% of the city was cleared of militants.
On 30 May, the Pakistan military had taken back the city of Mingora from the TTP, calling it a significant victory in its offensive against the militants.
However, some sporadic fighting was still continuing on the city's outskirts.
In all, according to the military, 128 soldiers and more than
~1,475 militants were killed and 317 soldiers were wounded during operation Black Thunderstorm.
~95 soldiers and policemen were captured by the militants; all were rescued by the military.
114 foreign fighters were captured, including some local commanders.
At least 23 of the militants killed were foreigners.

Sporadic fighting throughout Swat continued up until mid-June.
On 14 June, the operation was declared over and the military had regained control of the region.
Only small pockets of Taliban resistance remained and the military started mopping up operations.
This led to a refugee crisis, and by 22 August, 1.6 million of 2.3 million have returned home according to UN estimates.

=== Blockade of South Waziristan ===
In the aftermath of the successful victory and recapture of the entire Swat valley, the Pakistan military began a massive army troop build-up along the southern and eastern borders of South Waziristan on 16 June 2009,.
The military was now taking the fight to Mehsud's mountainous stronghold, ordering an expansion of its current offensive against TTP fighters in the Swat valley.
On 17 June 2009, the Governor of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Owais Ghani, denounced Baitullah Mehsud as "the root cause of all evils", and quoted that the government has called on the military to launch a "full-fledged" operation to eliminate Mehsud and his estimated 20,000 men.

The Islamabad's decision to launch the offensive against Mehsud signaled a deepening of Pakistani resolve against the militants.
The military had targeted the TTP leader on three separate occasions – in 2004, 2005 and 2008 – but walked away each time after signing peace deals with Mehsud.
This time, the military also enjoyed the public support as a wave of terrorist attacks had swayed public sentiment against the Taliban.
On 17 October 2009, the military launched another offense, called Rah-e-Nijat when the combat brigades and fighter jets launched a large-scale offensive in South Waziristan involving ~28,000 troops advancing across South Waziristan from three directions.
Starting with air force strike and naval intelligence assessment on the TTP, the first town to fall to the military was Kotkai, the birthplace of the TTP leader, Hakimullah Mehsud, on 19 October 2009.
However, the next day, the TTP re-took the town.
Troops had thrust into Kotkai only to be hit by a determined counteroffensive that killed seven soldiers, including an army major, and wounded seven more.
The military managed to take the town once again on 24 October, after days of bombardments.
On 29 October, the town of Kaniguram, which was under the control of Uzbek fighters from the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, was surrounded.
And on 2 November, Kaniguram was taken.
On 1 November 2009, the towns of Sararogha and Makin were surrounded, and fighting for Sararogha started on 3 November.
The fighting there lasted until 17 November, when the town finally fell to the military.
The same day, the town of Laddah was also captured by the military and street fighting commenced in Makin.
Both Sararogha and Laddah were devastated in the fighting.
By 21 November 2009, the ISPR reports showed that more than 570 foreign fighters and 76 soldiers had been killed in the offensive.
On 12 December 2009, the Pakistan military declared victory in South Waziristan.

===
Death of Baitullah Mehsud and TTP counter-attacks ===
As early as August 2009, the TTP leader, Baitullah Mehsud, was killed in a drone attack.
This was later confirmed by captured chief spokesman Maulvi Umar.
He was replaced by Hakimullah Mehsud.

In early October 2009, the TTP started a string of bomb attacks in cities across Pakistan.
The goal of the attacks was to show that the TTP militants were still a united fighting force following the death of their leader and to disrupt a planned military offensive into South Waziristan.
Places targeted include the U.N. World Food Program offices in Islamabad a food store in Peshawar; military headquarters in Rawalpindi; a market in Shangla; the intelligence establishments in Lahore; the police stations in Kohat and Peshawar; the Islamic center at the International Islamic University in Islamabad; and Air Science Laboratories
(ASL) Complex in Kamra.
The month of November ended with a car bombing of Meena Bazaar, Peshawar killing 118 civilians.
Additionally, the month of November saw suicide bombings of the National Bank of Pakistan in Rawalpindi, a market in Charsadda, and six bombings in Peshawar including the regional headquarters of the ISI and the Judicial Complex.
In 2013, the media reported that the mastermind of chain of attacks in 2009, Abdullah Umar, was brutalized and killed in a police encounter with Punjab Police in 2013.
Media authorities identified Abdullah Umar as a law student of the International Islamic University and a son of army colonel.

==
Continued insurgency ==


===
Insurgency in West and defeat of Taliban: 2010–11 ===
In an offensive in Bajaur by Frontier Corps, a militants' stronghold village Damadola was captured and cleared by 6 February 2010.
Bajaur was declared conflict free zone by 20 April.
On 23 March 2010, the Pakistan armed forces launched an offensive to clear Orakzai.
Officials also announced a future offensive in North Waziristan.
The week prior the Pakistan military killed approximately 150 militants in fighting in the region.
It was expected that all tribal areas would be cleared by June 2010.On 3 June, Pakistani authorities announced a victory over the insurgents in Orakzai and Kurram.

===
Death of Bin Laden and Navy offensive ===
As late as 2010, chief of naval staff Admiral Noman Bashir had coordinated many of successful tactical ground operations against TTP hideouts, to support the army and air force pressure on militants.
Many successful operations were executed by the navy, and its operational capability gained international prominence.
By 2011, Pakistan's armed forces were stretched thin by natural disasters and deployments against extremist groups, with one third of the army deployed for the fight, another third along the Indian border and the rest engaged in preparing to deploy.
On 1 May 2011, in a clandestine operation in Abbottabad, al-Qaeda leader Osama Bin Laden was located and killed by the U.S. Navy SEALs in his private compound.
The groups affiliated with the armed TTP vowed, via media, to avenge Osama's death upon the Pakistan Armed Forces.

On 21 and 28 April, senior al-Qaeda operative Ilyas Kashmiri conducted a series of coordinated terrorist attacks on the Pakistan Navy presence in Northern and Southern contingents.
This included attacks on high naval officials of the Pakistan Navy in Karachi, first attacking their bus near the Navy bases.
Finally on 22 May, TTP attacked the Mehran Naval Base, killing up to 10 naval officers, wounding 30 others, and destroying two naval reconnaissance aircraft, during the attack.
In response, the navy's SSG(N) launched its largest offensive efforts since the 1971 operations, and managed to control and secure the base after a massive shootout.
Operationally resulting in tactical success, the navy's counter offensive killed all the militants and ring leaders behind these operations.
Kashmiri was widely suspected in the Mehran operation.

On 4 June 2011, Ilyas Kashmiri was killed by a U.S. drone strike in South Waziristan.

In 2012, the north-west region of Pakistan experienced periodic bombings perpetrated by insurgents, resulting in thousands of deaths.
On 22 December 2012, a suicide bomb attack carried out by the Pakistani Taliban killed Bashir Ahmed Bilour, a minister of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, as well as 8 other people.

===
Tirah Valley clashes ==
=
In January 2013, at least 80 militants and civilians were killed in clashes between the Tehrik-e-Taliban / Lashkar-e-Islam and Ansar ul-Islam (a pro-government militant group) in Tirah Valley of Pakistan's Khyber Agency.
Fighting between Ansar ul-Islam and the Pakistani Taliban continued till March and as a result, almost the entire Tirah Valley came under the control of Lashkar-e-Islam and TTP fighters.
Over 250 militants and civilians were killed and 400 others wounded in the three-month-long clashes.
The fighting also displaced about 200,000 to 300,000 people.
This forced the Pakistan Army to start Operation Rah-e-Shahadat in order to root out insurgents and extremists from the strategically important region and restore peace and stability for the upcoming May elections.

===
Operation Rah-e-Shahadat ===
Operation Rah-e-Shahadat (English: Path to Martyrdom;
Urdu:راه شهادث), was a codename of a joint military operation that was commenced on 5 April 2013 by the Pakistan Army, with assistance provided by the PAF and Navy for air support.
In close coordination with Local Peace Committee (Aman Lashkar), the army troops and special operations forces, aided by Frontier Corps, to flush out TTP and LeI militants from the Tirah Valley of the Khyber Agency.
At least four Pakistani soldiers and 14 insurgents were killed while 5 soldiers were also wounded.
In a major aerial operation, the Pakistan Air Force and navy fighter jets pounded hideouts of banned group LeI in and according to military intelligence reports, many militants escaped from the areas taking with them their injured fighters.
On 7 April 2013, Pakistani military officials said that at least 30 Taliban-linked militants and 23 soldiers including commandos were killed during clashes in the Tirah Valley since 5 April.
Several Aman Lashkar members were also reported to be killed and wounded.
Scores of insurgents and Pakistani troops were injured in the operation.
On 8 April 2013, Pakistani military officials said that at least 30 Pakistani soldiers and 97 militants were killed during fierce fighting with Taliban
linked-fighters in the Tirah Valley since 5 April, the day when the operation began.
On 9 April 2013, the ISPR confirmed that at least 23 soldiers and 110 insurgents were killed in the four-day fighting in the Tirah Valley of Khyber Agency.
On 11 April 2013, at least 15 militants and one Pakistani soldier were killed during fighting in southern sector of Tirah Valley.
The areas of Mada Khel and Tut Sar were cleared from militants.
On 12 April 2013, nine Pakistani soldiers and seven insurgents were killed during clashes in Sipah area of Tirah Valley.
The security forces took control of the areas of Sandana and Sheikhmal Khel in Sipah area.
Three Lashkar-e-Islam militants were also arrested while a dozen others were injured.
Two peace committee members were killed and 22 others were injured in a bomb blast in the same area.
On 13 April 2013, Pakistan Army's ISPR said that seven militants were killed in the Tirah Valley on 12 April.
It did not confirm the casualties suffered by the security forces.
On 16 April 2013, a member of Zakhakhel peace committee
(Tawheedul-ul-Islam) was killed in a bomb blast in Dari area of Tirah Valley.
On 2 May 2013, four Taliban-linked insurgents were killed and five others wounded after Pakistani fighter jets targeted TTP hideouts in the Tirah Valley.
On 5 May 2013, Pakistan Army's ISPR said that 16 insurgents and two soldiers were killed during heavy clashes in the Tirah Valley.
Three soldiers were reported to be wounded.
The military also claimed to have captured militant strongholds Kismat Sur and Sanghar and recovered huge cache of arms and ammunition from the militants fleeing the area.

===
Disengagement of militant groups ===
News reports and
intelligence media news began airing the news that the TTP and other Central Asian militant groups, notably the IMU, have now set up camps and reinforced hundreds of fighters to Syria to fight alongside rebels opposed to Bashar al-Assad in continuity of cementation of ties with al Qaeda, starting of July 2013.
According to Reuters, hundreds of fighters had gone to Syria to fight alongside their "Mujahedeen friends".
Media reported the visit and setup of a TTP base in Syria to assess "the needs of the jihad".
At least 12 experts in information technology and warfare were sent to Syria in the last two months to aid the Mujahideen.
The Pakistani government has not commented on the allegations.

===
North Waziristan offensive ===
On 19 December 2013, the army launched a major offensive in the Mir Ali region of North Waziristan following a suicide bomb attack on a checkpoint in the area the previous day.
Artillery and helicopter gunships were used in the operation.
By 23 December, more than 30 militants and up to 70 civilians allegedly were killed.

===
Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan infighting ===
In March 2014 rival factions fought for control of Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan.
Commander Khan Said Sajna and followers of the late TTP leader Hakimullah Mehsud now under command of Maulana Fazlullah clashed in Shaktoi area of South Waziristan and later in the same area in early April 2014.
This began a bloody struggle for control of the organization.
After several minor skirmishes another major attack took place in the Shawal area of the troubled North Waziristan district on 6 May 2014.

===
Operation Zarb-e-Azb ===
In response to the IMU's Jinnah Airport attack on 8 June 2014, the Pakistani military launched an operation on 15 June 2014 against the militants in North Waziristan including the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), Al-Qaeda, East Turkestan Islamic Movement (ETIM), the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) and the Haqqani network.
Up to 30,000 soldiers were involved in the operation.
It had been described as a "comprehensive operation" that aimed to flush out foreign and local militants hiding in North Waziristan.

By 2014, casualty rates in the country as a whole dropped by 40% as compared to 2011–13, with even greater drops noted in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, despite the province being the site of a large massacre of school children by Tehrik-i-Taliban terrorists in December 2014.

By December 2015, some 3,400 Pakistani Taliban and their allied fighters were killed during the first 18 months of the operation, according to the ISPR.
By June 2016, a total of 3,500 militants were killed, including 900 terrorists belonging to Lashkar-e-Islam, according to the Director General ISPR.
490 soldiers were also killed in the two-year operation.
A kinetic military action was conducted and Shawal valley was cleared of militants.
On 21 May 2016, the Emir of Taliban Akhtar Mansour was killed in a US drone strike near Ahmad Wal town in Balochistan, which is roughly 35 kilometres (22 mi) from Afghan airspace.

===
Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad ===
On 22 February 2017, the Pakistan army launched Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad which aimed at eliminating the residual threat of terrorism, and consolidating the gains of Zarb-e-Azb.
The operation was initiated in response to militant Jamaat-ul-Ahrar's Operation Ghazi that saw several IED and suicide attacks across Pakistan in February.

==
Peace prospects and developments ==
Since 2006, major initiatives have been taken out by the government to reconstruct and rehabilitate the war-torn areas of FATA and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.
The military administrator of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), Lieutenant-General Nadeem Ahmad, supervised majority of the socioeconomic development in the areas that were badly affected by the military operations.
The government took many initiatives, including promotion the political activities under the Political Parties Act, the construction of the Peshawar-Torkham Road and the establishment of the Investment Bank of FATA, envisioned to bring prosperity and provide employment opportunities.
Around ₨ 1 billion were spent for the rehabilitation of the IDPs and ₨ 500 million were immediately transferred into the account of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government for the economic development in the province.
As of 2006 and present, there are numbers of notable and major international agencies and UN efforts to reconstruct the war-torn areas affected of fighting.
As early as 2005, there major government institutions who have been involved in public level to lead the reconstruction, economic development and to bring the quick economic recovery in the war-torn areas, as listed below:

US Aid
National Reconstruction Bureau (NRB)
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA)
Special Support Group for IDPs (SSG)
Federal Relief Commission (FRC)
National Logistics Cell (NLC)
Frontier Works Organisation (FWO)
Navy Reconstruction Group (NRG)Under
the 2006–15 program, a nine-year project, over $2.06 billion would be spend for the economic reconstruction of the FATA region, with the U.S. Government has pledged to provide $750 million over a period of 5 years.
Since 2010, the engineering units of army, the Frontier Works Organisation (FWO) and Corps of Engineers and Military Engineering Service, have been active in the area to reconstruct the war-torn areas.
Major operations were carried out by the FWO to complete the wide canvas of works, including construction of over 400 km roads, dams, canals and hydroelectric works.
The engineering units commenced the work on Gomal Zam Dam in Waziristan with the help of the local tribal people who were employed for this mega project.
The Pakistan Army started the political and educational activities after rebuilding the damaged schools and colleges in Waziristan and gave admissions to as many as young tribal teenagers and young men and women in the army institutions since August 2011.

== Casualties ==
In a debriefing to parliamentarians on 19 October 2011, the ISPR stated that a total of ~3,097 soldiers and personnel were killed and 721 other were permanently disabled in the war on terror.
The ISI lost 63 of its personnel owing to targeted assaults on ISI installations.
In the same government report, it confirmed that since 2001 a total of ~40,309 Pakistanis, both military and civilian, had lost their lives in the conflict.
In addition, the TTP and central Asian militant groups suffered a staggering number of human casualties, and according to the reports ~20,742 militants had been killed or captured by February 2010.
Among these, by November 2007, were 488 foreign fighters killed, 24 others arrested and 324 injured.
220 policemen were killed in fighting in 2007 and 2008.
Before all-out fighting broke out in 2003, independent news sources reported only four incidents of deaths of Pakistani forces in 2001 and 2002, in which a total of 20 soldiers and policemen were killed.
The data compiled by the independent South Asia Terrorism Portal website shows that around 63,872 people were killed all across Pakistan including at least 34,106 terrorists, 7,118 security forces personnel and 22,648+ civilians from 2000 to May
2019.Naushad
Ali Khan of Pakistan Government's Research and Analysis, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Police in his article Suicide and terrorist attacks and police actions in NWFP, Pakistan has provided details of different activities of the terrorists during 2008.
Accordingly, 483 cases were registered with 533 deaths and 1290 injured.
Similarly 29 suicidal attacks were recorded, resulting 247 deaths and 695 injuries.
During the same period 83 attempts acts of terrorism were foiled by the Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa Police.

== Issues with war veterans ==
Pakistan does not have its own equivalent to the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.
There is also no federal ministry that looks after veteran affairs.
Most of Pakistan's infantry come from lower income, poor families, mainly from the rural areas of the country.
They remain unknown from the time of their recruitment, and for the most part, to the time of their leave or death.
Because there is no network of support that goes out to veterans, some believe that Pakistan's veterans are facing similar issues like those faced by Vietnam veterans.
Politicians hardly ever mention the veterans in speeches or statements.
This is because civil society hardly ever inquires or hears about the physical and mental challenges facing Pakistan's veterans.
How to re-integrate veterans in to society is an issue that has yet to be addressed.

==
Popular culture ==
Since the success of unified military operations in 2009–11, the Waziristan war has been heavily featured in Pakistan media, including in theatre, television, cinema, music, video games and literature.
The war also influenced Pakistan's civil society to gather their support for Pakistan Armed Forces through the media miniseries and films that were released throughout the war.
Pakistan's rock bands, such as Entity Paradigm, Strings, Call and Mizraab released many patriotic songs to gather support for the Pakistan armed forces to tackle down the insurgency.
A popular band in the country, Junoon, released their album, Rock & Roll Jihad and literature Rock & Roll Jihad:
A Muslim Rock Star's Revolution in 2010.

==
United States role ==
The US Ambassador Cameron Munter found it difficult to counter the Anti-American sentiment in the country, especially after the Raymond Davis incident.
The Anti-Americanism sentiment in Pakistan is one of the strongest in the world.
The Anti-Americanism has risen as a result of U.S. military drone strikes introduced by President George W. Bush and continued by President Barack Obama as his counter-terrorism policy.
As of present, almost 60%–80% of Pakistanis consider the United States as an enemy combatant state.
The Anti-Americanism has been provoked mainly as a reaction from those who are critical of American CIA activities in Pakistan, such as the infamous break-out of the Raymond Allen Davis incident and American intrusions from Afghanistan border such as the 2011 NATO attack in Pakistan.
The credibility of Obama administration was undermined in the country and, furthermore, approximately 4 in 10 Pakistanis believe that U.S. military and economic aid is having a negative impact on their country; only 1 in 10 believes the impact has been positive.
In 2010, Pakistan purchased 1,000 laser-guided bomb kits and 18 F-16 fighter jets from the US.

===
Economics and Cost of war ===
Studies and research conducted by Pakistan's leading economists and the financial experts, the war hit Pakistan's national economy "very hard", and the outcomes produced by the war on country's national economy, were surprising and unexpected to Pakistan's military and economic planners.
The Pakistani government's economic institutions referred to the conflict as "economic terrorism" and according to Pakistani officials, the indirect and direct cost of the war was around $2.67 billion in 2001–02, which reached up to $13.6 billion by 2009–10, was projected to rise to $17.8 billion in the 2010–11 financial year.
The country's national investment-to-GDP ratio has nosedived from 22.5% in 2006–07 which went down to 13.4% in 2010–11 with serious consequences for job creating ability of the economy.
The leading English language newspaper, The Nation gave great criticism to United States, and called U.S. role as "economic terrorism" in South Asia.

Until November 2016 the conflict, as well as terrorism in Pakistan, had cost Pakistan $118.3 billion.
According to US Congress and the Pakistani media, Pakistan has received about $18 billion from the United States for the logistical support it provided for the counter-terrorism operations from 2001 to 2010, and for its own military operation mainly in Waziristan and other tribal areas along the Durand Line.
The Bush administration also offered an additional $3 billion five-year aid package to Pakistan for becoming a frontline ally in its 'War on Terror'.
Annual installments of $600 million each split evenly between military and economic aid, began in 2005.

In 2009, President Barack Obama pledged to continue supporting Pakistan and said that Pakistan would be provided economic aid of $1.5 billion each year for the next five years.
Unfolding a new US strategy to defeat Taliban and al-Qaeda, Obama said Pakistan must be a 'stronger partner' in destroying al-Qaeda safe havens.
In addition, President Obama has also planned to propose an extra $2.8 billion in aid for the Pakistani military to intensify the US-led 'War on Terror' along the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.
The military aid would be in addition to the civilian aid of $1.5 billion a year for the next five years from 2009 onwards.
In his autobiography, President Musharraf wrote that the United States had paid millions of dollars to the Pakistan government as bounty money for capturing al-Qaeda operatives from tribal areas bordering Afghanistan.
About 359 of them were handed over to the US for prosecution.

== See also ==
Economic terrorism
Terrorism in Pakistan
Human rights in Pakistan
Joint warfare
Sectarianism in Pakistan
Military history of the North-West Frontier
Afghanistan–Pakistan relations
Pakistan–
United States relations
Violence in Pakistan 2006–09
(table and map)


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Tellis, Ashley J. (2008).
"
Pakistan and the War on Terror: Conflicted Goals, Compromised Performance" (PDF).
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

Jane Perlez, Pir Zubair Shah (2 October 2008).
"
Confronting Taliban, Pakistan finds itself at War".
The New York Times.

Farooq, Umar (11 February 2013).
"
Civilians bear brunt of Pakistan's war in the northwest".
Foreign Policy.

==
External links ==
Costs of War by the Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs, Brown University
Pakistan Security Reports by the Pak Institute for Peace Studies (PIPS)
Pakistan Long War Journal by the Foundation for Defense of Democracies
Human Security Report s by the Human Security Report Project
Battling Taliban
: Where Does It Stop?
ongoing coverage from Dawn in Pakistan
"Waziristan War (2004 – present)".
historyguy.com.
The History Guy.
An air-to-surface missile (ASM) or air-to-ground missile (AGM) is a missile designed to be launched from military aircraft at targets on land or sea.
There are also unpowered guided glide bombs not considered missiles.
The two most common propulsion systems for air-to-surface missiles are rocket motors, usually with shorter range, and slower, longer-range jet engines.
Some Soviet-designed air-to-surface missiles are powered by ramjets, giving them both long range and high speed.

Guidance for air-to-surface missiles is typically via laser guidance, infrared guidance, optical guidance or via satellite guidance signals.
The type of guidance depends on the type of target.
Ships, for example, may be detected via passive radar or active radar homing, less effective against multiple, small, fast-moving land targets.

There is some cross-over between air-to-surface missiles and surface-to-surface missiles.
For example, there was an air-launched version of the Tomahawk missile, superseded by the AGM-86 ALCM.
Other missiles used in both roles include the Penguin and AGM-84 Harpoon anti-ship missiles.
Many air-to-surface missiles can be used against both ships and land targets, although some must be modified to perform a different role; for example, the AGM-84E Standoff Land Attack Missile is a land-attack version of the Harpoon.

A major advantage of air-to-surface missiles for ground attack by aircraft is the standoff distance they provide: missiles can be launched from a distance without coming within range of the target's air defences.
Most air-to-surface missiles are fire-and-forget from a standoff distance, allowing the attacker to withdraw without approaching further after launch.
Some missiles (typically cruise missiles or anti-ship missiles)
have long enough range to be launched over the horizon, finding the target autonomously.

Sub-categories of air-to-surface missiles include:

air-launched anti-tank guided missiles (typically launched from helicopters)
air-launched cruise missiles
air-launched anti-ship missiles
anti-radiation missilesTypically, the higher and faster the launching aircraft is flying, the longer the reach of a particular missile is.
For long-range missiles this difference can be relatively small, but short-range missiles (like the AGM-65 Maverick) have a much longer range when launched at altitude.

There have been examples of air-launched ballistic missiles
(Air Launched ICBM, GAM-87 Skybolt), but they are rare.
Sometimes air-to-surface missiles are divided into the categories of tactical and strategic.
Typically missiles with chemical explosive or small nuclear warheads are classed as tactical, and large nuclear warheads as strategic.

==
List of air-to-surface missiles ==


===
Argentina ===
MP-1000
Martín Pescador
AS-25K


===
Brazil ===
MAR-1 Anti-radiation missile
FOG-MPM Fiber Optics Guided Multiple Purpose Missile.

AVTM-300 Cruise missile.
===
China ===
C-101
C-601
C-602
C-611
C-701
C-704
C-705
C-801
C-802
C-805
Changfeng (missile)
(Chang Feng 1)
Changfeng (missile)
(Chang Feng 2)
DH-10
FL series (missile)
FL-8
FL-9
FL-10
FL-7
HJ-8
HJ-9
HJ-10
HJ-73
HN-1
HN-3
HN-2
HY series
KD1 (missile)
KD2 (missile)
KD-63
KD-88
LMD-002 (missile)
LMD-003 (missile)
Sky Arrow (missile)
Sky Arrow 90
SY series (missile)
TBI (missile)
TL-6
TL-10
YJ-12
YJ-22
YJ-62
YJ-63
YJ-82
YJ-83
YJ-91
ZD1 (missile)


===
France ===
AS.11
AS.12
AS.15TT
AS.20
AS.30
AS.30
TCA
AS.30 Laser
AS.37
Martel
ARMAT
HOT
Exocet
Mistral
SCALP EG
TRIGAT LR
Apache
ASMP
ASMP-
A
AASM
MLP
ANL


===
Germany ===
Taurus KEPD 350
ARMIGER
PARS 3
LR
HOT (missile)
AS.34
Kormoran
RBS-15
(in cooperation with Sweden)


===
Greece ===
HSC-1
Makedon


===
India ===
BrahMos
HeliNa (Dhruvastra)
SANT
Rudram-1


===
Israel ===
Popeye (missile)
Nimrod (missile)
Luz (missile)


===
Iran ===
Ghased 3
Zoobin
Bina
Sadid-1
Fajr-4
Sattar 1
Sattar 2
Sattar 3
Sattar 4
Ghaem


===
Norway ===
Penguin missile
Naval Strike Missile


===
Pakistan ===
Baktar-Shikan Air Launched variant
H-2 SOW
H-4 SOW
Ra'ad
Ra'ad-II
Barq
Takbir
GIDS
REK


===
South Africa ===
Denel ZT3
Ingwe laser guided anti-tank guided missile
Denel Mokopa
air-to-ground missile
Kentron TORGOS air launched sub-sonic cruise missile (development cancelled)
Denel Small Guided Missile (in development)


===
Sweden ===
Rb 05
RBS 15


===
Turkey ===
SOM (missile)
Cirit
UMTAS
MAM
Hassas
Güdümlü Silah Sistemi


===
UK ===
Blue Steel missile
Brimstone missile
Green Cheese missile (canceled in 1956)
ALARM
Storm Shadow
BAe Sea Eagle
GAM-87
Skybolt (air-launched ballistic missile; canceled)
Lightweight Multirole Missile
SPEAR
3
===
United States ===
AGM-12
Bullpup (no longer in service)
AGM-22 (project ceased in 1980s, still in limited use)
AGM-28
Hound Dog (no longer in service)
AGM-45
Shrike (no longer in service)
AGM-53
Condor (project cancelled)
AGM-62
Walleye (no longer in service)
AGM-63
(project cancelled)
AGM-64 Hornet (project cancelled)
AGM-65
Maverick (in service)
AGM-69
SRAM (no longer in service)
AGM-76
Falcon (project cancelled)
AGM-78
Standard ARM (no longer in service)
AGM-79
Blue Eye (project cancelled)
AGM-80
Viper (project cancelled)
AGM-83
Bulldog (project cancelled)
AGM-84 Harpoon (in service)
AGM-86
ALCM (in service)
AGM-87
Focus (no longer in service)
AGM-88 HARM (in service)
AGM-112
(reserved when program renamed GBU-15)
AGM-114
Hellfire (in service)
AGM-119 Penguin (in service)
AGM-122 Sidearm (no longer in service)
AGM-123
Skipper (out of service/no longer in service)
AGM-124
Wasp (
project cancelled)
AGM-129
ACM (no longer in service)
AGM-130
AGM-131 SRAM II (project cancelled)
AGM-136
Tacit Rainbow (project cancelled)
AGM-137 TSSAM (project cancelled)
AGM-142
Have Nap (in service)
AGM-153 (project cancelled)
AGM-154
JSOW (in service)
AGM-158
JASSM (in service)
AGM-159
JASSM
(project cancelled)
AGM-176
Griffin (in service)
AGM-X  (in development)
Small Advanced Capabilities Missile (SACM) (in development)
Bold Orion (prototype)
GAM-87
Skybolt (air-launched ballistic missile; project cancelled)
High Virgo (prototype)
AGM-179 JAGM (in development)
AGM-183A
ARRW (in development)
LRSO (in development)


===
USSR/Russian Federation ===
R-82
S-5
S-8
S-13
S-24
S-25
Kh-15
Kh-20
Kh-22
(Russian: Х-22; AS-4 'Kitchen')
Kh-23
/Kh-66 'Grom' (Russian:
Х-23 Гром 'Thunder'; NATO: 'AS-7 Kerry')
Kh-25
(AS-10 'Karen')
Kh-29 (AS-14 'Kedge')
Kh-31
(AS-17 'Krypton')
Kh-32
(AS-4 'Krypton')
Kh-38
Kh-45
Kh-59
(AS-13 'Kingbolt')
Kh-90
(AS-X-19 'Koala')
KS-1
Komet (AS-1 'Kennel')
K-10S (AS-2 'Kipper')
Kh-20
(AS-3 'Kangaroo')
Kh-22
(AS-4 'Kitchen')
KSR-2
(AS-5 'Kelt')
KSR-5
(AS-6 'Kingfish')
Kh-23
Grom (AS-7 'Kerry')
9K114 Shturm (AT-6 Spiral)
Kh-28
(AS-9 'Kyle')
Kh-25
(AS-10 'Karen')
Kh-58
(AS-11 'Kilter')
Kh-25
(AS-12 'Kegler')
Kh-59
(AS-13 'Kingbolt')
Kh-29 (AS-14 'Kedge')
Kh-55 (AS-15 'Kent')
Kh-15
(AS-16 'Kickback')
Kh-31
(AS-17 'Krypton')
AS-18
Kazoo (H-59M Ovod-M)
Kh-80 (AS-19 'Koala')
Kh-35 (AS-20 'Kayak')
Hermes-A


== See also ==
Surface-to-air missile
Laser-guided bomb
Anti-tank guided missile
Anti-ship missile
Cruise missile
Anti-radiation missile
Anti-surface warfare
Air-to-ground weaponry


==
References ==


==
External links ==
EADS - Cassidian division - Products
DIEHL Defence:
Guided Missiles
Israel
Military Industries Ltd. - Air-to-Ground Ammunition
Kongsberg Gruppen
Lockheed Martin - JASSM
MBDA missile systems - solutions
NTI.org - HiWING Mechanical & Electrical Technology Corporation
Royal Air Force - Long Range Air-to-Surface weapons - Brimstone
Raytheon Company - AGM-65
Maverick missile
SAAB Group - Weapon systems
TAURUS Systems GmbH
A double-barreled shotgun is a shotgun with two parallel barrels, allowing two single shots to be fired in quick succession.

==
Construction ==
Modern double-barreled shotguns, often known as doubles, are almost universally break action, with the barrels hinge down at the rear to expose the breech ends for unloading and reloading.

Since there is no reciprocating action needed to eject and reload the shells, doubles are more compact than repeating designs such as pump action, lever-action or self-loading shotguns.

=== Barrel configuration ===

Double-barreled shotguns come in two basic configurations: side-by-side (S×S) and over-and-under ("over/under", O/U, etc.),
indicating horizontal and vertical arrangement of barrels.

The original double-barreled guns were nearly all S×S designs, which was a more practical design for muzzleloaders.

Early cartridge-firing shotguns also used the S×S action, because they kept the exposed hammers of the earlier muzzleloading shotguns from which they evolved.

When hammerless designs started to become common, the O/U design was introduced, and most modern sporting doubles are O/U designs.
One significant advantage that doubles have over single-barrel repeating shotguns is the ability to have more than one choke at a time.

Some shotgun shooting sports, such as skeet shooting, use crossing targets presented in a narrow range of distance, and only require one level of choke.

Other sports, like sporting clays, give the shooter targets at differing ranges, and targets that might approach or recede from the shooter, and so must be engaged at differing ranges.

Having two barrels lets the shooter use a more open choke for near targets, and a tighter choke for distant targets, providing the optimal shot pattern for each distance.

The disadvantage lies in the fact that the barrels of a double-barreled shotgun, whether O/U or S×S, are not parallel, but slightly angled, so that shots from the barrels converge, usually at "40 yards out".
For the S×S configuration, the shotstring continues on its path to the opposite side of the rib after the converging point; for example, the left barrel's discharge travels on the left of the rib till it hits dead center at 40 yards out, after that, the discharge continues on to the right.
In the O/U configuration with a parallel rib, both barrels' discharges will keep to the dead center, but the discharge from the "under" barrel will shoot higher than the discharge from the "over" barrel after 40 yards.
Thus, double-barreled shotguns are accurate only at practical shotgun ranges, though the range of their ammunition easily exceeds four to six times that distance.

S×S shotguns are often more expensive, and may take more practice to aim effectively than a
O/U. The off-center nature of the recoil in a S×S gun may make shooting the body-side barrel slightly more painful by comparison to an O/U, single-shot, or pump/lever action shotgun.
Gas-operated, and to a lesser extent recoil-operated, designs will recoil less than either.
More S×S than
O/U guns have traditional "cast-off" stocks, where the end of the buttstock veers slightly to the right, allowing a right-handed user to point the gun more easily.
Double-barreled shotguns are also inherently more safe, as whether the shotgun is loaded or can be fired can be ascertained by anyone present if the action is broken open, for instance on a skeet, trap or hunting clays course when another shooter is firing; if the action is open, the gun cannot fire.
Similarly, doubles are more easily examined to see if loaded than pump or semi-automatic shotguns, whose bolt must be opened and chamber closely examined or felt to make sure it is unloaded; with a double gun (or a break-action single gun), whether the gun is loaded, i.e., has cartridges in any chamber,
is easily and immediately seen with a glance (and just as easily unloaded).

===
Trigger mechanism ===
The early doubles used two triggers, one for each barrel, located front to back inside the trigger guard.

The index finger was used to pull either trigger, as having two fingers inside the trigger guard can cause a very undesirable recoil-induced double-discharge.

Double-trigger designs are typically set up for right-handed users.
In double-trigger designs, it is often possible to pull both triggers at once, firing both barrels simultaneously, though this is generally not recommended as it doubles the recoil, battering both shotgun and shooter, particularly if it was unanticipated or unintended.
Discharging both barrels at the same time has long been a hunting trick employed by hunters using 8 gauge "elephant" shotguns, firing the two two-ounce slugs for sheer stopping power at close range.
Later models use a single trigger that alternately fires both barrels, called a single selective trigger or SST.

The SST does not allow firing both barrels at once, since the single trigger must be pulled twice in order to fire both barrels.

The change from one barrel to the other may be done by a clockwork type system, where a cam alternates between barrels, or by an inertial system where the recoil of firing the first barrel toggles the trigger to the next barrel.
A double-barreled shotgun with an inertial trigger works best with full power shotshells; shooting low recoil shotshells often will not reliably toggle the inertial trigger, causing an apparent failure to fire occasionally when attempting to depress the trigger a second time to fire the second barrel (this also can happen if the first shell fails to fire).

Generally there is a method of selecting the order in which the barrels of an SST shotgun fire; commonly this is done through manipulation of the safety, pushing to one side to select top barrel first and the other side to select bottom barrel first.

In the event that an inertial trigger does not toggle to the second barrel when firing low recoil shotshells, manually selecting the order to the second barrel will enable the second barrel to fire when the trigger is depressed again.

One of the advantages of double-barreled shotgun with double triggers or SST, is that the second shot can be taken almost immediately after the first with merely a second trigger pull, without needing to manually operate the action (which will inevitably destabilize the gun from the shoulder position and affect aim), and can utilize different chokes for the two shots (assuming, of course, that full power shotshells are fired, at least for a double-barreled shotgun with an inertial type SST, as needed to toggle the inertial trigger).
This can be noticeably faster than a pump shotgun, which requires manually pumping the fore-end to eject and reload for the second shot, and may be faster, or not slower, than a semi-automatic shotgun (as there are no bolt movements to delay the rechambering of a second shell).
Note, however, in neither the pump or semi-automatic will the second shot be a different choke pattern from the first shot, whereas for a double, the two shots are usually with different chokes.

Thus, depending on the nature of the hunt, the appropriate choke for the shot is always at hand.

For example, while field hunting flushing birds, the first shot is usually closer than the second because the bird flies away from the shooter; so, the more open choke (and barrel) would be better for the first shot, and if a second shot is needed, as the bird is flying away, the more closed (and thus longer distance of an effective shot pattern) choke (and barrel) is then appropriate.

Conversely, on a driven hunt, where the birds are driven towards the shooter, the closed (longer effective distance) choke (and barrel) should be fired first, saving the open (closer effective distance) choke (and barrel) for the now-closer incoming bird.
None of this is possible with single-barrel shotguns, only with a double, whether S×S or
O/U.


===
Regulation ===
Regulation is a term used for multi-barreled firearms that indicates how close to the same point of aim the barrels will shoot.
A poorly regulated gun may hit consistently with one barrel, but miss consistently with the other, making the gun nearly useless for anything requiring two shots.

However, the short ranges and spread of shot provide a significant overlap, so a small error in regulation in a double is often too small to be noticed.

Generally the shotguns are regulated to hit the point of aim at a given distance, usually the maximum expected range since that is the range at which a full choke is used, and where precise regulation matters most.
The regulation is usually more important in SxS shotguns, as felt recoil differs.

==
Regional prestige ==
The double-barreled shotgun is seen as a weapon of prestige and authority in rural parts of India and Pakistan, where it is known as Dunali (literally "two pipes").
It is especially common in Bihar, Purvanchal, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Kumaon and Punjab.

== See also ==
Boxlock action –
Firing mechanism using concealed hammers and a break-open action
Coach gun - A style of double-barrel shotgun from the American Wild West
Combination guns and drillings – Type of firearm with at least one rifled barrel and one smoothbore barrel
Double-barreled name – Family name that is a combination of two other family names
Double-barreled cannon – American Civil War cannon
Double rifle
Lupara
Multiple-barrel firearm – Class of firearm with more than one barrel
Standard Manufacturing
DP-12


== References ==
A sawn-off shotgun (also called a sawed-off shotgun, short-barreled shotgun, shorty or a boom stick) is a type of shotgun with a shorter gun barrel—typically under 18 inches (46 cm)—and often a shortened or absent stock.
Despite the colloquial term, barrels do not, strictly speaking, have to be shortened with a saw.
Barrels can be manufactured at shorter lengths as an alternative to traditional, longer barrels.
This makes them easier to transport due to their smaller profile and lighter weight.
The design also makes the weapon easy to maneuver in cramped spaces, a feature sought by military close-quarters combat units, law enforcement SWAT team users, and home-defense purposes.
As a result of the shorter barrel length, any sawed-off shotgun with a magazine tube will have its capacity reduced.

In the 1930s, the United States, Britain and Canada mandated that a permit be required to own these firearms.
They are subject to legal restrictions depending upon jurisdiction.
They are used by military forces and police agencies worldwide.
== Description ==
Compared to a standard shotgun, the sawn-off shotgun has a shorter effective range, due to a lower muzzle velocity; however, its reduced length makes it easier to maneuver and conceal.
Powerful and compact, the weapon is especially suitable for use in small spaces, such as close-quarters combat in a military context.
Military vehicle crews use short-barreled combat shotguns as ancillary weapons.
In urban combat zones, military entry teams often use entry shotguns when breaching and entering doorways.

Many jurisdictions have a minimum legal length for shotgun barrels to make these more concealable shotguns unavailable for criminal purposes.
Many gun makers in the U.S. have not offered sawed-off shotguns to the public since 1934, when shotguns with barrel lengths of under 18 inches were restricted, although they had previously been sold.
To abide by NFA regulations, anyone may complete a Form 1 "making" form, and purchase and have approved the US$200 tax stamp for the shotgun in question, in order to legally reduce its barrel length to less than 18 inches by cutting the barrel or replacing it with a shorter one.
A sawed-off shotgun is often an unofficial modification of a standard shotgun.
In countries where handguns are more costly or difficult to obtain, criminals can convert legally purchased or stolen shotguns into concealable weapons.

The term is often applied to illegal weapons that are created by cutting off the barrel of a standard shotgun.
The barrel of a shotgun without a tube magazine can be cut to any length; pump-action or semi-automatic shotguns usually have a tube magazine attached to the underside of the barrel which limits the practical minimum barrel length to about the length of the magazine tube, unless it also is modified, technically much more challenging than shortening the barrel.
Repeating-fire shotguns with box magazines do not lose shell capacity when sawed off, but they are far less common than those with tubular magazines.
Shotguns manufactured with barrels under the legal minimum length frequently fall into special categories.

==
Legal restrictions ==
Many nations have placed legal restrictions on sawed-off shotguns.
The following are the restrictions for specific nations.
Although not listed here, they are also subject to laws governing guns in general.

===
Australia ===
In the state of Victoria a shotgun may not have its barrel shortened so as to change the category under which that shotgun would be classified.
In some states, any alteration to the length of the barrel requires permission from the Chief Commissioner of Police.

===
Canada ===
Short-barreled, manually operated shotguns (non-semi-automatics) are non-restricted as long as the barrel remains unmodified from the original factory length.
There is no legal minimum for shotgun barrels as long as they are not handguns; shotguns with barrels as short as 8.5 inches are available in Canada.
The act of reducing the length of the barrel of a shotgun to less than 457 mm (18 inches) by sawing, cutting, or "otherwise", by anyone other than a recognized gun manufacturer, is prohibited.

===
Czech Republic ===
Short-barreled shotguns are universally category B weapons and therefore require a shall issue permit and Gun license (zbrojní průkaz), including the self defense category.

===
Germany ===
In Germany, the possession of a sawed-off shotgun is legal with a firearms license (Waffenbesitzkarte), just like any other firearm.
Restrictions only apply to pump-action shotguns, which require a minimum barrel length of 45 cm and a minimum overall length of 90 cm to be legal.
Other shotguns may be of any length.
If the barrel length is less than 30 cm or the overall length is less than 60 cm, the firearm is considered a handgun, and treated accordingly under the law.

===
Ireland ===
Shortening the barrel of a shotgun or rifle results in a presumptive five-year minimum sentence of imprisonment upon conviction for a first offence, and a mandatory five-year sentence for second or subsequent offences.

===
United Kingdom ===
Within the United Kingdom, side-by-side, over-under, bolt-action and lever-action shotguns are required to conform to the specification of a 24-inch minimum barrel length if held on a shotgun certificate.
If held on a firearms certificate, the applicant having demonstrated 'good reason' for possession, they must comply with the standard configuration of 12-inch minimum barrel length, 24-inch minimum overall length, in common with other Section 1 firearms.

Shotguns held on a shotgun certificate must either have no magazine, or a non-removable magazine capable of holding no more than two rounds.
Shotguns held on firearms certificates are not subject to any magazine restrictions.

Semi-automatic and pump-action shotguns, whether held on shotgun or firearms certificates, are always required to comply with the specification of 24-inch minimum barrel length, 40-inch minimum overall length.
Muzzleloading firearms held on firearms certificates are exempt from any restrictions on barrel and overall length.
A smoothbore muzzleloader held on a shotgun certificate would be subject to the standard 24-inch minimum barrel length specification.

===
United States ===
Under the National Firearms Act (NFA), it is illegal for a private citizen to possess a sawed-off modern smokeless powder shotgun (a shotgun with a barrel length shorter than 18 inches (46 cm) or a minimum overall length of the weapon, total, including the 18-inch minimum barrel, of under 26 inches (66 cm)) (under U.S.C. Title II), without a tax-paid registration from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, requiring a background check and either a $200 or $5 tax for every transfer, depending upon the specific manufacturing circumstances of the particular sawed-off modern shotgun being transferred.
Gun trusts have become an increasingly popular means of registering SBSs with the BATFE.

Short-barreled muzzleloading blackpowder shotguns are not illegal under federal law, and require no tax-stamped permit, although they may be illegal under state law.
As with all NFA regulated firearms, a new tax stamp must be purchased before every transfer.
Inter-state transfers must be facilitated through a Federal Firearms Licensee (FFL) while intrastate transfers may be between two persons.
In the US, shotguns originally manufactured without shoulder stocks (and thus not legally shotguns), with a total length under 26 inches, are classified as an "Any Other Weapon" by the BATFE and have a $5 transfer tax, if they are manufactured by a maker possessing the appropriate Class 2 Special Occupational Taxpayer Federal Firearms License.

In order to convert an existing shoulder-stocked shotgun to a short-barreled shotgun or an existing pistol-grip-only shotgun to an "Any Other Weapon", a private citizen must pay the standard $200 NFA tax.

==
Police and military use ==
Historical military use of sawed-off shotguns includes use as a primary weapon for Confederate cavalry during the American Civil War.

These muzzle-loaded weapons were used primarily for close-range combat and to supplement the availability of more traditional short-ranged weapons such as the saber or carbine.

The availability of the source weapons and the ability to use single ball, shot, or a mix of both as the situation required were reasons why they were initially desired by those establishing Confederate cavalry units.

They were replaced over time as more conventional arms became available and as the tactical use of cavalry shifted towards use as mounted infantry.

In modern usage, minimum length and barrel length restrictions only apply to civilian use; military and police departments may issue short-barreled shotguns, and major manufacturers offer special models with barrels in the range of 10 to 14 inches (25 to 36 cm) as riot shotguns or combat shotguns for use in areas with restricted space.
These are generally referred to as "entry shotguns", because they are often used for forcing entry into buildings, where the short easy handling is more important than the increased ammunition capacity of a longer shotgun.
Breaching rounds provide another use for very short shotguns.
These rounds are usually made of sintered powdered metal, but a normal buckshot or bird shot round will also work.
A shotgun is used for breaching by placing the gun next to a door lock (0 to 2 inches away, 0 to 5 cm), and firing at a 45 degrees downward angle through the door between the lock or latch and the door frame.
The impact of the projectile(s) opens a hole through the door, removing the latch or locking bolt.
When through the door, the shot or sintered metal disperses quickly, and because it was aimed downwards, the risk of harming occupants on the other side of the breached door is minimized.
Breaching guns used by police and the military may have barrels as short as 10 inches (25 cm), and they often have only a pistol grip rather than a full butt stock.
Some models use a special cup-like muzzle extension to further minimize the risk of debris injuring the shooter.
Because few rounds are fired, any sporting shotgun with a 3-round capacity could be shortened and used as a capable breaching shotgun.

== Barrel length and shot spread ==
It is a common misconception that shortening the length of a shotgun barrel itself significantly affects the pattern or spread of the pellets; this only becomes true when the barrel is reduced to less than 50% of a typical length.

A standard-length barrel (e.g., 28 inches) is this long to move the center of gravity of the weapon away from the body and give it an ergonomic heft, and in order for the barrel to extend out into the shooter's field of vision right up to the target, as well as to make the weapon safer, as it is  difficult to inadvertently point a long gun at one's own body.
The pattern is primarily affected by the type of cartridge fired and the choke, or constriction normally found at the muzzle of a shotgun barrel.

The primary reason that the pattern is altered is because cutting off the end of the barrel removes the choke, which generally only extends about two inches (5 cm) inward from the muzzle.
This results in a cylinder bore, which causes the widest spread generally found in shotgun barrels (see choke for more information on the impact of chokes, shotgun shell for information on spreader loads, and details on shot patterning for other relevant information).
However, many qualified gunsmiths can re-tap and reinstall the choke in the shortened barrel.
==
Civilian usage ==
A sawn-off shotgun with exposed, manually cocked hammers and dual triggers is known as a lupara ("wolf-shot") in Italy and, while associated with organized crime, was originally used by Sicilian farmers and shepherds to protect their vineyards and flocks of animals.
In rural areas of North India, where it is seen as a weapon of authority and prestige, it is known as a dunali, literally meaning "two pipes".
It is especially common in Bihar, Purvanchal, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Punjab.

The light weight of short-barreled shotguns, particularly in configurations that lack substantial stocks, leads some users to use short 'minishells' with lower shot and powder loading for comfortable casual use.

==
Criminal use ==
In the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, where handguns are not easily obtainable, the sawn-off shotgun was a common weapon in armed robberies during and shortly after the 1960s, and it is this use that most people associate with the weapon.

The bank robber Clyde Barrow modified his Browning A-5 shotgun by cutting the barrel down to the same length as the magazine tube, and shortening the stock by 5 to 6 inches (125 to 150 mm) to make it more concealable.
A small, 10–12-inch (250–300 mm) strap was attached to both ends of the butt of the gun, and was looped around his shoulder, concealing the gun between his arm and chest under his jacket in the manner of a shoulder holster.
The gun was drawn up quickly and fired from the shoulder under which it was carried.
Barrow dubbed it the "Whippit", as he was able to "whip it" out easily.

==
Derived uses ==
Familiarity with descriptions and images of sawed-off shotguns via crime reports in the public media has led to "sawed-off" or "sawn-off" being used sometimes colloquially as "small or stripped version of"; such as the Sawn-Off Daimler (SOD).

== See also ==
Coach Gun
KAC Masterkey
M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System
Marble Game Getter
Serbu Super-Shorty
Short-barreled rifle
Title II weapons


== Notes ==
Kinetic military action is a euphemism for military action involving active warfare, including lethal force.
The phrase is used to contrast between conventional military force and "soft" force, including diplomacy, sanctions and cyber warfare.
"
Kinetic" was used as a retronymic euphemism for military action in Bush at War, a 2002 book by Bob Woodward.
United States Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld used the words "kinetic" and "non-kinetic" often.

"Kinetic military action" was used by White House aide Ben Rhodes on March 23, 2011 to describe U.S. military action in Libya:I think what we are doing is enforcing a resolution that has a very clear set of goals, which is protecting the Libyan people, averting a humanitarian crisis, and setting up a no-fly zone...
Obviously that involves kinetic military action, particularly on the front end.

This use was noted by news media: "'Kinetic military action' is still hell" and "Kinetic Military Action No More".
U.S. Department of Defense used "kinetic operations" on a webpage about "Operation Inherent Resolve".
It contained an interactive graphic titled "AIRSTRIKES IN IRAQ AND SYRIA" and captioned "... operations related to ISIL since kinetic operations started on Aug. 8, 2014 ...".On February 11, 2015, President Obama used "kinetic strike" in a letter to Congress.
He wanted, among other things, Congress to "authorize the use of U.S. forces [against ISIL] in ... [ground] missions to enable kinetic strikes".
The phrase was not used in the draft resolution proposed to Congress.
On December 2, 2015, Secretary of State John Kerry spoke after attending a series of NATO meetings in Brussels, “There are various ways in which countries can contribute; they don’t necessarily have to be troops, engaged in kinetic action.
There are medical facilities, there are other assets that can be deployed, there is intelligence gathering.”

== See also ==
Newspeak
War
Kinetic bombardment
Kinetic energy


=
= References ==
A shotgun shell, shotshell or simply shell is a type of rimmed, cylindrical (straight-walled) cartridges used specifically by shotguns, and is typically loaded with numerous small, pellet-like spherical sub-projectiles called shot, fired through a smoothbore barrel with a tapered constriction at the muzzle to regulate the extent of scattering.

A shell can sometimes also contain only a single large solid projectile known as a slug, fired usually through a rifled slug barrel.

The shell casing usually consist of a paper or plastic tube mounted on a brass base holding a primer, and the shots are typically contained by a wadding/sabot inside the case.

The caliber of the shotshell is known as its gauge.

The projectiles are traditionally made of lead, but other metals such as steel, tungsten and bismuth are also used due to restrictions on lead, and other unusual projectiles such as saboted flechettes, rubber balls, rock salt and magnesium shards also exist.

Slug shells can also be made with specialty non-lethal projectiles such as rubber and bean bag rounds.

Shotguns have an effective range of about 35 m (38 yd) with buckshot, 45 m (49 yd) with birdshot, 100 m (110 yd) with slugs, and well over 150 m (160 yd) with saboted slugs in rifled barrels.
Other rounds include:
Ferret rounds:
rounds designed to penetrate a thin barrier (e.g. a car door) and release a gas payload.

Bolo rounds: two large lead balls attached by a wire.

Piranha rounds: shells full of sharp tacks.

Dragon's breath rounds: shells full of incendiary chemicals that creates a fireball/flame when discharged, and can ignite a flammable target at close range.
Most shotgun shells are designed to be fired from a smoothbore barrel, but dedicated shotguns with rifled barrels are limited to lead slugs or sabot slugs as "shot" would be spread too wide by the rifling.
A rifled barrel will increase the accuracy of sabot slugs, but makes it unsuitable for firing shot, as it imparts a spin to the shot cup, causing the shot cluster to disperse.
A rifled slug uses rifling on the slug itself so it can be used in a smoothbore shotgun.

==
History ==
Early shotgun shells used brass cases, not unlike rifle and pistol cartridge cases of the same era.
These brass shotgun hulls or cases closely resembled rifle cartridges, in terms of both the head and primer portions of the shotgun shell, as well as in their dimensions.
Card wads, made of felt, leather, and cork, as well as paperboard, were all used at various times.
Waterglass (Sodium silicate) was commonly used to cement the top overshot wad into these brass shell casings.
No roll crimp or fold crimp was used on these early brass cases, although roll crimps were eventually used by some manufacturers to hold the overshot wad in place securely.
The primers on these early shotgun shells were identical to pistol primers of the same diameter.

Starting in the late 1870s, paper hulls began replacing brass hulls.
Paper hulls remained popular for nearly a century, until the early 1960s.
These shotgun shells using paper hulls were nearly always roll crimped, although fold crimping also eventually became popular.
The primers on these paper hull shotgun shells also changed from the pistol primers used on the early brass shotgun shells to a primer containing both the priming charge and an anvil, unlike rifle and pistol ammunition, making the shotgun shell primer taller.
Card wads, made of felt and cork, as well as paperboard, were all used at various times, gradually giving way to plastic over powder wads, with card wads, and, eventually, to all plastic wads.
Starting in the early 1960s, plastic hulls started replacing paper hulls for the majority of shotgun shells and by the 1980s, plastic hulls had become universally adopted.

==
Typical construction ==
Modern shotgun shells typically consist of a plastic case, with the base covered in a thin brass plated steel covering.
As noted previously, paper shells used to be common, and are still made, as are solid brass shells.
Some companies have produced what appear to be all-plastic shells, although in these there is a small metal ring cast into the rim of the shell to provide strength.
Often the more powerful loads will use "high brass" shells, with the brass extended up further along the sides of the shell, while light loads will use "low brass" shells.
The brass does not actually provide a significant amount of strength, but the difference in appearance provides shooters with a way to quickly differentiate between high and low powered ammunition.

The base of the shell is fairly thick to hold the large shotgun primer, which is longer than primers used for rifle and pistol ammunition.
Modern smokeless powders are far more efficient than the original black powder used in shotgun shells, so very little space is actually taken by powder; shotguns use small quantities of double base powders, equivalent to quick-burning pistol powders, with up to 50% nitroglycerin.
After the powder comes the wadding or wad.
The primary purpose of a wad is to prevent the shot and powder from mixing, and to provide a seal that prevents gas from blowing through the shot rather than propelling it.
The wad design may also encompass a shock absorber and a cup that holds the shot together until it is out of the barrel.

A modern wad consists of three parts, the powder wad, the cushion, and the shot cup, which may be separate pieces or be one part.
The powder wad acts as the gas seal (known as obturation), and is placed firmly over the powder; it may be a paper or plastic part.
The cushion comes next, and it is designed to compress under pressure, to act as a shock absorber and minimize the deformation of the shot; it also serves to take up as much space as is needed between the powder wad and the shot.
Cushions are almost universally made of plastic with crumple zones, although for game shooting in areas grazed by farm stock or wildlife biodegradable fiber wads are often preferred.
The shot cup is the last part of the shell, and it serves to hold the shot together as it moves down the barrel.
Shot cups have slits on the sides so that they peel open after leaving the barrel, allowing the shot to continue on in flight undisturbed.
Shot cups, where used, are also almost universally plastic.
The shot fills the shot cup (which must be of the correct length to hold the desired quantity of shot), and the shotgun shell is then crimped, or rolled closed.
==
Sizes ==


===
Standard ===
Shotgun shells are generally measured by "gauge", which is the weight, in fractions of a pound, of a pure lead round ball that is the same diameter as the internal diameter of the barrel; in Britain and some other locations outside the United States the term "bore" is used with the same meaning.
This contrasts with rifles and handguns, which are almost always measured in "caliber", a measurement of the internal diameter of the barrel measured in millimeters or inches and, consequently, is approximately equal to the diameter of the projectile that is fired.

For example, a shotgun is called "12-gauge" because a lead sphere that just fits the inside diameter of the barrel weighs 1⁄12 pound (38 g).
This measurement comes from the time when early cannons were designated in a similar manner—a "12 pounder" would be a cannon that fired a 12-pound (5.4 kg) cannonball; inversely, an individual "12-gauge" shot would in fact be a ​1⁄12 pounder.
Thus, a 10-gauge shotgun has a larger-diameter barrel than a 12-gauge shotgun, which has a larger-diameter barrel than a 20-gauge shotgun, and so forth.

The most popular shotgun gauge by far is 12-gauge.
The larger 10-gauge, once popular for hunting larger birds such as goose and turkey, is in the decline with the advent of longer, "magnum" 12-gauge shells, which offer similar performance.
The mid-size 20-gauge is also a very popular chambering for smaller-framed shooters who favor its reduced recoil, those hunting smaller game, and experienced trap and skeet shooters who like the additional challenge of hitting their targets with a smaller shot charge.
Other less-common, but commercially available gauges are 16 and 28.
Several other gauges may be encountered but are considered obsolete.
The 4, 8, 24, and 32 gauge guns are collector items.
There are also some shotguns measured by diameter, rather than gauge.
These are the .410 (10.4mm), .380 (9mm), and .22 (5.5mm); these are correctly called ".410 bore", not ".410-gauge".

The .410 bore is the smallest shotgun size which is widely available commercially in the United States.
For size comparison purposes, the .410, when measured by gauge, would be around 67-
or 68-gauge
(it is 67.62-gauge),
The .410 is often  mistakenly assigned 36-gauge.
The 36 gauge was in fact a .360 diameter cartridge which was 1.5 inches (38 mm) in length and is now obsolete.

===
Other calibers ===
Snake shot (
AKA: bird shot, rat shot and dust shot)
refers to handgun and rifle cartridges loaded with small lead shot.
Snake shot is generally used for shooting at snakes, rodents, birds, and other pest at very close range.
The most common snake shot cartridges are .22
Long Rifle, .22
Magnum, .38
Special,
9×19mm Luger, .40 Smith & Wesson, .44
Special, .45 ACP, and .45 Colt.

Commonly used by hikers, backpackers and campers, snake shot is ideally suited for use in revolvers and derringers, chambered for .38
Special and .357 Magnum.
Snake shot may not cycle properly in semi-automatic pistols.
Rifles specifically made to fire .22 caliber snake shot are also commonly used by farmers for pest control inside of barns and sheds, as the snake shot will not shoot holes in the roof or walls, or more importantly injure livestock with a ricochet.
They are also used for airport and warehouse pest control.

Shot shells have also been historically issued to soldiers, to be used in standard issue rifles.
The .45-70 "Forager" round, which contained a thin wooden bullet filled with birdshot, was intended for hunting small game to supplement the soldiers' rations.
This round in effect made the .45-70 rifle into a small gauge shotgun, capable of killing rabbits, ducks, and other small game.

During World War II, the United States military developed the .45 ACP M12 and M15 shot shells cartridges.
They were issued to pilots, to be used as foraging ammunition in the event that they were shot down.
While they were best used in the M1917 revolvers, the M15 cartridge would actually cycle the semi-automatic M1911 pistols action.

===
Garden guns ===
Garden guns are smooth-bore firearms specifically made to fire .22 caliber snake shot, and are commonly used by gardeners and farmers for pest control.
Garden guns are short-range weapons that can do little harm past 15 to 20 yards, and they are quite quiet when fired with snake shot, compared to a standard ammunition.
These guns are especially effective inside of barns and sheds, as the snake shot will not shoot holes in the roof or walls, or more importantly injure livestock with a ricochet.
They are also used for pest control at airports, warehouses, stockyards, etc.

==
Shotgun gauge diameter formula ==
The standard definition of shotgun gauge assumes that a pure lead ball is used.
The following formulas relate the bore diameter dn (in inches) to the gauge n:
d
          
            n
=
1.67
        
          /
        
        
          
            n
            
              3
            
          
        
        =
4.66
              
                /
              
              n
            
            
              3
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle d_{n}=1.67/{\sqrt[{3}]{n}}={\sqrt[{3}]{4.66/n}}}
n
        =
(
1.67
        
          /
        
        
          d
          
            n
          
        
        
          )
          
            3
=
4.66
        
          /
(
        
          d
          
            n
          
        
        
          )
          
            3
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle n=(1.67/d_{n})^{3}=4.66/(d_{n})^{3}}
For example, the common bore diameter dn = 0.410 inches (.410 bore) is effectively gauge n = 67.6 .
==
Lead free ==
By 1957
the ammo industry had the capability of producing a nontoxic shot, made out of either iron or steel.
In 1976 the Fish and Wildlife Service took the first steps toward phasing out lead shot by designating steel-shot-only hunting zones for waterfowl.
In the 1970s lead-free shot shell ammunition loaded with steel, bismuth, or tungsten composite pellets instead of more traditional lead-based pellets was introduced and required for Migratory Bird Hunting (Ducks & Geese).
Lead shot in waterfowl hunting was banned throughout the United States in 1991.

Due to environmental regulations, lead-loaded ammunition must be used carefully by hunters in Europe.
For instance, in France, it cannot be fired in the vicinity of a pond.
In fact, the laws are so complex that some hunters in Europe prefer not to risk getting into problems for firing lead pellets in the wrong places, so they opt for composite pellets in all situations.
The use of lead shot is banned in Canada and the United States when hunting migratory game birds, such as ducks and geese, forcing the use of non-toxic shot in these countries for waterfowl hunting (lead shot can still legally be used in the United States for hunting game other than waterfowl).
This means that manufacturers need to market new types of lead-free shotgun ammunition loaded with alternative pellets to meet environmental restrictions on the use of lead, as well as lead-based and cheaper shotshell ammunition, to remain competitive worldwide.

The C.I.P. enforces approval of all ammunition a manufacturer or importer intends to sell in any of the
(mainly European)
C.I.P. member states.
The ammunition manufacturing plants are obliged to test their products during production against the C.I.P. pressure specifications.
A compliance report must be issued for each production lot and archived for later verification if needed.

Besides pressure testing, shotshells containing steel pellets require an additional Vickers hardness test.
The steel pellets used must have a hardness under 100 HV1, but, even so, steel is known to wear the barrel excessively over time if the steel pellet velocities become too high, leading to potentially harmful situations for the user.
As a result, the measurement of pellet velocity is also an additional obligation for shotshells in
12-,
16-, and 20-gauges in both standard and high performance versions sold in Europe.
The velocity of pellets must be below 425 m/s (1,390 ft/s), 390 m/s (1,300 ft/s) and 390 m/s (1,300 ft/s)
respectively for the standard versions.
Another disadvantage of steel pellets is their tendency to ricochet unpredictably after striking any hard surface.
This poses a major hazard at indoor ranges or whenever metal targets or hard backstops (e.g. concrete wall vs. a dirt berm) are used.
For this reason, steel shot is explicitly banned at most indoor shooting ranges.
Any shooters who are considering buying ammo loaded with steel for anything other than hunting purposes should first find out if using it won't cause undue hazard to themselves and others.
However, data supporting the danger of firing high velocity shells loaded with steel shot causing barrel wear has not been published and the US equivalent of CIP, SAAMI, does not have any such restrictive limitations on the velocity of commercial steel shotshells sold in the United States.
Similarly, shotgun manufacturers selling shotguns in the United States select their own appropriate standards for setting steel hardness for shotgun barrels and for velocities of steel shotshell loaded ammunition.

Some indoor shooting ranges prohibit the use of steel shot over concern of it causing a spark when hitting an object down range and causing a fire.

== Shot sizes ==
Shotshells are loaded with different sizes of shot depending on the target.
For skeet shooting, a small shot such as a No.8 or
No.9 would be used, because range is short and a high density pattern is desirable.
Trap shooting requires longer shots, and so a larger shot, usually #7½ is used.
For hunting game, the range and penetration needed to assure a clean kill is considered.

Shot loses its velocity very quickly due to its low sectional density and ballistic coefficient (see external ballistics).
Small shot, like that used for skeet and trap, will have lost all appreciable energy by around 100 yards (91 m), which is why trap and skeet ranges can be located in relatively close proximity to inhabited areas with negligible risk of injury to those outside the range.

===
Birdshot ===

Birdshots are designed to use for waterfowl and upland hunting, where the game is agile small/medium-sized birds.

Their sizes are numbered similar to the shotgun gauges — the smaller the number, the larger the shot (except in the obsolete Swedish system, in which it is reversed).
Generally birdshot is just called "shot", such as "number 9 shot" or "BB shot".

There are small differences in size of American, Standard (European), Belgian, Italian, Norwegian, Spanish, Swedish, British, and Australian shot to make matters more complex.
That is because some systems go by diameter in inches
(American)
, some go by diameter in millimeters
(European), and the British system goes by the number of lead shot per ounce.
Australia has a hybrid system due to its market being flooded with a mixture of British, American, and European shells.

For American shot, a useful method for remembering the diameter of numbered shot in inches is simply to subtract the shot size from 17.
The resulting answer is the diameter of the shot in hundredths of an inch.
For example, #2 shot gives 17-2 = 15, meaning that the diameter of #2 shot is 15/100 or 0.15".
B shot is .170 inches, and sizes go up in .01 increments for BB and BBB sizes.

In metric measurement, it is easy to remember that #5 shot is 3 mm; each number up or down represents a 0.25 mm change in diameter, so e.g. #7 shot is 2.5 mm.

Number 11 and number 12 lead shot also exists.
Shot of these sizes is used in specialized shotshells designed to be fired at close range (less than four yards) for killing snakes, rats and similar-sized animals.
Such shells are typically intended to be fired from handguns, particularly revolvers.
This type of ammunition is produced by Federal and CCI, among others.

==== Birdshot selection ====
For hunting, shot size must be chosen not only for the range, but also for the game.
The shot must reach the target with enough energy to penetrate to a depth sufficient to kill the game.
Lead shot is still the best ballistic performer, but environmental restrictions on the use of lead, especially with waterfowl, require steel, bismuth, or tungsten composites.
Steel, being significantly less dense than lead, requires larger shot sizes, but is a good choice when lead is not legal and cost is a consideration.
It is argued that steel shot cannot safely be used in some older shotguns without causing damage to either the bore or to the choke due to the hardness of steel shot.
However, the increased pressure in most steel cartridges is a far greater problem, causing more strain to the breech of the gun.
Since tungsten is very hard, it must also be used with care in older guns.
Tungsten shot is often alloyed with nickel and iron, softening the base metal.
That alloy is approximately 1/3 denser than lead, but far more expensive.
Bismuth shot falls between steel and tungsten shot in both density and cost.
The rule of thumb in converting appropriate steel shot is to go up by two numbers when switching from lead.
However, there are different views on dense patterns versus higher pellet energies.

=== Buckshot ===
Larger sizes of shot, large enough
that they must be carefully packed into the shell rather than simply dumped or poured in, are called "buckshot" or just "buck".
Buckshot is used for hunting medium to large game, as a tactical round for law enforcement and military personnel, and for personal self-defense.
Buckshot size is most commonly designated by a series of numbers and letters, with smaller numbers indicating larger shot.
Sizes larger than "0" are designated by multiple zeros. "
00" (usually pronounced "double-aught" in North American English) is the most commonly sold size.

The British system for designating buckshot size is based on the amount of shot per ounce.
The sizes are LG (large grape – from grapeshot derived from musket shooting), MG (medium grape), and SG (small grape).
For smaller game, SSG shot is half the weight of SG, SSSG shot is half the weight of SSG, SSSSG shot is half the weight of SSSG, and so on.
The Australian system is similar, except that it has 00-SG, a small-game shell filled with 00 buckshot.

Loads of 12-gauge 00 buckshot are commonly available in cartridges holding from 8 (eight) to 18 (eighteen) pellets in standard shell lengths
(​2 3⁄4 inches, 3 inches, and ​3 1⁄2).
Reduced-recoil 00 buckshot shells are often used as tactical and self-defense rounds, minimizing shooter stress and improving the speed of follow-up shots.

== Spread and patterning ==
Most modern sporting shotguns have interchangeable choke tubes to allow the shooter to change the spread of shot that comes out of the gun.

In some cases, it is not practical to do this; the gun might have fixed choke, or a shooter firing at receding targets may want to fire a wide pattern immediately followed by a narrower pattern out of a single barrelled shotgun.

The spread of the shot can also be altered by changing the characteristics of the shell.
===
Narrower patterns ===
A buffering material, such as granulated plastic, sawdust, or similar material can be mixed with the shot to fill the spaces between the individual pellets.
When fired, the buffering material compresses and supports the shot, reducing the deformation the shot pellets experience under the extreme acceleration.

Antimony-lead alloys, copper plated lead shot, steel, bismuth, and tungsten composite shot all have a hardness greater than that of plain lead shot, and will deform less as well.

Reducing the deformation will result in tighter patterns, as the spherical pellets tend to fly straighter.
One improvised method for achieving the same effect involves pouring molten wax or tar into the mass of shot.
Another is a partial ring cut around the case intended to ensure that the shot comes out tightly bunched along with the portion of the case forward of the cut, creating a 'cut-shell'.
This can be dangerous, as it is thought to cause higher chamber pressures—especially if part of the shell remains behind in the barrel and is not cleared before another shot is fired.

===
Wider patterns ===
Shooting the softest possible shot will result in more shot deformation and a wider pattern.
This is often the case with cheap ammunition, as the lead used will have minimal alloying elements such as antimony and be very soft.

Spreader wads are wads that have a small plastic or paper insert in the middle of the shot cup, usually a cylinder or "X" cross-section.

When the shot exits the barrel, the insert helps to push the shot out from the center, opening up the pattern.

Often these result in inconsistent performance, though modern designs are doing much better than the traditional improvised solutions.

Intentionally deformed shot (hammered into ellipsoidal shape) or cubical shot will also result in a wider pattern, much wider than spherical shot, with more consistency than spreader wads.

Spreader wads and non-spherical shot are disallowed in some competitions.

Hunting loads that use either spreaders or non-spherical shot are usually called "brush loads", and are favored for hunting in areas where dense cover keeps shot distances very short.
===
Spread ===
Most shotgun shells contain multiple pellets in order to increase the likelihood of a target being hit.
A shotgun's shot spread refers to the two-dimensional pattern that these projectiles (or shot) leave behind on a target.

Another less important dimension of spread concerns the length of the in-flight shot string from the leading pellet to the trailing one.

The use of multiple pellets is especially useful for hunting small game such as birds, rabbits, and other animals that fly or move quickly and can unpredictably change their direction of travel.
However, some shotgun shells only contain one metal shot, known as a slug, for hunting large game such as deer.

As the shot leaves the barrel upon firing, the three-dimensional shot string is close together.
But as the shot moves farther away, the individual pellets increasingly spread out and disperse.
Because of this, the effective range of a shotgun, when firing a multitude of shot, is limited to approximately 20 to 50 m (22 to 55 yd).
To control this effect, shooters may use a constriction within the barrel of a shotgun called a choke.
The choke, whether selectable or fixed within a barrel, effectively reduces the diameter of the end of the barrel, forcing the shot even closer together as it leaves the barrel, thereby increasing the effective range.

The tighter the choke,
the narrower the end of the barrel.
Consequently, the effective range of a shotgun is increased with a tighter choke, as the shot column is held tighter over longer ranges.
Hunters or target shooters can install several types of chokes, on guns having selectable chokes, depending on the range at which their intended targets will be located.
For fixed choke shotguns, different shotguns or barrels are often selected for the intended hunting application at hand.

From tightest to loosest, the various choke sizes are: full choke, improved modified, modified, improved cylinder, skeet, and cylinder bore.
A hunter who intends to hunt an animal such as rabbit or grouse knows that the animal will be encountered at a close range—usually within 20 m (22 yd)—and will be moving very quickly.
So, an ideal choke would be a cylinder bore (the loosest) as the hunter wants the shot to spread out as quickly as possible.
If this hunter were using a full choke (the tightest) at 20 m (22 yd), the shot would be very close together and cause an unnecessarily large amount of damage to the rabbit, or, alternatively, a complete miss of the rabbit.
This would waste virtually all of the meat for a hit, as the little amount of meat remaining would be overly-laden with shot and rendered inedible.
By using a cylinder bore, this hunter would maximize the likelihood of a kill, and maximize the amount of edible meat.
Contrarily, a hunter who intends to hunt geese knows that a goose will likely be approximately 50 m (55 yd) away, so that hunter would want to delay the spread of the shot as much as possible by using a full choke.
By using a full choke for targets that are farther away, the shooter again maximizes the likelihood of a kill, and maximizes the amount of edible meat.
This also guarantees a swift and humane kill as the target would be hit with enough shot to kill quickly instead of only wounding the animal.

For older shotguns having only one fixed choke, intended primarily for equally likely use against rabbits, squirrels, quail, doves, and pheasant, an often-chosen choke is the improved cylinder, in a 28 inches (710 mm) barrel, making the shotgun suitable for use as a general all-round hunting shotgun, without having excess weight.

Shotguns having fixed chokes intended for geese, in contrast, are often found with full choke barrels, in longer lengths, and are much heavier, being intended for fixed use within a blind against distant targets.

Defensive shotguns with fixed chokes generally have a cylinder bore choke.

Likewise, shotguns intended primarily for use with slugs invariably also are found with a choke that is a cylinder bore.

==
Dram equivalence ==
"Dram" equivalence is sometimes still used as a measure of the powder charge power in a shotgun shell.

Today, it is an anachronistic equivalence that represents the equivalent power of a shotgun shell containing this equivalent amount of black-powder measured in drams avoirdupois.

A dram in the avoirdupois system is the mass of ​1⁄256 pound or ​1⁄16 ounce or 27.3 grains.

The reasoning behind this archaic equivalence is that when smokeless powder first came out, some method of establishing an equivalence with common shotgun shell loads was needed in order to sell a box of shotgun shells.

For example, a shotgun shell containing a 3 or 3 1/2 dram load of black-powder was a common hunting field load, and a heavy full power load would have contained about a 4 to 4-1/2 dram load, whereas a shotgun shell containing only a 2 dram load of black-powder was a common target practice load.
A hunter looking for a field or full power load familiar with black-powder shotgun loads would have known exactly what the equivalence of the shotgun shells would have been in the newly introduced smokeless powder.

Today, however, this represents a poorly understood equivalence of the powder charge power in a shotgun shell.

To further complicate matters, "dram" equivalence was only defined for 12 gauge shotgun shells, and only for lead shot, although it has often been used for describing other gauges of shells, and even steel shot loaded shells.
Furthermore, "dram" equivalence only came around about 15 years after smokeless powder had been introduced, long after the need for an equivalence had started to fade, and actual black-powder loaded shotshells had largely vanished.

In practice, "dram" equivalence today most commonly equates just to a velocity rating equivalence in fps (feet-per-second), while assuming lead shot.

A secondary impact of this equivalence was that common shotgun shells needed to stay the same size, physically, e.g., 2-1/2 or 2-3/4-inch shells, in order to be used in pre-existing shotguns when smokeless powder started being used to load shotgun shells in the place of black-powder.

As smokeless powder did not have to be loaded in the same volume as black-powder to achieve the same power, being more powerful, the volumes of wads had to increase, to fill the shotgun shell enough to permit proper crimps still to be made.

Initially, this meant that increased numbers of over powder card wads had to be stacked to achieve the same stack-up length.

Eventually, this also led to the introduction of one-piece plastic wads in the late 1950s through the early 1960s, to add additional wad volumes, in order to maintain the same overall shotgun shell length.

Dram equivalence has no bearing on the reloading of shotgun shells with smokeless powder; loading a shotgun shell with an equivalent dram weight of smokeless powder would cause a shotgun to explode.

It only has an equivalence in the reloading of shotgun shells with black powder.

== See also ==
Gauges
2 bore
4 bore
6 bore
8 bore
20-gauge shotgun
.410
bore
Breaching round
Lead shot
Snake shot
Red rocket, a 3D printed shotgun slug as a politically motivated demonstration of its possibility
Shotgun slug
Shrapnel shell
Rifle cartridge


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Goodwyn, Kendall W. (October 1951).
"
How They Make Shotgun Shells".
Popular Science Monthly.
159 (4): 170–174.
The DARPA Falcon Project (Force Application and Launch from CONtinental United States) is a two-part joint project between the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and the United States Air Force (USAF) and is part of Prompt Global Strike.
One part of the program aims to develop a reusable, rapid-strike Hypersonic Weapon System (HWS), now retitled the Hypersonic Cruise Vehicle (HCV), and the other is for the development of a launch system capable of accelerating an HCV to cruise speeds, as well as launching small satellites into Earth orbit.

This two-part program was announced in 2003 and continued into 2006.Blackswift was a project announced under the Falcon banner using a fighter-sized unmanned aircraft which would take off from a runway and accelerate to Mach 6 (7,350 km/h; 4,567 mph) before completing its mission and landing again.
The memo of understanding between DARPA and the USAF on Blackswift—also known as the HTV-3X—was signed in September 2007.

The Blackswift HTV-3X did not receive needed funding and was canceled in October 2008.Current research under FALCON program is centered on X-41 Common Aero Vehicle (CAV), a common aerial platform for hypersonic ICBMs and cruise missiles, as well as civilian RLVs and ELVs.
The prototype Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 (HTV-2) first flew on 22 April 2010; the second test flew 11 August 2011.

Both flights ended prematurely.

== Design and development ==


===
Past projects ===
The aim was always to be able to deploy a craft from the continental United States, which could reach anywhere on the planet within one to two hours.
The X-20 Dyna-Soar in 1957 was the first publicly acknowledged program—although this would have been launched vertically on a rocket and then glided back to Earth, as the Space Shuttle did, rather than taking off from a runway.
Originally, the Shuttle was envisaged as a part-USAF operation, and separate military launch facilities were built at Vandenberg AFB at great cost, though never used.
After the open DynaSoar USAF program from 1957 to 1963, spaceplanes went black (became highly classified).
In the mid-1960s, the CIA began work on a high-Mach spyplane called Project Isinglass.
This developed into Rheinberry, a design for a Mach-17 air-launched reconnaissance aircraft, which was later canceled.
According to Henry F. Cooper, who was the Director of the Strategic Defense Initiative ("Star Wars") under President Reagan, spaceplane projects consumed $4 billion of funding in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s (excluding the Space Shuttle).
This does not include the 1950 and 1960s budgets for the Dynasoar, ISINGLASS, Rheinberry, and any 21st-century spaceplane project which might emerge under Falcon.
He told the United States Congress in 2001 that all the United States had in return for those billions of dollars was "one crashed vehicle, a hangar queen, some drop-test articles and static displays".
Falcon was allocated US$170 million for budget year 2008.

====
HyperSoar ====
The HyperSoar was an American hypersonic aircraft project developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL).
It was to be capable of flying at around Mach 12 (9,200 mph, 14,700 km/h), allowing it to transit between any two points on the globe in under two hours.
The HyperSoar was predicted to be a passenger plane capable of skipping outside the atmosphere to prevent it from burning up in the atmosphere.
A trip from Chicago to Tokyo (10,123 kilometers) would take 18 skips, or 72 minutes.

It was planned to use hydrocarbon-based engines outside the atmosphere and experimental jet engine technology with testing to begin by 2010.
Later, the Hypersoar concept was acquired from LLNL by DARPA, and in 2002 it was combined with the USAF X-41 Common Aero Vehicle to form the FALCON program.

===
FALCON ===
The overall FALCON (Force Application and Launch from CONtinental United States) program announced in 2003 had two major components: a small launch vehicle for carrying payloads to orbit or launching the hypersonic weapons platform payload, and the hypersonic vehicle itself.

====
Small Launch Vehicle ====
The DARPA FALCON solicitation in 2003 asked for bidders to do development work on proposed vehicles in a first phase of work, then one or more vendors would be selected to build and fly an actual launch vehicle.

Companies which won first phase development contracts of $350,000 to $540,000 in November 2003 included:
AirLaunch LLC, Reno Nevada
Andrews Space Inc., Seattle Washington
Exquadrum Inc., Victorville California.

KT Engineering, Huntsville Alabama
Lockheed Martin Corp., New Orleans
Louisiana
Microcosm Inc., El Segundo California
Orbital Sciences Corp., Dulles Virginia
Schafer Corp., Chelmsford Massachusetts
Space Exploration Technologies,
Hawthorne California


====
Hypersonic Weapon System ====
The first phase of the hypersonic weapon system development was won by three bidders in 2003, each receiving a $1.2 to $1.5 million contract for hypersonic vehicle development:
Andrews Space Inc., Seattle, Wash.
Lockheed Martin Corp., Lockheed Martin Aeronautics Co., Palmdale, Calif.
Northrop Grumman Corp., Air Combat Systems, El Segundo, Calif.
Lockheed Martin received the only Phase 2 HWS contract in 2004, to develop technologies further and reduce technology risk on the program.

====
Follow-on hypersonic program ====
Following the Phase 2 contract, DARPA and the US Air Force continued to develop the hypersonic vehicle platform.

The program was to follow a set of flight tests with a series of hypersonic technology vehicles.
The FALCON project includes:

X-41 Common Aero Vehicle (CAV): a common aerial platform for hypersonic ICBMs and cruise missiles, as well as civilian RLVs and ELVs.

Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 1
(HTV-1): a test concept, originally planned to fly in September 2007, now canceled.

Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 (HTV-2):
first flew on 22 April 2010, but contact was lost soon after booster separation
HTV-3X:
Blackswift, now canceledThe Hypersonic Cruise Vehicle (HCV) would be able to fly 9,000 nautical miles (17,000 km) in 2 hours with a payload of 12,000 lb (5,500 kg).

It would fly at a high altitude and achieve speeds of up to Mach 20.
===
Blackswift ===
The Blackswift was a proposed aircraft capable of hypersonic flight designed by the Lockheed Martin Skunk Works, Boeing, and ATK.The USAF
states that the "Blackswift flight demonstration vehicle will be powered by a combination turbine engine and ramjet, an all-in-one power plant.
The turbine engine accelerates the vehicle to around Mach 3 before the ramjet takes over and boosts the vehicle up to Mach 6."
Dr. Steven Walker, the Deputy Director of DARPA's Tactical Technology Office (acting Director as of January, 2017), will be coordinating the project.
He told the USAF website,

I will also be communicating to Lockheed Martin and Pratt & Whitney on how important it is that we get the technical plan in place ...
I'm trying to build the bridge at the beginning of the program—to get the communication path flowing.

The Falcon program has announced the hypersonic horizontal take-off Blackswift/HTV-3X.
It is also launching the HTV-2 off the top of a rocket booster.

Falcon seems to be converging from two directions, on the ultimate goal of producing a hypersonic aircraft which can take off and land from a runway in the US, and be anywhere in the world in an hour or two.
Falcon is methodically proceeding toward a Hypersonic Cruise Vehicle.
Dr. Walker stated,

We need to fly some hypersonic vehicles—first the expendables, then the reusables—in order to prove to decision makers that this isn't just a dream… We won't overcome the skepticism until we see some hypersonic vehicles flying.

In October 2008 it was announced that HTV-3X or Blackswift did not receive needed funding in the fiscal year 2009 defense budget and had been canceled.

The Hypersonic Cruise Vehicle program will continue with reduced funding.

Computer simulations of the Falcon HTV-3X vehicle
		
		
		
		


==
Flight testing ==
DARPA had two HTV-2s built for two flight tests in 2010 and 2011.
The Minotaur IV light rocket is the booster for the HTV-2 with Vandenberg Air Force Base serving as the launch site.
DARPA planned the flights to demonstrate thermal protection systems and aerodynamic control features.

Test flights were supported by NASA, the Space and Missile Systems Center, Lockheed Martin, Sandia National Laboratories and the Air Force Research Laboratory's (AFRL)
Air Vehicles and Space Vehicles Directorates.

The first HTV-2 flight was launched on 22 April 2010.
The HTV-2 glider was to fly 4,800 miles (7,700 km) across the Pacific to Kwajalein at Mach 20.
The launch was successful, but the first mission was not completed as planned.
Reports stated that contact had been lost with the vehicle nine minutes into the mission.

In mid-November, DARPA revealed that the test flight had ended when the computer autopilot had "commanded flight termination".
According to a DARPA spokesman, "When the onboard system detects [undesirable or unsafe flight] behavior, it forces itself into a controlled roll and pitchover to descend directly into the ocean."
Reviews found that the craft had begun to roll violently.
A second flight was launched on 11 August 2011.
The unmanned Falcon HTV-2 successfully separated from the booster and entered the mission's glide phase, but again lost contact with control about nine minutes into its planned 30-minute Mach 20 glide flight.
Initial reports indicated it purposely impacted the Pacific Ocean along its planned flight path as a safety precaution.

Some analysts thought that the second failure would result in an overhaul of the Falcon program.

== Refocus ==
In July 2013, DARPA decided it would not conduct a third flight test of the HTV-2
because enough data had been collected from the first two flights, and another test was not thought to provide any more usable data for the cost.

The tests provided data on flight aerodynamics and high-temperature effects on the aeroshell.

Work on the HTV-2 would continue to summer 2014 to provide more study on hypersonic flight.

The HTV-2 was the last active part of the Falcon program.

DARPA has now changed its focus for the program from global/strategic strike to high-speed tactical deployment to penetrate air defenses and hit targets quickly from a safe distance.

== See also ==
Boeing X-51
Prompt Global Strike, a follow-on military project
Rockwell
X-30 (National AeroSpace Plane)
Lockheed Martin SR-72
Boost-glide


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Falcon page on Darpa.mil
HCV page on Globalsecurity.org
"Air Drops Dummy Rocket for Darpa's Falcon", Aviation Week,
"Hypersonics
Back in the News" on Defensetech.org
"Going Hypersonic:
Flying FALCON for Defense" and "Air Force Plans Flight Tests Of Hypersonic Vehicle" on Space.com
"Pentagon Has Far-Reaching Defense Spacecraft in Works", Washington Post, March 16, 2005
"US hypersonic aircraft projects face change as Congress urges joint technology office", Flight International, 30 May 2006
Prompt Global Strike (PGS) is a United States military effort to develop a system that can deliver a precision-guided conventional weapon airstrike anywhere in the world within one hour, in a similar manner to a nuclear ICBM.
Such a weapon would allow the United States to respond far more swiftly to rapidly emerging threats than is possible with conventional forces.
A PGS system could also be useful during a nuclear conflict, potentially replacing the use of nuclear weapons against up to 30% of targets.
The PGS program encompasses numerous established and emerging technologies, including conventional surface-launched missiles and air- and submarine-launched hypersonic missiles, although no specific PGS system has yet been finalized as of 2018.

==
System ==
The PGS system is intended to complement existing American rapid-response forces, such as Forward Deployed Forces, Air Expeditionary Groups (which can deploy within 48 hours) and carrier battle groups (which can respond within 96 hours).

Possible delivery systems for PGS warheads include:

a rocket similar to existing ICBMs, launched from land or via submarine
an air-
or submarine-launched hypersonic cruise missile, such as a massive version of Boeing X-51 or Advanced Hypersonic Weapon
a kinetic weapon launched from an orbiting space platformIn 2010, the United States Air Force prototyped a PGS system based on a modified Minuteman III ICBM.
In March 2011, Air Force Major General David Scott stated that the service had no plans to use a sea- or land-based ICBM system for Prompt Global Strike, as they would be expensive to develop and potentially "dangerous."
Instead, efforts would focus on a hypersonic glider.
However, the following day, Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Norton Schwartz said that an ICBM-based PGS system was still an option.

==
Development history ==


===
Background ===
The George W. Bush administration considered developing a hypersonic conventional weapon for a PGS role in the 2000s, in the form of DARPA's Falcon Project.
A conventionally-armed modification of the Trident SLBM was also proposed as a PGS candidate in 2006.
The Bush administration ultimately rejected the idea of a PGS system because of fears that a submarine-launched ballistic missile would trigger the Russian nuclear-launch warning system, potentially provoking a nuclear war.
However, the Obama administration continued development of the system later in the decade.
In April 2010, Marine Corps General James Cartwright explained the system's rationale, stating that "Today, unless you want to go nuclear, [the conventional military response time is] measured in days, maybe weeks".
A potential enemy cannot be certain that a launched ICBM contains only a conventional warhead, not a nuclear one.
It is thus currently unclear what design features or precautions could convince China and Russia, two countries with advanced launch-detection systems and nuclear ICBMs, to ignore their early-warning systems.
Current ideas include a low-trajectory missile design, or allowing Russian and Chinese inspection of PGS missile sites.
On 11 April 2010, United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates indicated that the United States already had a Prompt Global Strike capability.
This coincided with the New START disarmament treaty signed on 8 April 2010, which set new, lower limits on arsenals of ballistic missiles and their warheads.
The treaty does not distinguish between conventional and nuclear versions of weapons, meaning any ballistic PGS missiles and warheads would count toward the new limit.
However, the U.S. State Department stated in 2010 that this would not constrain plans for PGS deployment, since plans for the system at that time did not come near the New START limits.

===
Advanced hypersonic weapon ===
On 18 November 2011, the first advanced hypersonic weapon (AHW) glide vehicle was successfully tested by the U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command as part of the Prompt Global Strike program.
The missile was launched from the Pacific Missile Range Facility in Hawaii, and struck a target at the Reagan Test Site on Kwajalein Atoll, over 3,700 kilometres (2,300 mi) away, in under 30 minutes.
The prototype, which incorporated technologies developed by Sandia National Laboratories, was used to gather data to assist the development of future hypersonic warheads.
The AHW followed an endo-atmospheric (within earth atmosphere, at altitude below 100 kilometers) non-ballistic trajectory during the test flight.
This is a crucial design feature, as following a depressed trajectory that is much lower and flatter than a normal ICBM prevents other nuclear-armed nations from mistakenly thinking the AHW is a nuclear-tipped missile.
The second AHW test flight occurred on 25 August 2014 from the Kodiak Launch Complex in Alaska.
The mission was terminated shortly after liftoff due to an anomaly in the launch vehicle.
Operators triggered a self-destruct sequence four seconds after launching, with eyewitnesses claiming the weapon had veered off trajectory just as it took off.
A Failure Review Board released the results of their investigation into the failed launch in early February 2015.
The board determined that an external thermal protective cover, designed to regulate motor temperature, interfered with the launch vehicle's steering assembly; no issues were found with the hypersonic glide body, booster motors, or the Kodiak Launch Complex, and the board determined the test range flight safety officer correctly followed established protocol and procedures.
The HTV-2 Falcon project is also in the development stage of conducting test flights.

===
Submarine option ===
In January 2012, the Pentagon stated that the PGS launch platform would be submarine-based.
However, practical efforts to develop the PGS system were delayed by fears of accidentally starting a nuclear conflict.
In February 2014, the U.S. Navy solicited proposals for two-year industry trade studies to test the feasibility of developing a hypersonic submarine-launched intermediate-range conventional PGS weapon.

The Navy specified that the effort was a study to evaluate technology options, not to develop a system-level specific CPGS solution.
The Navy stated that it would be interested in awarding one or two 13-month technology evaluation contracts, each worth around US$5 million.

==
Foreign responses ==


===
Russia ===
In December 2010, Russian military experts indicated that the forthcoming S-500 missile defense system would include anti-hypersonic defenses.
In December 2012, commenting on the development of a replacement for its R-36M2 Voevoda ICBM, the commander of the Russian Strategic Missile Forces, Sergey Karakaev, stated that the missile would allow Russia "to realize such opportunities as the creation of high precision strategic weapons with non-nuclear warheads and a practical global range.
Russia can create non-nuclear, high precision weapons based on intercontinental rockets in the event that the USA also works on designing such a weapon".
On 11 December 2013, Vice Prime Minister Dmitry Rogozin warned that Russia would use nuclear weapons if it came under an attack, adding that this possibility serves as the main deterrent to potential aggressors.
Rogozin also stated that the Russian Fund of Perspective Researches (FPI) would develop a military response to the PGS system.
In September 2014, Russia's president Vladimir Putin mentioned PGS among a number of the new threats Russia faced, along with the US Ground-Based Midcourse Defense system in Alaska, the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System in Europe, and increased NATO activity in eastern Europe.
Deputy prime minister Dmitry Rogozin again warned that Russia would upgrade its strategic nuclear forces and aerospace defences in response to the PGS system.
According to some observers, the Russian Yu-71 hypersonic boost-glide system is under test flights since 2011, though its predecessors date back to 2001.In October 2015, while attending a non-proliferation conference in New York, the Russian Foreign Ministry's Department of Non-proliferation, Disarmament, and Arms Control Mikhail Ulyanov stated "It is the policy of the United States that is the most serious obstacle in the further reduction in nuclear arms.
This is because of their persistent implementation of their line objectively rocking global strategic stability through the unilateral creation of a global system of anti-missile defense that gradually complements the conception of a Prompt Global Strike, which hampers the beginning of negotiations on the prohibition of placing weapons in space and lack of any type of progress in ratifying the CTBT."In March 2018, the Avangard hypersonic warhead, a development of the Yu-71/Yu-74, entered series production.

===
China ===
The Chinese People's Liberation Army began developing its own long-range hypersonic missile, the DF-ZF rocket-boosted hypersonic glide vehicle, in the 2010s.
The DF-ZF, which is similar to the PGS/HTV-2 system, underwent its first full-scale flight test in January 2014, and conducted few more flight tests later, of which only one failed.
As with Russia's efforts, little is publicly known about the progress of the Chinese hypersonic glide vehicle program.

== See also ==
Air Force Global Strike Command
Anti-ship ballistic missile
Avangard (Russia)
ArcLight, a DARPA program which proposed using US Navy ships such as Aegis cruisers to launch intercontinental missiles
Boost-glide
DF-21D, a conventionally armed MRBM deployed by China in an anti-ship capacity
DF-ZF, China
Project Thor, a proposed orbital kinetic bombardment weapon
Tupolev
Tu-360


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Woolf, Amy F. (7 July 2017).
"
Conventional Prompt Global Strike and Long-Range Ballistic Missiles: Background and Issues" (PDF).
fas.org.
Congressional Research Service.

"U.S. Looks To Non-Nuclear Weapons
To Use As Deterrent".
Washington Post.
8 April 2010.

"Why Do We Need ‘Hypersonic’ Strike Weapons, Exactly?".
Defense One.
17 September 2014.
The DF-ZF is a Chinese hypersonic glide vehicle (HGV), previously denoted by the Pentagon as WU-14 and currently officially operational on October 1st, 2019, in the 70th anniversary of the People's Republic of China.
The DF-ZF is designed to be mounted on a DF-17, a type of ballistic missile specifically designed to carry HGVs.

==
Testing ==
The DF-ZF, designated by Pentagon as the WU-14, is a hypersonic missile delivery vehicle that has been flight-tested by China seven times, on 9 January, 7 August and 2 December 2014; 7 June and 27 November 2015; in April 2016 and twice in November 2017.
The system is operational as of 2019.The Chinese Defense Ministry confirmed its January 2014 test and said the test was "scientific" in nature, although it was widely viewed as part of a broader Chinese military build-up.
All seven tests China performed so far were concluded successfully according to U.S. officials cited in The Washington Free Beacon.
All the test launches were performed at the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi Province, the main long-range missile testing center for the People's Liberation Army.

== Capabilities and design ==
The DF-ZF is thought to reach speeds between Mach 5 (3,836 mph (6,173 km/h; 1,715 m/s)) and Mach 10 (7,680 mph (12,360 km/h; 3,430 m/s)).
The glider could be used for nuclear weapons delivery but could also be used to perform precision-strike conventional missions (for example, next-generation anti-ship ballistic missiles), which could penetrate "the layered air defenses of a U.S. carrier strike group.
"Hypersonic glider vehicles are less susceptible to anti-ballistic missile countermeasures than conventional reentry vehicles (RVs).

Normal RVs descend through the atmosphere on a predictable ballistic trajectory—a hypersonic glider like the HGV can pull-up after reentering the atmosphere and approach its target in a relatively flat glide, lessening the time it can be detected, fired at, or reengaged if an initial attack fails.

Gliding makes it more maneuverable and extends its range.
Although gliding creates more drag, it flies further than it would on a higher trajectory through space, and is too low to be intercepted by exo-atmospheric kill vehicles.
The tradeoff is that warheads have less speed and altitude as they near the target, making them vulnerable to lower-tier interceptors, such as the Mach 17 Russian 53T6, ABM-3 Gazelle.
Other potential counter-hypersonic interception measures may involve laser or railgun technologies, but such technologies will not be readily available.
A vehicle like the DF-ZF could be fitted to various Chinese ballistic missiles, such as the DF-21 medium-range missile (extending range from 2,000 to 3,000 km (1,200 to 1,900 mi)), and the DF-31 intercontinental ballistic missiles (extending range from 8,000 to 12,000 km (5,000 to 7,500 mi)).
Analysts suspect that the DZ-ZF will first be used in shorter-range roles as an anti-ship missile and for other tactical purposes to address the problem of hitting a moving target with a ballistic missile.
Long-term goals may include deterrence of U.S. missile capabilities with the prospect of strategic bombardment against the United States, or other countries.

Since conventional interceptor missiles have difficulty against maneuvering targets traveling faster than Mach 5 (the DZ-ZF reenters the atmosphere at Mach 10),
a problem exacerbated by decreased detection times, the United States may place more importance on developing directed-energy weapons as a countermeasure.
However, after decades of research and development, directed-energy weapons are still very much at the experimental stage and it remains to be seen if or when they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons.
Complaints have been raised by one researcher over lack of access to high-performance computing power, required for development of the HGV.
While China has a number of high performance supercomputers, access to them was not provided for the DF-ZF development project.

==
See also ==
Avangard – a Russian hypersonic warhead
Hypersonic Technology Vehicle 2 and Advanced Hypersonic Weapon – a similar US test vehicle and warhead
HGV-202F - an Indian Hypersonic glide vehicle
HYFLEX – a Japanese Hypersonic Flight Experiment
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle – an Indian hypersonic vehicle under development
DARPA Falcon Project – Prompt Global Strike
Rockwell X-30, 1990–1993 project for SSTO prototype
Boeing X-51 Waverider
Hypersonic Flight Experiment
IXV


== References ==
A kinetic energy penetrator (KEP, KE weapon, long-rod penetrator or LRP) is a type of ammunition designed to penetrate vehicle armour using a flechette-like, high-sectional density projectile.

Like a bullet, this type of ammunition does not contain explosive payloads and uses purely kinetic energy to penetrate the target.

Modern KEP munitions are typically of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) type.

==
History ==
Early cannons fired kinetic energy ammunition, initially consisting of heavy balls of worked stone and later of dense metals.
From the beginning, combining high muzzle energy with projectile weight and hardness have been the foremost factors in the design of such weapons.

Similarly, the foremost purpose of such weapons has generally been to defeat protective shells of armored vehicles or other defensive structures, whether it is stone walls, sailship timbers, or modern tank armour.

Kinetic energy ammunition, in its various forms, has consistently been the choice for those weapons due to the highly focused terminal ballistics.

The development of the modern KE penetrator combines two aspects of artillery design: high muzzle velocity and concentrated force.
High muzzle velocity is achieved by using a projectile with a low mass and large base area in the gun barrel.
Firing a small-diameter projectile wrapped in a lightweight outer shell, called a sabot, raises the muzzle velocity.
Once the shell clears the barrel, the sabot is no longer needed and falls off in pieces.

This leaves the projectile traveling at high velocity with a smaller cross-sectional area and reduced aerodynamic drag during the flight to the target (see external ballistics and terminal ballistics).
Germany developed modern sabots under the name "treibspiegel" ("thrust mirror") to give extra altitude to its anti-aircraft guns during the Second World War.
Before this, primitive wooden sabots had been used for centuries in the form of a wooden plug attached to or breech loaded before cannonballs in the barrel, placed between the propellant charge and the projectile.
The name "sabot" (pronounced  SAB-
oh in English usage) is the French word for clog (a wooden shoe traditionally worn in some European countries).

Concentration of force into a smaller area was initially attained by replacing the single metal (usually steel) shot with a composite shot using two metals, a heavy core (based on tungsten) inside a lighter metal outer shell.
These designs were known as armour-piercing composite rigid (APCR) by the British, high-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) by the US, and hartkern (hard core) by the Germans.
On impact, the core had a much more concentrated effect than plain metal shot of the same weight and size.
However, the air resistance and other effects were the same as for the shell of identical size.
High-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) were primarily used by tank destroyers in the US Army and were relatively uncommon as the tungsten core was expensive and prioritized for other applications.

Between 1941 and 1943, the British combined the two techniques in the armour-piercing discarding sabot (APDS) round.
The sabot replaced the outer metal shell of the APCR.
While in the gun, the shot had a large base area to get maximum acceleration from the propelling charge
but once outside, the sabot fell away to reveal a heavy shot with a small cross-sectional area.
APDS rounds served as the primary kinetic energy weapon of most tanks during the early-Cold War period, though they suffered the primary drawback of inaccuracy.
This was resolved with the introduction of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) round during the 1970s, which added stabilising fins to the penetrator, greatly increasing accuracy.

== Design ==
The principle of the kinetic energy penetrator is that it uses its kinetic energy, which is a function of its mass and velocity, to force its way through armor.

If the armor is defeated, the heat and spalling (particle spray) generated by the penetrator going through the armor, and the pressure wave that would develop, ideally destroys the target.
The modern kinetic energy weapon maximizes the stress (kinetic energy divided by impact area) delivered to the target by:

maximizing the mass – that is, using the densest metals practical, which is one of the reasons depleted uranium or tungsten carbide is often used – and muzzle velocity of the projectile, as kinetic energy scales with the mass m and the square of the velocity v of the projectile
(
        m
        
          v
          
            2
          
        
        
          /
        
        2
        )
.

{\displaystyle (mv^{2}/2).}

minimizing the width, since if the projectile does not tumble, it will hit the target face first; as most modern projectiles have circular cross-sectional areas, their impact area will scale with the square of the radius r (the impact area being
π
r
          
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \pi r^{2}}
  )
Additionally, penetrator length plays a large role in determining the depth of penetration that it is capable of.
Generally, a penetrator is incapable of penetrating more than its own length, as the sheer stress of impact and perforation ablates it.
This has led to the current designs which resemble a long metal arrow.

For monobloc penetrators consisting solely of one material, a perforation formula devised by Wili Odermatt and W. Lanz is able to calculate the penetration capability of an APFSDS round.
In 1982, using some ideas from gas dynamics, an analytical investigations with experiments on penetration into targets  led to conclusions about the efficiency of impactors (penetration is deeper) with unconventional three-dimensional shapes.
The opposite technique to KE-penetrators uses chemical energy penetrators.
There are two types of these shells in use: high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT) and high-explosive squash head (HESH).
They have been widely used against armour in the past and still have a role but are less effective against modern composite armour, such as Chobham as used on main battle tanks today.
Main battle tanks usually use KE-penetrators, while HEAT is mainly found in missile systems that are shoulder-launched or vehicle-mounted, and HESH is usually favored for fortification demolition.

== See also ==
Röchling shell
Compact Kinetic Energy Missile
SSM-A-23 Dart
Earthquake bomb
Flechette
Impact depth
Kinetic bombardment
MGM-166
LOSAT
Hellfire R9X


== Notes ==


==
References ==
Hypersonic flight is flight through the atmosphere below about 90 km at speeds above Mach 5, a speed where dissociation of air begins to become significant and high heat loads exist.

==
History ==
The first manufactured object to achieve hypersonic flight was the two-stage Bumper rocket, consisting of a WAC Corporal second stage set on top of a V-2 first stage.
In February 1949, at White Sands, the rocket reached a speed of 8,288.12 km/h (5,150 mph), or approximately Mach 6.7.
The vehicle, however, burned on atmospheric re-entry, and only charred remnants were found.
In April 1961, Russian Major Yuri Gagarin became the first human to travel at hypersonic speed, during the world's first piloted orbital flight.
Soon after, in May 1961, Alan Shepard became the first American and second person to achieve hypersonic flight when his capsule reentered the atmosphere at a speed above Mach 5 at the end of his suborbital flight over the Atlantic Ocean.
In November 1961, Air Force Major Robert White flew the X-15 research airplane at speeds over Mach 6.

On 3 October 1967, in California, a X-15 reached Mach 6.7, but by the time the vehicle approached Edwards Air Force Base, intense heating associated with shock waves around the vehicle had partially melted the pylon that attached the ramjet engine to the fuselage.
The reentry problem of a space vehicle was extensively studied.

The NASA X-43A flew on scramjet for 10 seconds, and then glided for 10 minutes on its last flight in 2004.

The Boeing X-51 Waverider flew on scramjet for 210 seconds in 2013, finally reaching Mach 5.1 on its fourth flight test.

The hypersonic regime has since become the subject for further study during the 21st century, and strategic competition between China, India, Russia, and the U.S.


==
Physics ==
The stagnation point of air flowing around a body is a point where its local velocity is zero.
At this point the air flows around this location.
A shock wave forms, which deflects the air from the stagnation point and insulates the flight body from the atmosphere.
This can affect the lifting ability of a flight surface to counteract its drag and subsequent free fall.
Ning describes a method for interrelating Reynolds number with Mach number.
In order to maneuver in the atmosphere at faster speeds than supersonic, the forms of propulsion can still be airbreathing systems, but a ramjet no longer suffices for a system to attain Mach 5, as a ramjet slows down the airflow to subsonic.
Some systems (waveriders) use a first stage rocket to boost a body into the hypersonic regime.
Other systems (boost-glide vehicles) use scramjets after their initial boost, in which the speed of the air passing through the scramjet remains supersonic.
Other systems (munitions) use a cannon for their initial boost.

===
High Temperature Effect ===
Hypersonic flow is a high energy flow.
The ratio of kinetic energy to the internal energy of the gas increases as the square of the Mach number.
When this flow enters a boundary layer, there are high viscous effects due to the friction between air and the high-speed object.
In this case, the high kinetic energy is converted in part to internal energy and gas energy is proportional to the internal energy.
Therefore, hypersonic boundary layers are high temperature regions due to the viscous dissipation of the flow's kinetic energy.

Another region of high temperature flow is the shock layer behind the strong bow shock wave.
In the case of the shock layer, the flows velocity decreases discontinuously as it passes through the shock wave.
This results in a loss of kinetic energy and a gain of internal energy behind the shock wave.
Due to high temperatures behind the shock wave, dissociation of molecules in the air becomes thermally active.
For example, for air at T >
2000 K, dissociation of diatomic oxygen into oxygen radicals is active:
O2 → 2OFor T >
4000 K, dissociation of diatomic nitrogen into N radicals is active: N2 → 2NConsequently, in this temperature range, molecular dissociation followed by recombination of oxygen and nitrogen radicals produces nitric oxide:
N2 + O2 → 2NO, which then dissociates and recombines to form ions: N +
O → NO+ +
e−


===
Low Density Flow ===
At standard sea-level condition for air, the mean free path of air molecules is about 
  
    
      
        λ
        =
68
        
          n
m
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \lambda
=68\mathrm {nm} }
  .
Low density air is much thinner.
At an altitude of 104 km (342,000 ft) the mean free path is 
  
    
      
        λ
        =
        1
        
        f
t
=
0.305
m
      
    
    {\displaystyle \lambda =1\,ft=0.305\,m}
  .
Because of this large free mean path aerodynamic concepts, equations, and results based on the assumption of a continuum begin to break down, therefore aerodynamics must be considered from kinetic theory.
This regime of aerodynamics is called low-density flow.

For a given aerodynamic condition low-density effects depends on the value of a nondimensional parameter called the Knudsen number
K
          
            n
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle K_{n}}
  ,
defined as
K
          
            n
=
λ
l
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle K_{n}={\frac {\lambda }{l}}}
   where 
  
    
      
        l
      
    
    {\displaystyle l}
   is the typical length scale of the object considered.
The value of the Knudsen number based on nose radius, 
  
    
      
        
          K
          
            n
          
        
        =
        
          
            λ
            R
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle K_{n}={\frac {\lambda }{R}}}
  , can be near one.

Hypersonic vehicles frequently fly at very high altitudes and therefore encounter low-density conditions.
Hence, the design and analysis of hypersonic vehicles sometimes require consideration of low-density flow.
New generations of hypersonic airplanes may spend a considerable portion of their mission at high altitudes, and for these vehicles, low-density effects will become more significant.

===
Thin Shock Layer ===
The flow field between the shock wave and the body surface is called the shock layer.
As the Mach number M increases, the angle of the resulting shock wave decreases.
This Mach angle is described by the equation
μ
        =
        
          sin
−
1
⁡
(
a
        
          /
        
        v
        )
{\displaystyle \mu =\sin ^{-1}(a
/v)}
where a is the speed of the sound wave and v is the flow velocity.
Since M=v/a, the equation becomes 
  
    
      
        μ
=
        
          sin
−
1
⁡
(
        1
        
          /
        
        M
)
{\displaystyle \mu =\sin ^{-1}(1/M)}
  .
Higher Mach numbers position the shock wave closer to the body surface, thus at hypersonic speeds, the shock wave lies extremely close to the body surface, resulting in a thin shock layer.
At low Reynolds number, the boundary layer grows quite thick and merges with the shock wave, leading to a fully viscous shock layer.

===
Viscous Interaction ===
The compressible flow boundary layer increases proportionately to the square of the Mach number, and inversely to the square root of the Reynolds number.

At hypersonic speeds, this effect becomes much more pronounced, due to the exponential reliance on the Mach number.
Since the boundary layer becomes so large, it interacts more viscously with the surrounding flow.
The overall effect of this interaction is to create a much higher skin friction than normal, causing greater surface heat flow.
Additionally, the surface pressure spikes, which results in a much larger aerodynamic drag coefficient.
This effect is extreme at the leading edge and decreases as a function of length along the surface.

===
Entropy Layer ===
The entropy layer is a region of large velocity gradients caused by the strong curvature of the shock wave.
The entropy layer begins at the nose of the aircraft and extends downstream close to the body surface.
Downstream of the nose, the entropy layer interacts with the boundary layer which causes an increase in aerodynamic heating at the body surface.
Although the shock wave at the nose at supersonic speeds is also curved, the entropy layer is only observed at hypersonic speeds because the magnitude of the curve is far greater at hypersonic speeds.

==
Hypersonic weapons development ==
In the last year, China has tested more hypersonic weapons than we have in a decade.
We've got to fix that.

Two main types of hypersonic weapons are hypersonic cruise missiles and hypersonic glide vehicles.
Hypersonic weapons, by definition, travel five or more times the speed of sound.
Hypersonic cruise missiles, which are powered by scramjet, are restricted below 100,000 feet; hypersonic glide vehicles can travel higher.
Compared to a ballistic (parabolic) trajectory, a hypersonic vehicle would be capable of large-angle deviations from a parabolic trajectory.
According to a July 2019 report by CNBC, Russia and China lead in hypersonic weapon development, trailed by the United States, and in this case the problem is being addressed in a joint program of the entire Department of Defense.

To meet this development need, the Army is participating in a joint program with the Navy and Air Force, to develop a hypersonic glide body.

India is also developing such weapons.
France and Australia may also be pursuing the technology.
Japan is acquiring both scramjet (Hypersonic Cruise Missile), and boost-glide weapons (
Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile).Waverider hypersonic weapons delivery is an avenue of development.

China's XingKong-2
(星空二号, Starry-sky-2), a waverider, had its first flight 3 August 2018.In 2016, Russia is believed to have conducted two successful tests of Avangard, a hypersonic glide vehicle.
The third known test, in 2017, failed.
In 2018, an Avangard was launched at the Dombarovskiy missile base, reaching its target at the Kura shooting range, a distance of 3700 miles (5955 km).

Avangard uses new composite materials which are to withstand temperatures of up to 2,000 degrees Celsius (3,632 degrees Fahrenheit).
The Avangard's environment at hypersonic speeds reaches such temperatures.
Russia considered its carbon fiber solution to be unreliable, and replaced it with composite materials.
Two Avangard hypersonic glide vehicles (HGVs) will first be mounted on SS-19 ICBMs; on 27 December 2019 the weapon was first fielded to the Yasnensky Missile Division, a unit in the Orenburg Oblast.
In an earlier report, Franz-Stefan Gady named the unit as the 13th Regiment/Dombarovskiy Division (Strategic Missile Force).These tests have prompted US responses in weapons development per John Hyten's USSTRATCOM statement 05:03, 8 August 2018 (UTC).
At least one vendor is developing ceramics to handle the temperatures of hypersonics systems.
There are over a dozen US hypersonics projects as of 2018, notes the commander of USSTRATCOM; from which a future hypersonic cruise missile is sought, perhaps by
Q4 FY2021.The
Long range precision fires (LRPF)
CFT is supporting Space and Missile Defense Command's pursuit of hypersonics.

Joint programs in hypersonics are informed by Army work; however, at the strategic level, the bulk of the hypersonics work remains at the Joint level.
Long Range Precision Fires (LRPF) is an Army priority, and also a DoD joint effort.
The Army and Navy's Common Hypersonic Glide Body (C-HGB) had a successful test of a prototype in March 2020.
A wind tunnel for testing hypersonic vehicles will be built in Texas (2019).
The Army's Land-based Hypersonic Missile "is intended to have a range of 1,400 miles".

By adding rocket propulsion to a shell or glide body, the joint effort shaved five years off the likely fielding time for hypersonic weapon systems.
Countermeasures against hypersonics will require sensor data fusion: both radar and infrared sensor tracking data will be required to capture the signature of a hypersonic vehicle in the atmosphere.
There are also privately developed hypersonic systems.
DoD tested a Common Hypersonic Glide Body (C-HGB) in 2020.

According to Air Force chief scientist, Dr. Greg Zacharias, the US anticipates having hypersonic weapons by the 2020s, hypersonic drones by the 2030s, and recoverable hypersonic drone aircraft by the 2040s.
The focus of DoD development will be on air-breathing boost-glide hypersonics systems.
Countering hypersonic weapons during their cruise phase will require radar with longer range, as well as space-based sensors, and systems for tracking and fire control.
Rand Corporation (28 September 2017) estimates there is less than a decade to prevent Hypersonic Missile proliferation.

In the same way that anti-ballistic missiles were developed as countermeasures to ballistic missiles, counter-countermeasures to hypersonics systems were not yet in development, as of 2019.
But by 2019, $157.4 million was allocated in the FY2020 Pentagon budget for hypersonic defense, out of $2.6 billion for all hypersonic-related research.
$207 million of the FY2021 budget was allocated to defensive hypersonics, up from the FY2020 budget allocation of $157 million.
Both the US and Russia withdrew from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty in February 2019.
This will spur arms development, including hypersonic weapons, in FY2021 and forward.
Australia and the US have begun joint development of air-launched hypersonic missiles, as announced by a Pentagon statement on 30 November 2020.
The development will build on the $54 million Hypersonic International Flight Research Experimentation (HIFiRE) under which both nations collaborated on over a 15-year period.
Small and large companies will all contribute to the development of these hypersonic missiles.
In 2021 DoD is codifying flight test guidelines, knowledge gained from Conventional prompt strike (CPS) and the other hypersonics programs.

==
Flown aircraft ==


===
Hypersonic aircraft ===
 Aerojet General X-8
 North American
X-15 (crewed)
 Lockheed X-17
 NASA X-43
 Boeing X-51
 DF-ZF
Avangard
HSTDV


=== Spaceplanes ===
 Space Shuttle orbiter (crewed)
 Buran (human-rated, only flew without crew)
 RLV-TD
 Boeing X-37
Shenlong
 IXV
BOR-4
Martin X-23 PRIME
 Martin
X-24 (crewed)
 ASSET
 HYFLEX
Chongfu
Shiyong Shiyan Hangtian Qi (disputed)
Jiageng-1


== Cancelled aircraft ==


===
Hypersonic aircraft ===
Silbervogel (Sänger bomber)
Keldysh bomber
Tupolev Tu-360, follow-on to Tu-160
Tupolev Tu-2000
 Lockheed L-301


=== Spaceplanes ===
Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar
Rockwell
X-30 (National Aerospace Plane)
Orbital Sciences X-34
 Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-105
Tsien Spaceplane 1949
HOPE-X
 XCOR Lynx
 Lockheed Martin X-33
 Hermes
Prometheus
HL-20 Personnel Launch System
HL-42
 BAC Mustard
 Kliper
HOTOL
Valier Raketenschiff
Rockwell C-1057
== Developing and proposed aircraft ==


===
Hypersonic aircraft ===
I-Plane
14-X
Avatar (spacecraft)
 Advanced Technology Vehicle
 DARPA XS-1
Dream Chaser
 NASA
X-43
 HyperSoar
 HyperStar hypersonic passenger airliner
 Falcon HTV-2
 Boeing Commercial Airplanes hypersonic airliner Concept
Lockheed Martin SR-72
 Tactical Boost Glide Vehicle
Kholod
 Programme for Reusable In-orbit Demonstrator in Europe (PRIDE)
Sänger II
 HyShot
 Hytex
Horus
 SHEFEX
 Skylon
Reaction Engines
A2
 Spartan
 HEXAFLY
SpaceLiner
STRATOFLY
Zero
Emission Hyper Sonic Transport


=== Cruise missiles and warheads ===
Advanced Hypersonic Weapon
AGM-183A air launched rapid response weapon (ARRW, pronounced "arrow")
Telemetry data has been successfully transmitted from ARRW —
AGM-183A IMV-2 (Instrumented Measurement Vehicle) to the Point Mugu ground stations, demonstating the ability to accuratly broadcast radio at hypersonic speeds.
Hundreds of ARRWs or other Hypersonic weapons are being sought by the Air Force.

Expendable Hypersonic Air-Breathing Multi-Mission Demonstrator ("Mayhem")
Based on HAWC and HSSW: "solid rocket-boosted, air-breathing, hypersonic conventional cruise missile", a follow-on to AGM-183A. As yet
no design work has been done.

Hypersonic air-breathing weapon concept (HAWC, pronounced "hawk")
It is easier to put a seeker on a sub-sonic air-breathing vehicle.

Hypersonic conventional strike weapon (cancelled)
 Kh-45
(cancelled)
Avangard
Kinzhal
Zircon
 Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle
HGV-202F Hypersonic glide vehicle
/ Brahmos-II
 DF-ZF


==
See also ==
Hypersonic speed
Supersonic transport
Lifting body
Atmospheric entry
Boost-glide
Scramjet
Ramjet
List of X-planes
Thunderbird 1


==
References ==


==
External links ==
A comparative analysis of the performance of long-range hypervelocity vehicles
(2016) Joint Air Power Competence Centre (JAPCC)
The 3M22 Zircon also spelled as
3M22 Tsirkon (Russian: Циркон, NATO reporting name: SS-N-33) is a scramjet powered maneuvering anti-ship hypersonic cruise missile currently in testing by Russia.

==
History ==
The missile represents a further development of the HELA (Hypersonic Experimental Flying Vehicle) developed by NPO Mashinostroyeniya that was on display at the 1995 MAKS air show.
Prototypes were test-launched from a Tu-22M3 bomber in 2012–2013.
Launches from a ground-based platform followed in 2015, with first success achieved in 2016.
In April 2017, it was reported Zircon had reached a speed of Mach 8 (6,090 mph; 9,800 km/h; 2,722.3 m/s) during a flight test.
Zircon was again test-fired on 3 June 2017, almost a year earlier than had been announced by Russian officials.
In November 2017, Colonel General Viktor Bondarev stated that the missile was already in service.
Another flight test reportedly occurred on 10 December 2018, during which the missile demonstrated that it could attain a speed of Mach 8.On 20 February 2019, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated the missile is capable of accelerating up to Mach 9 and destroying both sea and land targets within 1,000 km (540 nmi; 620 mi).
By the year's end, on 24 December 2019, Putin stated that Zircon's land-based version was in development.
According to the commander in chief of the Russian Navy Nikolai Yevmenov, as of January 2020, Zircon was still in testing phase and despite the overall positive evaluation of the test program, still suffered from the "childhood diseases" (Russian idiom meaning "teething problems").
Modernized frigates are expected to be the first platform to receive the hypersonic missile, and the tests are to be continued in parallel with the Navy's armament with the Kalibr cruise missile.
Yevmenov further stated Zircon is expected to enter service "in the coming years".
In early January 2020, Zircon was first test-launched from the frigate Admiral Gorshkov in the Barents Sea, and successfully hit a ground target in the Northern Urals, exceeding the distance of 500 km.
On 7 October 2020, the Russian Chief of General Staff, Valery Gerasimov, stated a Zircon was launched from Admiral Gorshkov in the White Sea and successfully hit a sea target in the Barents Sea 450 km (280 mi) away, reportedly reaching a speed of "more than Mach 8" and altitude of 28 km (17 mi).On 26 November 2020, the Russian Defense Ministry announced the successful test of a missile launched from Admiral Gorshkov in the White Sea, hitting a naval target 450 km away in the Barents Sea.
On 11 December 2020, the Russian Defense Ministry announced the successful test of a missile launched from Admiral Gorshkov in the White Sea, hitting a ground target 350 km away in the Astrakhan Region.

==
Design ==
Zircon is believed to be a maneuvering, winged hypersonic cruise missile with a lift-generating center body.
A booster stage with solid-fuel engines accelerates it to supersonic speeds, after which a scramjet motor with liquid-fuel (Decilin) (JP-10 Jet fuel) in the second stage accelerates it to hypersonic speeds.
The missile's range is estimated to be 135 to 270 nautical miles (155 to 311 mi; 250 to 500 km) at low level, and up to 400 nmi (460 mi; 740 km) in a semi-ballistic trajectory; average range is around 400–450 km (250–280 mi; 220–240 nmi).
According to Russian media (2017), the longest possible range is 540 nmi (620 mi; 1,000 km) and for this purpose a new fuel was created.
In the 2020 test, Ministry of Defense of the Russia claimed the missile's range is estimated to 1,000 - 2,000 km (depend on the type of target)Zircon can travel at a speed of Mach 8–Mach 9
(6,090–6,851 mph; 9,800–11,025 km/h; 2,722.3–3,062.6 m/s).
This has led to concerns that it could penetrate existing naval defense systems.
Zircon exchanges information in flight and can be controlled by commands if necessary.
Zircon will be first deployed with the Kirov-class battlecruisers Admiral Nakhimov and Pyotr Velikiy after 2020.
The ships will have their P-700 Granit anti-ship missiles replaced with the 3S14 universal VLS cells capable of carrying the Oniks, Kalibr and Zircon anti-ship cruise missiles; each vessel is to be equipped with 72 such missiles.
After completion of their refit, the ships could carry 40–80 anti-ship cruise missiles of different types.
Other platforms are likely to include Russian Navy's Admiral Grigorovich class and Admiral Gorshkov class frigates, as well as Gremyashchiy class, Buyan class and Karakurt class corvettes, mainly due to the installation of the compatible 3S14 vertical launchers.

==
Export ==
There are certain design similarities between Zirkon and BrahMos-II, which have been noted by experts.
Some experts have also postulated that the BrahMos-II might be an export version of the Zirkon missile.
A version for export should have its range limited under 300 km in compliance with the MTCR, or up to 400 km.

==
Operators ==
Russia
Russian Navy


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Hypersonic missile "Zircon" why NATO is afraid of new Russian weapons
(Russian)
Hunting in Russian "Zircon" (Russian)
Russia's Invincible Weapons:
Today, Tomorrow, Sometime, Never?
(
English)
The DARPA XS-1 was an experimental spaceplane/booster with the planned capability to deliver small satellites into orbit for the U.S. Military.
It was reported to be designed to be reusable as frequently as once a day, with a stated goal of doing so for 10 days straight.

The XS-1 was intended to directly replace the first stage of a multistage rocket by taking off vertically and flying to hypersonic speed and high suborbital altitude, enabling one or more expendable upper stages to separate and deploy a payload into low Earth orbit.
The XS-1 would then return to Earth, where it could ostensibly be serviced fast enough to repeat the process at least once every 24 hours.
The DARPA XS-1 program operated 2013–2020.

After several years of refinement and proposals, in May 2017, DARPA selected Boeing for Phase 2/3 to build and test an XS-1 spacecraft (now called the Experimental Spaceplane program).
At the time, test flights were scheduled to start no earlier than 2020.
On 22 January 2020, it was announced that Boeing was ceasing its role in the program, effectively ending it.

==
History ==
The XS-1 program followed several previous failed attempts to develop a reusable space launch vehicle.
The Rockwell X-30 in the 1980s and X-33 VentureStar in the 1990s never flew because of immature technologies.
DARPA's last attempt was the Responsive Access, Small Cargo, Affordable Launch (RASCAL) program in the early 2000s with the goal of placing 300 lb (140 kg) payloads in orbit for less than $750,000.

The XS-1 program was announced in November 2013 at a DARPA industry day.
DARPA stated that the XS-1 was more feasible due to better technologies, including light and low-cost composite airframe and tank structures, durable thermal protection, reusable and affordable propulsion, and aircraft-like health management systems.
Jess Sponable, the XS-1 program manager, spoke on February 5, 2014 at NASA's Future In-Space Operations group, stating, "The vision here is to break the cycle of escalating space system costs, enable routine space access and hypersonic vehicles.
"By
July 2014, three companies were awarded contracts to design a demonstration vehicle.
The selected companies were Boeing with Blue Origin, Masten Space Systems with XCOR Aerospace, and Northrop Grumman with Virgin Galactic.
Unlike other DARPA programs that were handed off to parts of the United States military once proven successful, this initiative was designed from the start to be a direct partnership between the agency and industry.
In August 2015, Boeing, Northrop Grumman, and Masten Space Systems all received additional funding from DARPA to continue their design concepts for Phase 1B of the program.

As of 2015, the first XS-1 orbital mission was planned to occur as early as 2020.DARPA began Phase 2 of the XS-1 program in April 2016.

In July 2016, DARPA stated that they believed "the time is right for a renewed effort, one that began in 2013/14, but [in 2016 was] ramped up through a solicitation process, allowing for several industry concepts to be created.
Per the [solicitation] requirements, the winged craft [requirements would continue to need to] be capable of performing 10 flights in 10 days, with a payload capacity greater than 3,000 lbs for a cost of less than $5 million USD per flight.
"In
May 2017, DARPA selected Boeing for Phase 2/3 to build and test the XS-1 (now called the Experimental Spaceplane program).
The phase 2/3 contract included $146 million in DARPA funding and an unspecified contribution by the company.
On 22 January 2020, DARPA announced that Boeing was pulling out of the XS-1 program "immediately" and effectively ending the program.

==
Program goals ==
The goals of the program as of September 2013 were:
The space plane must carry a 3,000–5,000 lb (1,400–2,300 kg) payload to low Earth orbit for less than a cost of US$5 million per flight, at a rate of 10 or more flights per year; currently, launching that type of payload requires using an Orbital Sciences Corporation Minotaur IV expendable booster, priced at $55 million once per year.

hypersonic flight to Mach 10 (12,250 km/h) or higher
fast one-day turnaround time, including flying 10 times in 10 days
a 1,800 kg (4,000 lb) payload on a trajectory to orbit
launch cost less than 1/10 that of current launch systems, approximately US$5 million per flight
uncrewed vehicle
utilize a reusable first stage booster to fly at hypersonic speeds to a suborbital altitude, coupled with one or more expendable upper stages that would separate and deploy a satellite


==
Entrants and selection ==
Boeing, Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems, and Masten Space Systems have Phase 1 conceptual design contracts.

Boeing performed trade studies with Blue Origin initially.

Boeing's design would allow the autonomous booster to carry the second stage and payload to high altitude and deploy them into space.
The booster would then return to Earth, where it could be quickly prepared for the next flight by applying operation and maintenance principles similar to modern aircraft.
Northrop Grumman used its aircraft, spacecraft, and autonomous systems experience to work with its team consisting of Scaled Composites to lead fabrication and assembly, and Virgin Galactic to head commercial spaceplane operations and transition; Virgin Galactic and Scaled Composites both worked on the SpaceShip Two, the world's only commercial spaceline.

The team also leveraged technologies developed during related projects for DARPA, NASA, and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory to give the government "return on those investments."

Their concept included a clean-pad launch using a transporter erector launcher with minimal infrastructure and ground crews, highly autonomous flight operations, and horizontal landing and recovery on standard runways.
Masten Space Systems has experience in rapid reusable rocket-powered vehicles, with their Xombie, Xoie, and Xaero vertical takeoff, vertical landing (VTVL) designs having already met or exceeded the 10 flights in 10 days objective set by the program.

Although the company consists of approximately 30 employees and is headquartered in a small building at the Mojave Air and Space Port, they have spent years flying various small VTVL systems on short hops at the spaceport, serving as test beds for guidance, navigation, and control (GNC) systems designed to safely land spacecraft on the Moon and potentially other planets.
Their concept showed a VTVL system taking off vertically from a launch pad with wings and a tail fin.
Masten Space Systems was partnered with XCOR Aerospace for Phase 1A.
Phase 2 & 3
In May 2017
Boeing was selected to partner with DARPA to build the XS-1.
Aerojet Rocketdyne was to provide AR-22 engines, derived from the RS-25 engine, for the spacecraft.
The phase 2/3 contract to build and fly the prototype included US$146 million of DARPA funding.

==
Boeing XS-1
Phantom Express ==
The Boeing design was a vertical takeoff,
horizontal landing (VTHL) craft called Phantom Express.
The planned specifications include a vehicle height of 100 feet (30 m), with a 62 foot (19 m) wingspan.
The Phantom express was to use an Aerojet Rocketdyne AR-22 engine, which was originally built for the Space Shuttle program, but has been modified to be reused ten times within ten days, for less than $5 million per launch.
This performance requirement was demonstrated on a test stand in July 2018.
On 22 January 2020, it was announced that Boeing was ceasing its role in the program, effectively ending it.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Boeing Phantom Express official site
DARPA
XS-1
artist concept animation video, 2014.

Masten Space Systems,
Inc. award notice, US$3 million, US government document, June 27, 2014.
DARPA XS-1 artist concept animation video
The Long Range Strike Bomber (LRS-B) is a development and acquisition program to develop a long-range strategic bomber for the United States Air Force, intended to be a heavy-payload stealth aircraft capable of delivering thermonuclear weapons.

Initial capability is planned for the mid-2020s.
A request for proposal to develop the aircraft was issued in July 2014.

The Air Force plans to procure at least 100 of the LRS-B aircraft at a cost of an estimated $550 million each (2010 dollars), with potentially as many as 200 units being considered to enter service eventually.

A development contract was awarded to Northrop Grumman for its B-21 Raider in October 2015.
Due to the sensitive nature much about the project is highly classified and little information is available to the public.
As of late 2019, it was known that construction of the aircraft has commenced.

==
Origins ==


===
Conception ===
On 19 May 2009, Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz said that the USAF's focus in the 2010 budget was on "Long-range strike, not next-generation bomber" and will push for this in the Quadrennial Defense Review.

In June 2009, the two teams working on next-generation bomber proposals were told to "close up shop".
On 16 September 2009, Secretary of Defense Robert Gates endorsed the concept of a new bomber but insisted that it must be affordable, stating: "What we must not do is repeat what happened with our last manned bomber.
By the time the research, development, and requirements processes ran their course, the aircraft, despite its great capability, turned out to be so expensive –
$2 billion each in the case of the B-2 Spirit—that less than one-sixth of the planned fleet of 132 was ever built."
On 5 October 2009, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition Ashton Carter said that the DoD was still deciding if the USAF needed a new bomber and that, if approved, the aircraft would need to handle reconnaissance as well as strike missions.
In July 2010, Carter said he intended to "make affordability a requirement" for the next-generation intelligence and strike platform.
On 11 December 2009, Gates said that the QDR had shown the need for both manned and unmanned long range strike and that the 2011 budget would likely include funding for the future bomber.
The USAF plans for the new bomber to be multi-role with intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities.
As a bomber, the LRS-B will be under Air Force Global Strike Command, while ISR assets are managed by Air Combat Command's 25th Air Force.
In 2010, Andrew Krepinevich, director of the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, questioned a reliance on short range aircraft like the F-35 to manage China in a future conflict and promoted reducing the F-35 buy in favor of a longer range platform like the Next-Generation Bomber; then Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne had rejected this plan in 2007.
During debate on the New START treaty in December 2010, several senators raised the LRS-B as a reason to oppose or delay ratification.

===
Funding ===
On 6 January 2011, Gates made a speech on the U.S. defense budget for FY 2012, which announced major investment in developing a long-range, nuclear-capable bomber, also to be optionally remotely piloted.
He also said the aircraft "will be designed and developed using proven technologies, an approach that should make it possible to deliver this capability on schedule and in quantity.
It is important that we begin this project now to ensure that a new bomber can be ready before the current aging fleet goes out of service.
The follow on bomber represents a key component of a joint portfolio of conventional deep-strike capabilities—an area that should be a high priority for future defense investment given the anti-access challenges our military faces.
"
In July 2011, Joint Chief Vice Chairman James Cartwright called for a large UAV instead of a manned aircraft, including for the nuclear mission.
Retired Air Force colonel and Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments analyst Mark Gunzinger has called for an optionally manned bomber, stating that purely unmanned bombers would be at a disadvantage without direct human pilot awareness and vulnerable to communication disruption.
In March 2011, the USAF decided to purchase 80 to 100 aircraft.
Air Force Global Strike Command indicated that one requirement for the bomber is to carry a weapon of similar effect to the Massive Ordnance Penetrator.
In addition to the strategic bombing, tactical bombing, and prompt global strike roles typical for a bomber, the aircraft is to be part of a family of systems responsible for ground surveillance and electronic attack.
The Obama Administration in its 2012 budget request asked for $197 million and a total of $3.7 billion over five years to develop the bomber, including modular payloads for intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance (ISR), electronic attack (EA), and communications.
It shall be nuclear-capable, but shall not be certified as such until older bombers are set to retire.
In 2011, the House Armed Services Committee added language that would require two engine programs for the bomber; Carter objected that the addition would interfere with plans to reuse an existing engine.
Reportedly, the two most likely engines are the Pratt & Whitney PW9000 engine, which uses a combination of Pratt & Whitney F135 and commercial turbofan technology, and a derivative of the General Electric/Rolls-Royce F136.
In May 2011, Air Force Undersecretary Erin Conaton announced that a program office was being set up for the bomber.
The USAF asked for $292 million for the program in its 2013 budget request.
The program has also been referred to as "Long-Range Strike-B" (LRS-B).
In 2012, former Pentagon weapons tester Thomas P. Christie speculated that the bomber program had been initiated so that the Air Force would have a sacrificial program to offer during anticipated defense budget shortfalls.
The USAF seems committed to the program, given a lack of other non-nuclear options to deal with "deeply buried and/or hardened targets," and committed two percent of their investment budget to the project, compared to three percent to sustain existing bombers.
As of August 2013, the USAF believes that the LRS-B can reach Initial Operating Capability (IOC) in 2025.
Reportedly, the main risk is funding, in light of the F-35 Lightning II's acquisition difficulties and a lack of an "urgent threat".
Prior bomber programs were hindered by a lack of funding, only 21 B-2 Spirits were produced out of 132 planned and
fewer B-1 Lancers were built than were envisioned; both programs were scaled down due to spiraling per aircraft costs.
Research funding was allocated, as stealthy technologies to counter anti-access
/area-denial threats were spared from budget cuts.
The USAF stated the LRS-B is a top priority as it is believed that China will overcome the B-2's low-observable features by the 2020s.
Where possible, existing technologies and proven subsystems will be used in order to keep it within budget, instead of developing new and riskier ones.
Components such as engines and radars may be off-the-shelf or adaptions of existing models, such as derivative technologies of the F-35.
The LRS-B is intended to perform any long range mission, rather than one specialized mission, which drove up the cost of the B-2.
The USAF expects it to cost $1 billion each with development costs factored in, and aims for a per-aircraft cost of $550 million, considered reasonable for a limited production run military aircraft.

===
Production proposals, timeframe ===
On 25 October 2013, Boeing and Lockheed Martin announced their teaming up for the LRS-B. Boeing will be the prime contractor.
The two companies previously joined together for the program in 2008, but the partnership ended in 2010 when requirements shifted.
Boeing believes that as the program had evolved, they can readdress their partnership to specifically address requirements.
The team has Boeing's bomber experience and Lockheed Martin's stealth experience.
At the time of the announcement, official details about the LRS-B were that it will likely be optionally manned and use stealth technology.
On 30 January 2014, Northrop Grumman stated their intention to invest in developing needed technology for the bomber, such as stealth designs, mission management systems, and autonomous controls.
In January 2014, General Schwartz said that the Pentagon should abandon plans to outfit the F-35 with nuclear weapons in favor of the LRS-B. A 2010 Nuclear Posture Review stated that replacing the F-16 with the F-35 retains dual conventional and nuclear delivery capabilities for USAF fighters.
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) determined that upgrading the F-35 for nuclear deployment would cost $350 million over the next decade.
Schwartz said that without financial support from NATO, where some nuclear-capable F-35s would be deployed, those funds should be transferred to the LRS-B.
At the same time, Congress cut funding for the B61 nuclear bomb, stripping $10 million from F-35 integration and $34.8 million for life extension; Schwartz stated that B61's life extension must proceed.
On 20 February 2014, the USAF reasserted the bomber's need at the annual Air Force Association Air Warfare Symposium in Orlando,
Fla. It was stated it will be fielded in the mid-2020s, and between 80 and 100 of the bombers will be procured.
Lt.
Gen. Burton Field clarified the 80 to 100 range is due to uncertainty over the price rather than a figure representing the minimum number of bombers needed to mitigate risk.
Some USAF leaders expect the unit cost limit of $550 million per aircraft will be exceeded with additional equipment added to the airframe.
The cost goal is to set design constraints to prevent extra requirements for capability growth desires and untested technologies that would increase the price more from being incorporated during development.
Though the final cost may be greater than planned, a fixed price objective is expected to keep average procurement costs affordable.
Rather than the price ceiling being too low to meet requirements, the USAF sees this arrangement as itself and the potential contractor being disciplined about the bomber's missions and roles.
Research and development expenses are likely to be "significant", but not expected to be double the cost of production aircraft.
The USAF intended to release a full request for proposals (RFP), a final RFP, and begin the competition for the Long-Range Strike Bomber in fall 2014.
Two teams, Northrop Grumman and Boeing–Lockheed Martin, were working on pre-proposals for the competition.
In June 2014, the USAF revealed that the LRS-B RFP would be released "soon," with proposals to be submitted by fall 2014 and evaluations completed in early 2015, with a contract award after that.

Some public information includes that it will be operational in the mid-2020s, based on existing technologies, have a large payload, may possibly be optionally-manned, and is being designed to work with a "family of systems" that includes ISR, electronic attack, and communication systems.
Early aircraft will be designed around fixed requirements with mature technologies that will be adaptable through open architecture for future sensor and weapons capabilities.
Although the LRS-B request for proposals (RFP) was to be released by the end of June, the USAF hesitated to publicly announce it to keep the process fair and less likely to give sensitive information to "potential adversaries".
Public announcements of future acquisition milestones are to be "released as appropriate."
==
Competitive phase ==
The USAF released its RFP for the LRS-B on 9 July 2014.
By entering the competitive phase of acquisition, the USAF is limited with what it is able to release, and few details were expected to be made public until the contract is awarded in the second quarter of 2015.
The LRS-B is expected to replace the B-52 fleet, possibly replace a portion of the B-1 fleet, and complement the B-2 fleet.
According to an Air Force study, the Boeing B-52 Stratofortresses and Rockwell B-1 Lancers currently in inventory will reach the end of their service lives by 2045.Northrop
Grumman could base production in Florida if they won the contract, which would provide tax credits, while California passed a bill offering tax credits to the manufacturer if they build it in their state, which would mainly benefit the Boeing–Lockheed Martin team.
On 14 August 2014, the California legislature passed a measure to apply tax benefits equally to prime and subcontractors.

The previous measure only applied to subcontractors, meaning Lockheed Martin as part of the Boeing–Lockheed Martin team, placing Northrop Grumman at a near half-billion-dollar disadvantage in the bidding; the new measure levels the tax benefit field by also applying them to prime contractors, as Northrop Grumman has no subcontractor and also has operations in Palmdale.
With a target price of $550 million per aircraft, Defense News quoted a source with knowledge of the program predicting that the LRS-B may be smaller than the B-2, perhaps half the size, powered by two engines in the F135 power class.

The target unit cost of $550 million is based on 2010 dollars and is $606 million in 2016 dollars.
One of the program's main effects will be its impact on the industrial base; three of the country's five largest defense firms are competing.
After the LRS-B, the USAF will not have another major attack aircraft program until the 2030s for a new fighter, with a follow-on bomber after that.

With that stretch of time in between, the loser may be forced to leave the industry entirely; Northrop Grumman would likely not retain the infrastructure required for the next major undertaking, and Boeing's main aircraft field is now its commercial products.
Industrial impact may cause any contract to be contested by Congress from representatives that receive campaign donations from a company whose award would create jobs for constituents.

In addition to competing with other USAF priorities, budgets may put the LRS-B at odds with other services' priorities such as the Columbia-class submarine.
In April 2015, the Pentagon revealed that individual technologies for the LRS-B will be competed to enhance flexibility, increase competition, and drive down costs.

This means even though one team will build the aircraft, other competitors will have the chance to compete for sustainment and upgrade features.
Although a contract was planned to be awarded in early summer 2015, it was pushed back to September 2015 to ensure the optimal contractor was selected.

Prolonging this part of the process is seen as a time and money-saver later in the acquisition to ensure the resulting bomber can be useful over a 50-year lifespan.
In September 2015, the USAF revealed that the LRS-B's development was much further along than had been publicly acknowledged, and more than usual before a contract award.

Final requirements had been finalized since May 2013.

Both competitors had mature proposals with prototyping activities and wind tunnel tests along with subsystems, although no demonstrator had been built.

The designs are "very different" from each other with different teams on subsystems such as engines, electronic warfare suites, and communications systems; subcontractors will likely not be announced when the winner is picked.

The bomber seems similar to the B-2, but more advanced using improved materials for superior low observability, similar to or smaller in size, and will operate alone or as part of a strike package with other airborne assets.

Conducting of tests and risk reduction this early in the acquisition process is in part because the program has been handled by the Air Force Rapid Capabilities Office since 2011, which has more freedom in how it procures technologies.

To reduce risk, the aircraft's production rate will probably remain steady and fairly modest over the course of the aircraft's production.
In late September 2015, the contract award was again delayed.

==
Contract award ==
On 27 October 2015, the Defense Department awarded the development contract to Northrop Grumman.
The initial value of the contract is $21.4 billion, but the deal could eventually be worth up to $80 billion.
The deciding factor in the selection of the Northrop design was cost.
On 6 November 2015, Boeing and Lockheed Martin protested the decision to the Government Accountability Office (GAO).
Development costs have been estimated to be from $10 to $23 billion.
On 16 February 2016, the GAO denied the protest, and Northrop Grumman resumed work on the project.
In February 2016, Boeing and Lockheed decided not to pursue a lawsuit against the US Air Force over the selection of Northrop Grumman.
In November 2017, the CBO estimated the total cost of the bomber to be $97 billion, $69 billion of which are attributed to development costs.
At the 2016 Air Warfare Symposium, the LRS-B aircraft was formally designated B-21.
The head of the US Air Force Global Strike Command expects that 100 B-21 bombers is the minimum ordered and envisions some 175–200 bombers in service.
A media report states that the bomber could also be used as an intelligence gatherer, battle manager, and interceptor aircraft.

== See also ==
2037
Bomber


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Launching the New Bomber".
Air Force Magazine.
January 2016.
The Mark 41 Vertical Launching System (Mk 41 VLS) is a shipborne missile canister launching system which provides a rapid-fire launch capability against hostile threats.
The Vertical Launch System (VLS) concept was derived from work on the Aegis Combat System.

==
History ==
Refinement of the initial concept of Aegis system in the 1960s continued through the 1960s and 1970s, and the Mk 41 was conceived in 1976.
Originally, the system was only intended to fire the RIM-66 Standard missile, but the height of the Mk 41 was increased to accommodate the larger Tomahawk missile.
The prototype for the launcher was tested and evaluated on board USS Norton Sound (AVM-1).
The first operational launcher was installed aboard USS Bunker Hill.

==
Specifications ==


===
Mark 41
(Mk 41) ==
=
The Mk 41 is capable of firing the following missiles: RIM-66 Standard, RIM-67
Standard, RIM-161 Standard Missile 3,
RIM-174
Standard ERAM,
RGM-109 Tomahawk, RUM-139 VL-ASROC anti-submarine missile, RIM-7 Sea Sparrow anti-air missile, and RIM-162 ESSM.
The missiles are pre-loaded into "canisters", which are then loaded into the individual "cells" of the launcher.
The ESSM is loaded in a quad-pack with 4 missiles in one Mk 25 canister, older types of 8 cell modules are not able to use ESSM.
Launcher cells are fitted to ships in 8 cell modules (2 rows of 4) that share a common uptake hatch (exhaust system) sited between the two rows.
The Mk 41 VLS adopts modular design concept, which result in different versions that vary in size and weight due to different "canisters" in various modules.
The height (determining missile length) of the launcher comes in three sizes: 209 inches (5.3 m) for the self-defense version, 266 in (6.8 m) for the tactical version, and 303 inches (7.7 m) for the strike version.
The empty weight for an 8-cell module is 26,800 pounds (12.2 t) for the self-defense version, 29,800 pounds (13.5 t) for the tactical version, and 32,000 pounds (15 t) for the strike version.
Ticonderoga cruisers and Arleigh Burke destroyers up to DDG-78 have a Strikedown module fore and aft, which consists of five cells and a collapsible crane for assisting with replenishment at sea.
As replenishment of large missiles at sea was later seen as impractical and dangerous, Strikedown modules fell out of use on newer ships.

===
Mark 57
(Mk 57) ===
The Mk 57 VLS is an evolution of Mk 41 VLS.

Unlike the Mk 41, the Mk 57 is designed to be installed on the ship periphery instead of in centralized magazines.
Developed by Raytheon,  it provides backwards compatibility with existing missiles while allowing new missiles with significantly increased propulsion and payloads.

While allowing for slightly larger missiles than the Mk 41, the primary improvement of Mk 57 is its exhaust gas management system that can accommodate new missile designs having up to 45 percent greater rocket motor mass flow rate than that of Mk 41.
The unique symmetric geometry of the U-shaped gas management system facilitates the egress of gases, while minimizing flow into adjacent cells and reversed flow into the active cell.
Another advantage is the elimination of the water deluge system, which is used to cool the missile canister in the event that the missile restraint bolts do not release after rocket motor ignition.

Elimination of the water deluge system significantly reduces maintenance and personnel requirements, and protects against accidental missile wet-down.

==
Variants ==
MK 41 Mod 0, Ticonderoga-class cruisers, two 61 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 158 Mod 0 or Mod 1, forward and aft.

MK 41 Mod 1, Spruance-class destroyers, 61 cells forward.

MK 41
Mod 2, Arleigh Burke-class destroyers, DDG-51 to DDG-78, one 29 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 159 Mod 0 forward, one 61 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 158 Mod 0
aft.

MK 41
Mod 3, Brandenburg-class frigates (Germany), 16 cells.

MK 41
Mod 5, Anzac-class frigates (Australia, New Zealand), 8 cells
MK
41
Mod 7, Arleigh Burke-class destroyer,
DDG-79 to DDG-91, one 32 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 177 Mod 0 forward, one 64 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 176 Mod 0
aft.

MK 41 Mod 8, Barbaros-class frigates (Turkey), 8 or 16 cells
MK 41 Mod 9, De Zeven Provinciën-class frigate (Netherlands), 40 cells
MK 41
Mod 10, Sachsen-class frigates (Germany), 32 cells
MK
41
Mod 15, Arleigh Burke-class destroyer, DDG-92 and up, one 32 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 177
Mod 3 forward, one 64 cell Vertical Launcher Mk 176
Mod 2 aft.

MK 41
Mod 16, Adelaide-class frigate (Australia), 8 cells


==
Operators ==
AustraliaAnzac-class frigate - (8 cells)
Hobart-class destroyer - (48 cells)
Hunter-class frigate - (32 cells)
CanadaIroquois-class destroyer - (29 cells) (Retired)
Canadian Surface Combatant - (32 cells)
ChileAdelaide-class frigate - (8 cells)
DenmarkIver Huitfeldt-class frigate - (32 cells)
FinlandPohjanmaa-class corvette - (8 or 16 cells)
GermanySachsen-class frigate - (32 cells)
Brandenburg-class frigate - (16 cells) JapanMaya-class destroyer - (96 cells)
Atago-class destroyer - (96 cells)
Kongō-class destroyer - (90 cells)
Hyūga-class helicopter destroyer - (16 cells)
Murasame-class destroyer - (32 cells)
Takanami-class destroyer - (32 cells)
Akizuki-class destroyer - (32 cells)
Asahi-class destroyer - (32 cells)
NetherlandsDe Zeven Provinciën-class frigate - (40 cells)
NorwayFridtjof Nansen-class frigate - (8 or 16 cells)
South KoreaChungmugong
Yi Sun-shin-class destroyer (KDX-II) - (32 cells)
King Sejong the Great-class destroyer (KDX-III) - (80 cells)
SpainÁlvaro de Bazán-class frigate - (48 cells)
TaiwanKaohsiung-class tank landing ship - (Test Ship) ThailandNaresuan-class frigate - (8 cells)
Bhumibol Adulyadej-class frigate - (8 cells)
TurkeyG class frigate - (8 cells)
Barbaros-class frigate - (16 cells)
United KingdomType
26 frigate-
(24 cells)
United StatesSpruance-class destroyer - (61 cells, installed on 24 of 31 vessels)
(Retired)
Arleigh Burke-class destroyer - (90 or 96 cells)
Ticonderoga-class cruiser - (122 cells)
Zumwalt-class destroyer - (80 Mk 57 cells)


==
Gallery ==

		
		
		
		
		
		


==
See also ==
French Sylver
Chinese GJB 5860-2006
Russian Redut


==
References ==


==
External links ==
FAS - Mk 41
Lockheed Martin - Mk 41 VLS Factsheet
The BrahMos Aerospace Limited is a joint venture between the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) of India and the Federal State Unitary Enterprise NPO Mashinostroyenia (NPOM) of Russia under BrahMos Aerospace.
The BrahMos missile is named after two rivers, the Brahmaputra and the Moskva.

The company currently manufactures BrahMos missile with a range of 300 km and traveling at speeds of Mach 2.8 to 3.0.
It is currently developing BrahMos-II, a hypersonic cruise missile.

India is a member of the MTCR, India and Russia are now planning to jointly develop a new generation of Brahmos missiles with 600 km-plus range and an ability to hit protected targets with pinpoint accuracy.

==
History ==
After the Gulf War of the 1990s, there was a feeling that it was necessary to have a cruise missile system in India.
As a result, in 1998, then Scientific Advisor of India to Defense Minister A. P. J. Abdul Kalam and Deputy Defence Minister of Russia
N.V. Mikhailov signed an inter-governmental agreement in Moscow.

India holds a 50.5% share stake in the company and Russia holds the other 49.5%.

===
Expansion ===
BrahMos Aerospace production centre first started at Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh.
In 2007, BrahMos Aerospace acquired Kerala Hitech Industries Limited at Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala and converted it into BrahMos Aerospace Trivandrum Limited which made it into the second missile making unit for a world-class missile facility with system integration and testing.
At present the Defence Research and Development Organisation is planning to set up a third production centre in Nagpur in Maharashtra.

== Aim and objective ==
The aim of the agreement and formation of a joint company was to design, develop, manufacture and market the world's fastest supersonic cruise missile system.

== Organisation and leadership ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==


===
Official ===
Official Website of the BrahMos Aerospace Limited
Official Website of the BrahMos Aerospace
Thiruvananthapuram Limited
BrahMos - A project of two Governments
BrahMos - A Missile with a Niche


===
Others ===
India and Russia will decide on export of BrahMos
BATL set to make BrahMos engines
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh commends BrahMos team
BrahMos Aerospace plans expansion
New missile race:
America and Russia are joined by India and China
Space warfare will be combat that will take place in outer space.
The scope of space warfare therefore includes ground-to-space warfare, such as attacking satellites from the Earth; space-to-space warfare, such as satellites attacking satellites; and space-to-ground warfare, such as satellites attacking Earth-based targets.

As of 2021, no actual warfare is known to have taken place in space, though a number of tests and demonstrations have been performed.
International treaties are in place that attempt to regulate conflicts in space and limit the installation of space weapon systems, especially nuclear weapons.

From 1985 to 2002 there was a United States Space Command, which in 2002 merged with the United States Strategic Command, leaving the United States Space Force (formerly Air Force Space Command until 2019) as the primary American military space force.
The Russian Space Force, established on August 10, 1992, which became an independent section of the Russian military on June 1, 2001, was replaced by the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces starting December 1, 2011, but was reestablished as a component of the Russian Aerospace Forces on August 1, 2015.
In 2019 India conducted a test of the ASAT missile making it the fourth country with that capability.
In April 2019, the Indian government established the Defence Space Agency, or DSA.
==
History ==


===
1960s ==
=
Early efforts to conduct space warfare were directed at space-to-space warfare, as ground-to-space systems were considered to be too slow and too isolated by Earth's atmosphere and gravity to be effective at the time.
The history of active space warfare development goes back to the 1960s when the Soviet Union began the Almaz project, a project designed to give them the ability to do on-orbit inspections of satellites and destroy them if needed.

Similar planning in the United States took the form of the Blue Gemini project, which consisted of modified Gemini capsules that would be able to deploy weapons and perform surveillance.

One early test of electronic space warfare, the so-called Starfish Prime test, took place in 1962, when the United States exploded a ground-launched nuclear weapon in space to test the effects of an electromagnetic pulse.
The result was a deactivation of many then-orbiting satellites, both American and Soviet.
The deleterious and unfocused effects of the EMP test led to the banning of nuclear weapons in space in the Outer Space Treaty of 1967.
(
See high-altitude nuclear explosion.)

In the early 1960s the U.S. military produced a film called Space and National Security which depicted space warfare.

===
1970s–1990s ===
Through the 1970s, the Soviet Union continued their project and test-fired a cannon to test space station defense.
This was considered too dangerous to do with a crew on board, however, so the test was conducted after the crew had returned to Earth.

A 1976 Soviet report suggested that the design of the space shuttle had been guided by a requirement to deliver a payload- such as a bomb- over Russia and return to land after a single orbit.
This may have been a confusion based on requirements 3A and 3B for the shuttle's design, which required the craft to be able to deploy or retrieve an object from a polar orbit in a single pass.
Both the Soviets and the United States developed anti-satellite weaponry designed to shoot down satellites.
While early efforts paralleled other space-to-space warfare concepts, the United States was able in the 1980s to develop ground-to-space laser anti-satellite weapons.
None of these systems are known to be active today; however, a less powerful civilian version of the ground-to-space laser system is commonly used in the astronomical technique of adaptive optics.

In 1984 the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) was proposed.
It was nicknamed Star Wars after the popular science fiction franchise Star Wars.

In 1985 a USAF pilot in an F-15 successfully shot down the P78-1, an American research satellite, in a 345-mile (555 km) orbit with a missile.
===
Since 2000 ===
The People's Republic of China successfully tested (see 2007 Chinese anti-satellite missile test)
a ballistic missile-launched anti-satellite weapon on January 11, 2007.
This resulted in harsh criticism from the United States of America, Britain, and Japan.

The U.S. developed an interceptor missile, the SM-3, testing it by hitting ballistic test targets while they were in space.
On February 21, 2008, the U.S. used a SM-3 missile to destroy a spy satellite,
USA-193, while it was 247 kilometers (133 nautical miles) above the Pacific Ocean.
Japan fields the U.S.-made SM-3 missile, and there have been plans to base the land-based version in Romania and Vietnam.
In March 2019, India shot down a satellite orbiting in a low Earth orbit using an ASAT missile during an operation code named Mission Shakti, thus making its way to the list of space warfare nations, establishing the Defense Space Agency the following month, followed by its first-ever simulated space warfare exercise on 25 July which would inform a joint military space doctrine.
In July 2019 Emmanuel Macron "called for a space high command to protect" France's satellites.
This was followed by a plan released by military officials.
French Defense Minister, Florence Parly, announced a space weapons program that would move the country's space surveillance strategy towards active protection of its assets in space, e.g. satellites.
The projects outlined include: patrolling nano-satellites swarms, ground-based laser systems to blind spying satellites, and machine guns mounted on satellites.

==
Theoretical space weaponry ==


===
Ballistic warfare ===
In the late 1970s and through the 1980s the Soviet Union and the United States theorized, designed and in some cases tested a variety of weaponry designed for warfare in outer space.
Space warfare was seen primarily as an extension of nuclear warfare, and so many theoretical systems were based around the destruction or defense of ground and sea-based missiles.
Space-based missiles were not attempted due to the Outer Space Treaty, which banned the use, testing or storage of nuclear weapons outside the Earth's atmosphere.
When the U.S. gained "interest in utilizing space-based lasers for ballistic missile defense", two facts emerged.
One being that the ballistic missiles are fragile and two, chemical lasers project missile killing energy (3,000 kilometers).
This meant that lasers could be put into space to intercept a ballistic missile.

Systems proposed ranged from measures as simple as ground and space-based anti-missiles to railguns, space based lasers, orbital mines and similar weaponry.
Deployment of these systems was seriously considered in the mid-1980s under the banner of the Strategic Defense Initiative announced by Ronald Reagan in 1983, using the term "evil empire" to describe the Soviets (hence the popular nickname "Star Wars").
If the Cold War had continued, many of these systems could potentially have seen deployment: the United States developed working railguns, and a laser that could destroy missiles at range, though the power requirements, range, and firing cycles of both were impractical.
Weapons like the space-based laser was rejected, not just by the government, but by universities, moral thinkers, and religious people because it would have increased the waging of the arms race and questioned the United States' role in the Cold War.
===
Electronic warfare ===
With the end of the Cold War and continued development of satellite and electronics technology, attention was focused on space as a supporting theatre for conventional warfare.
Currently, military operations in space primarily concern either the vast tactical advantages of satellite-based surveillance, communications, and positioning systems or mechanisms used to deprive an opponent of said tactical advantages.

Accordingly, most space-borne proposals which would traditionally be considered "weapons" (a communications or reconnaissance satellite may be useful in warfare but isn't generally classified as a weapon)
are designed to jam, sabotage, and outright destroy enemy satellites, and conversely to protect friendly satellites against such attacks.
To this end, the US (and presumably other countries) is researching groups of small, highly mobile satellites called "microsats" (about the size of a refrigerator) and "picosats" (approximately 1 cubic foot (≈27 litres) in volume) nimble enough to maneuver around and interact with other orbiting objects to repair, sabotage, hijack, or simply collide with them.

===
Kinetic bombardment ===
Another theorized use involves the extension of conventional weaponry into orbit for deployment against ground targets.
Though international treaties ban the deployment of nuclear missiles outside the atmosphere, other categories of weapons are largely unregulated.
Traditional ground-based weapons are generally not useful in orbital environments, and few if any would survive re-entry even if they were, but as early as the 1950s, the United States has toyed with kinetic bombardment, i.e. orbiting magazines of non-explosive projectiles to be dropped onto hardened targets from low Earth orbit.

Kinetic weapons have always been widespread in conventional warfare—bullets, arrows, swords, clubs, etc.—but
the energy a projectile would gain while falling from orbit would make such a weapon rival all but the most powerful explosives.
A direct hit would presumably destroy all but the most hardened targets without the need for nuclear weapons.

Such a system would involve a 'spotter' satellite, which would identify targets from orbit with high-power sensors, and a nearby 'magazine' satellite to de-orbit a long, needle-like tungsten dart onto it with a small rocket motor or just dropping a very big rock from orbit (such as an asteroid).
This would be more useful against a larger but less hardened target (such as a city).
Though a common device in science fiction, there is no publicly available evidence that any such systems have actually been deployed by any nation.

===
Directed-energy weapons ===
Weapon systems that fall under this category include lasers, linear particle accelerators or particle-beam based weaponry, microwaves and plasma-based weaponry.
Particle beams involve the acceleration of charged or neutral particles in a stream towards a target at extremely high velocities, the impact of which creates a reaction causing immense damage.
Most of these weapons are theoretical or impractical to implement currently, aside from lasers which are starting to be used in terrestrial warfare.
That said, directed-energy weapons are more practical and more effective in a vacuum (i.e. space) than in the Earth's atmosphere, as in the atmosphere the particles of air interfere with and disperse the directed energy.
Nazi Germany had a project for such a weapon, considered a wunderwaffe, the sun gun, which would have been an orbital concave mirror able to concentrate the sun's energy on a ground target.

==
Practical considerations ==
Space warfare is likely to be conducted at far greater distances and speeds than terrestrial combat.
The vast distances involved pose difficult challenges for targeting and tracking, as even light requires a few seconds to traverse ranges measured in hundreds of thousands of kilometers.
For example, if attempting to fire upon a target at the distance of the Moon from the Earth, the image one sees reflects the position of the target slightly more than a second earlier.
Thus even a laser would need approximately 1.28 seconds, meaning a laser-based weapon system would need to lead a target's apparent position by 1.28×2 = 2.56 seconds.
A projectile from a railgun recently tested by the US Navy would take over eighteen hours to cross that distance, assuming that it would travel in a straight line at a constant velocity of 5.8 km/s along its entire trajectory.

Three factors conspire to make engaging targets in space very difficult.
First, the vast distances involved mean that an error of even a fraction of a degree in the firing solution could result in a miss by thousands of kilometers.
Second, space travel involves tremendous speeds by terrestrial standards—a geostationary satellite moves at a speed of 3.07 km
/s
whereas objects in low Earth orbit can move at up to 8 km/s.
Third, though distances are large, targets remain relatively small.
The International Space Station, currently the largest artificial object in Earth orbit, measures slightly over 100m at its largest span.
Other satellites can be orders of magnitude smaller, e.g. Quickbird measures a mere 3.04m.
External ballistics for stationary terrestrial targets is enormously complicated—some of the earliest analog computers were used to calculate firing solutions for naval artillery, as the problems were already beyond manual solutions in any reasonable time—and the issues in targeting objects in space make a difficult problem even harder.
Additionally, though not a problem for orbital kinetic weapons, any directed energy weapon would require large amounts of electricity.
So far the most practical batteries are lithium batteries, and the most practical method of generating electricity in space is through photovoltaic modules, which are currently only up to 30% efficient, and fuel cells, which have limited fuel.
Current technology might not be practical for powering effective lasers, particle beams, and railguns in space.
In the context of the Strategic Defense Initiative, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in the United States worked on a project for expandable space-based x-ray lasers powered by a nuclear explosion, Project Excalibur, a project canceled in 1992 for lack of results.
General William L. Shelton has said that in order to protect against attacks, Space Situational Awareness is much more important than additional hardening or armoring of satellites.
The Air Force Space Command has indicated that their defensive focus will be on "Disaggregated Space Architectures".

===
Space debris ===
Anti-satellite attacks, especially ones involving kinetic kill vehicles, can contribute to the formation of space debris which can remain in orbit for many years and could interfere with future space activity or in a worst case trigger a Kessler Syndrome.
In January 2007 China demonstrated a satellite knock out whose detonation alone caused more than 40,000 new chunks of debris with a diameter larger than one centimeter and a sudden increase in the total amount of debris in orbit.
The PRC is reported to be developing "soft-kill" techniques such as jamming and vision kills that do not generate much debris.

==
Possible warfare over space ==
Most of the world's communications systems rely heavily on the presence of satellites in orbit around Earth.
Protecting these assets might seriously motivate nations dependent upon them to consider deploying more space-based weaponry, especially in conflicts involving advanced countries with access to space.

Since 2017, the United States Air Force has run an annual military exercise called "Space Flag" at Peterson Air Force Base, which involves a red team simulating attacks on U.S. satellites.

==
Space warfare in fiction ==
Space warfare is a staple of science fiction, where it is portrayed with a wide range of realism and plausibility.
Fictional space warfare includes anticipated future technology and tactics, as well as fantasy- or history-based scenarios that happen to take place in a science-fiction setting.
Some portray a space-borne military as similar to an air force, whereas others depict a more naval framework.
Still others suggest forces more like marines: highly mobile forces engaged in interplanetary and interstellar warfare but
with most of the conflict occurring in terrestrial environments.

Both kinetic energy and directed energy weapons are often portrayed, along with various military space vessels.
The Lensman series by E. E. Smith is an early example, which also inspired the term space opera due to the grandiose scales of the stories.
The Ender's Game series by Orson Scott Card is a notable example in that it makes a conjecture as to what sort of tactics and training would be required for war in outer space.

Other science fiction authors have also delved into the tactics of space combat, such as David Weber in his Honorverse series as well as Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle in their Mote in God's Eye series.
A more recent example would be Alastair Reynolds' Revelation Space universe, which explores combat at relativistic speeds.
Robert A. Heinlein's Starship Troopers is perhaps one of the best-known and earliest explorations of the "space marine" idea.

Space-based vehicular combat is portrayed in many movies and video games, most notably Star Wars, "Stargate", the Halo series, Descent, Gundam, Macross, Babylon 5, and Star Trek.
Games such as the Homeworld series provide interesting concepts for space warfare, such as game mechanics using three-dimensional battle formations, the use of plasma-based projectors that receive their energy from a ship's propulsion system, and automated unmanned space combat vehicles.
Other series, such as Gundam, prominently feature vehicular combat in and among many near future concepts, such as O'Neill cylinders.

The distinct fictional settings in which space warfare occurs are far too numerous to list, but popular examples include Star Trek (in all of its various incarnations), Star Wars, Halo, Stargate, Warhammer 40,000, Babylon 5, Buck Rogers, Flash Gordon, Battlestar Galactica, Mass Effect, Freespace and many comic book franchises.
Video games have frequently touched the subject, with the Wing Commander franchise serving as a prototypical example.
Few games attempt to simulate an environment with realistic distances and speeds, though Independence War and Frontier: Elite II both do, as does the board game Attack Vector: Tactical.

== See also ==
Asteroid impact avoidance
Beijing–Washington space hotline
Militarisation of space
Space force
Space weapon
Sun outageRelated to specific countries and facilities:

Department of Defense Manned Space Flight Support Office
European Aeronautic Defense and Space Company
Joint Functional Component Command for Space and Global Strike (US Strategic Command)
National Missile Defense
Pine Gap (Australia)
United States Air Force Space Command
United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Hobbes, D (1986) "
An Illustrated Guide to Space Warfare
" Salamander Books Ltd. ISBN
0-86101-204-6
Macvey, John W. Space Weapons, Space War.
New York:
1979 Stein and Day (written by a professional astronomer)
David Jordan: Air and Space Warfare, pp.
178–223
, in:Understanding modern warfare.
Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge 2008, ISBN 978-0-521-87698-8.

John J. Klein:
Space Warfare:
Strategy, Principles and Policy.
Routledge, Oxford 2006, ISBN 978-0-415-40796-0.

Joan Johnson-Freese:
Space Warfare in the 21st Century –
Arming the Heavens.
Routledge, Oxford 2016,  ISBN 978-1-138-69388-3.
The .950 JDJ (24.1x70mm) is a powerful large caliber rifle cartridge developed by American gunsmith and weapon designer J. D. Jones of SSK Industries.

==
Cartridge ==
.950
JDJ cases are approximately 70 mm in length, and are based on a 20×110mm case shortened and necked up to accept the .950 in (24.1 mm) bullet.

Projectiles are custom-made and most commonly weigh 3,600 grains (230 g) which is 8.2 ounces or over half a pound.

== Rifles ==
As its name implies, rifles chambered for the cartridge have a groove diameter of 0.950 in (24.1 mm).
SSK received a "Sporting Use Exception" to de-regulate the rifles.
Thus, in the United States, they can be owned like any other Title
I rifle by an American citizen at age 18.
The rifles use McMillan Firearms stocks and extraordinarily thick Krieger barrels bearing an 18 lb (8.2 kg) muzzle brake.

Overall, depending on options, the rifles weigh from 85 to 120 pounds (39 to 54 kg)  and are therefore only useful for shooting from a bench rest or heavy bipod.
Despite the weight, recoil is significant and shooters must be sure to choose components (i.e., scopes and bipods) that can handle the force.
The sheer size, weight, and power of these rifles make them rather impractical for hunting use.
SSK only manufactured three of these rifles and as of 2014 no longer produces the ammunition.

== Ballistics ==
The cartridge propels its 3,600 grains (233 grams) bullet at approximately 2,200 feet per second (670 metres per second).
This yields a muzzle energy of 38,685 foot-pounds force (52,450 joules).By comparison, the 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge, used in the M16 and M4 rifles, produces between 1,200–1,300 foot-pounds force (1,600–1,800 joules), while the .308 Winchester, a favorite for hunters and medium-range police/military sniping, produces between 2,000–3,000 foot-pounds force (2,700–4,100 joules) depending on the load used.
Even the .50 BMG, which has a kinetic energy of around 13,000–15,000 foot-pounds force (18,000–20,000 joules) delivers less than half the energy.
The ballistics of the .950 JDJ are more similar to that of the 20 mm autocannon round, which delivers approximately 39,500 foot-pounds force (53,600 joules).
The muzzle energy of the .950 JDJ is comparable to the kinetic energy of a 2,800 pounds (1,300 kilograms) automobile traveling at 20 miles per hour
(32 kilometres per hour).In a 110 lb (50 kg) rifle, this will develop well over 200 foot-pounds force (270 joules) of free recoil energy.
Shooting usually involves a heavy "lead sled" or similar shooting rest, and the rifle scope has significant eye relief to avoid injuring the ocular orbit.

==
References ==
Boost-glide trajectories are a class of spacecraft guidance and reentry trajectories that extend the range of suborbital spaceplanes and reentry vehicles by employing aerodynamic lift in the high upper atmosphere.
In most examples, boost-glide roughly doubles the range over the purely ballistic trajectory.
In others, a series of skips allows range to be further extended, and leads to the alternate terms skip-glide and skip reentry.

The concept was first seriously studied as a way to extend the range of ballistic missiles, but was not used operationally in this form as conventional missiles with extended range were introduced.
The underlying aerodynamic concepts have been used to produce maneuverable reentry vehicles, or MARV, to increase the accuracy of some missiles like the Pershing II or to avoid interception as in the case of the Avangard.
More recently, the range-extension has been used as a way to allow flights at lower altitudes, helping avoid radar detection for a longer time compared to a higher ballistic path.

The concept has also been used to extend the reentry time for vehicles returning to Earth from the Moon, which would otherwise have to shed a large amount of velocity in a short time and thereby suffer very high heating rates.
The Apollo Command Module used what is essentially a one-skip reentry (or partial skip), as did the Soviet Zond and Chinese Chang'e 5-T1.
More complex multi-skip reentry is proposed for newer vehicles like the Orion spacecraft.

==
History ==


===
Early concepts ===
The conceptual basis for the boost-glide concept was first noticed by German artillery officers, who found that their Peenemünder Pfeilgeschosse arrow shells traveled much further when fired from higher altitudes.
This was not entirely unexpected due to geometry and thinner air, but when these factors were accounted for, they still could not explain the much greater ranges being seen.
Investigations at Peenemünde led them to discover that the longer trajectories in the thinner high-altitude air resulted in the shell having an angle of attack that produced aerodynamic lift at supersonic speeds.
At the time this was considered highly undesirable because it made the trajectory very difficult to calculate, but its possible application for extending range was not lost on the observers.
In June 1939, Kurt Patt of Klaus Riedel's design office at Peenemünde proposed wings for converting rocket speed and altitude into aerodynamic lift and range.
He calculated that this would roughly double range of the A-4 rockets from 275 kilometres (171 mi) to about 550 kilometres (340 mi).
Early development was considered under the A-9 name, although little work other than wind tunnel studies at the Zeppelin-Staaken company would be carried out during the next few years.
Low-level research continued until 1942 when it was cancelled.
The earliest known proposal for the boost-glide concept for truly long-range use dates to the 1941 Silbervogel.
A proposal by Eugen Sänger for a rocket powered bomber able to attack New York City from bases in Germany then fly on for landing somewhere in the Pacific Ocean held by the Empire of Japan.
The idea would be to use the vehicle's wings to generate lift and pull up into a new ballistic trajectory, exiting the atmosphere again and giving the vehicle time to cool off between the skips.
It was later demonstrated that the heating load during the skips was much higher than initially calculated, and would have melted the spacecraft.
In 1943, the A-9 work was dusted off again, this time under the name A-4b.
It has been suggested this was either because it was now based on an otherwise unmodified A-4, or because the A-4 program had "national priority" by this time, and placing the development under the A-4 name guaranteed funding.
A-4b
used swept wings in order to extend the range of the V2 enough to allow attacks on UK cities in the Midlands or to reach London from areas deeper within Germany.
The A-9 was originally similar, but later featured long ogival delta shaped wings instead of the more conventional swept ones.
This design was adapted as a crewed upper stage for the A-9/A-10 intercontinental missile, which would glide from a point over the Atlantic with just enough range to bomb New York before the pilot bailed out.

=== Post-war development ===
In the immediate post-war era, Soviet rocket engineer Aleksei Isaev found a copy of an updated August 1944 report on the Silbervogel concept.
He had the paper translated to Russian, and it eventually came to the attention of Joseph Stalin who was intensely interested in the concept of an antipodal bomber.
In 1946, he sent his son Vasily Stalin and scientist Grigori Tokaty, who had also worked on winged rockets before the war, to visit Sänger and Irene Bredt in Paris and attempt to convince them to join a new effort in the Soviet Union.
Sänger and Bredt turned down the invitation.
In November 1946, the Soviets formed the NII-1 design bureau under Mstislav Keldysh to develop their own version without Sänger and Bredt.
Their early work convinced them to convert from a rocket powered hypersonic skip-glide concept to a ramjet powered supersonic cruise missile, not unlike the Navaho being developed in the United States during the same period.
Development continued for a time as the Keldysh bomber, but improvements in conventional ballistic missiles ultimately rendered the project unnecessary.
In the United States, the skip-glide concept was advocated by many of the German scientists who moved there, primarily Walter Dornberger and Krafft Ehricke at Bell Aircraft.
In 1952, Bell proposed a bomber concept that was essentially a vertical launch version of Silbervogel known as Bomi.
This led to a number of follow-on concepts during the 1950s, including Robo, Hywards, Brass Bell, and ultimately the Boeing X-20 Dyna-Soar.
Earlier designs were generally bombers, while later models were aimed at reconnaissance or other roles.
Dornberger and Ehricke also collaborated on a 1955 Popular Science article pitching the idea for airliner use.
The introduction of successful intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) in the offensive role ended any interest in the skip-glide bomber concepts, as did the reconnaissance satellite for the spyplane roles.
The X-20 space fighter saw continued interest through the 1960s, but was ultimately the victim of budget cuts; after another review in March 1963, Robert McNamara canceled the program in December, noting that after $400 million had been spent they still had no mission for it to fulfill.
===
Missile use ===
Through the 1960s, the skip-glide concept saw interest not as a way to extend range, which was no longer a concern with modern missiles, but as the basis for maneuverable reentry vehicles for ICBMs.
The primary goal was to have the RV change its path during reentry so that anti-ballistic missiles (ABMs) would not be able to track their movements rapidly enough for a successful interception.
The first known example was the Alpha Draco tests of 1959, followed by the Boost Glide Reentry Vehicle (BGRV) test series, ASSET and PRIME.This research was eventually put to use in the Pershing II's MARV reentry vehicle.
In this case, there is no extended gliding phase; the warhead uses lift only for short periods to adjust its trajectory.
This is used late in the reentry process, combining data from a Singer Kearfott inertial navigation system with a Goodyear Aerospace active radar.
Similar concepts have been developed for most nuclear-armed nations' theatre ballistic missiles.

The Soviet Union had also invested some effort in the development of MARV to avoid US ABMs, but the closure of the US defenses in the 1970s meant there was no reason to continue this program.
Things changed in the 2000s with the introduction of the US's Ground-Based Midcourse Defense, which led Russia to reanimate this work.
The vehicle, referred to as Object 4202 in the Soviet era, was reported in October 2016 to have had a successful test.
The system was revealed publicly on 1 March 2018 as the hypersonic glide vehicle (HGV) Avangard (Russian: Авангард; English: Vanguard), which officially entered active service as an ICBM payload on 27 December 2019.
Vladimir Putin announced that Avangard had entered serial production, claiming that its maneuvrability makes it invulnerable to all current missile defences.
China has also developed a boost-glide warhead, the DF-ZF (known to US intelligence as "WU-14").
In contrast to the US and Russian MARV designs, the DF-ZF's primary goal is to use boost-glide to extend range while flying at lower altitudes than would be used to reach the same target using a purely ballistic path.
This is intended to keep it out of the sight of the US Navy's Aegis Combat System radars as long as possible, and thereby decrease the time that system has to respond to an attack.
DF-ZF was officially unveiled on 1 October 2019.
Similar efforts by Russia led to the Kholod and GLL-8 Igla hypersonic test projects, and more recently the Yu-71 hypersonic glide vehicle which can be carried by RS-28 Sarmat.
Boost-glide became the topic of some interest as a possible solution to the US Prompt Global Strike (PGS) requirement, which seeks a weapon that can hit a target anywhere on the Earth within one hour of launch from the United States.
PGS does not define the mode of operation, and current studies include Advanced Hypersonic Weapon boost-glide warhead, Falcon HTV-2 hypersonic aircraft, and submarine-launched missiles.
Lockheed Martin is developing this concept as the hypersonic AGM-183A ARRW.

====
Countermeasures ====
Boost-glide weapons are generally designed to avoid existing missile defense systems, either by continually maneuvering or by flying at lower altitudes to reduce warning time.
This generally makes such weapons easier to intercept using defensive systems intended for lower-altitude "low-tier" targets.
Flying at lower speeds than short-range ballistic missile warheads makes them easier to attack.
Those that approach with very low terminal attack profiles are even subject to attack by modern hypervelocity guns and railguns.
However, Russian sources claim that its Avangard HGV travels at Mach 27 and "constantly changes its course and altitude while it flies through the atmosphere, chaotically zigzagging on its path to its target, making it impossible to predict the weapon's location", thus making it supposedly "invulnerable to interception".

===
Reentry vehicle use ===
The technique was used by the Soviet Zond series of circumlunar spacecraft, which used one skip before landing.
In this case a true skip was required in order to allow the spacecraft to reach the higher-latitude landing areas.
Zond 6, Zond 7 and Zond 8 made successful skip entries, although Zond 5 did not.
The Chang'e 5-T1, which flew mission profiles similar to Zond, also used this technique.

The Apollo Command Module used a skip-like concept to lower the heating loads on the vehicle by extending the re-entry time, but the spacecraft did not leave the atmosphere again and there has been considerable debate whether this makes it a true skip profile.
NASA referred to it simply as "lifting entry".
A true multi-skip profile was considered as part of the Apollo Skip Guidance concept, but this was not used on any crewed flights.
The concept continues to appear on more modern vehicles like the Orion spacecraft, using onboard computers.

==
Flight mechanics ==
Using simplified equations of motion and assuming that during the atmospheric flight both drag and lift forces will be much larger than the gravity force acting on the vehicle, the following analytical relations for a skip reentry flight can be derived:
  
    
      
        
          γ
F
          
        
        =
        −
        
          γ
          
            E
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle
\gamma _{F}=-\gamma _{E}}
  
Where gamma is the flightpath angle relative to the local horizontal, the subscript E indicates the conditions at the start of the entry and
the subscript F indicates the conditions at the end of the entry flight.

The velocity V before and after
the entry can be derived to relate as follows:
V
              
                F
V
E
              
            
          
        
        =
e
2
γ
                  
                    E
L
                
                  /
D
              
            
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle {\frac {V_{F}}{V_{E}}}=e^{\frac
{2\gamma _{E}}{L/D}}}
  
Where L/D equals the lift-to-drag ratio of the vehicle.

==
Existing or in development ==
Russian Hypersonic Glide Vehicle Avangard developed and deployed
Chinese Hypersonic Glide Vehicle DF-ZF developed and deployed
US Hypersonic Glide Vehicle HTV-2 in development
Indian Hypersonic Glide Vehicle
HGV-202F
Japanese Hypersonic Glide Vehicle Hyper Velocity Gliding Projectile (HVGP)
Brazilian Hypersonic Glide Vehicle 14-X in development
French Hypersonic Glide Vehicle VMAX in development


==
See also ==
High Speed Strike Weapon (HSSW) (USA)
Prompt Global Strike (PGS) (USA)
Alpha Draco (USA)
ArcLight (missile) (USA)
DARPA Falcon Project (USA)
Boeing X-51 Waverider (USA)
North American
X-15 (USA)
Tupolev Tu-130
(Russia)
BrahMos-II (India / Russia)
Hypersonic Technology Demonstrator Vehicle (India)
Multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===
===
Bibliography ===
Neufeld, Michael (1995).
The Rocket and the Reich:
Peenemünde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile Era.
Simon and Schuster.
ISBN 9780029228951.

Yengst, William (April 2010).
Lightning Bolts:
First Maneuvering Reentry Vehicles.
Tate Publishing.
ISBN 9781615665471.
Angel Has Fallen is a 2019 American action thriller film directed by Ric Roman Waugh.
It is the third installment in the Has Fallen film series, following Olympus
Has Fallen (2013) and London Has Fallen (2016).
The film stars are Gerard Butler, Morgan Freeman, Jada Pinkett Smith, Lance Reddick, Tim Blake Nelson, Piper Perabo, Nick Nolte, and Danny Huston.
The plot again follows United States Secret Service agent Mike Banning as he races against time to clear his name after being framed for a drone attack on the President of the United States, Allan Trumbull.

The film was officially announced in October 2016, and Roman Waugh was hired in July 2017.
New members of the cast were added in early 2018, and filming began in February of that year around Bulgaria and the United Kingdom.

The film was released in the United States on August 23, 2019, by Lionsgate.
It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $146 million worldwide.
Plans for future sequels and TV spin-offs are in development.

==
Plot ==
Secret Service agent Mike Banning (Gerard Butler) undergoes training at a military facility in Virginia, owned by his former Army Ranger commanding officer Wade Jennings
(Danny Huston), now CEO of private military company Salient Global.
He is recommended for the position of Secret Service Director by President Allan Trumbull (Morgan Freeman), to replace retiring Director David Gentry (Lance Reddick), but hides the fact that he suffers from migraines and insomnia and takes painkillers to cope with chronic back pain from injuries sustained in Iraq.

While Trumbull is on a private fishing trip at Queen's Lake in Williamsburg, Virginia, a swarm of armed drones attack and overwhelm his protection detail, with only Banning surviving and saving the president.
Both men are incapacitated, but Banning recovers while Trumbull is left in a coma.
FBI special agent Helen Thompson (Jada Pinkett Smith) is presented with evidence implicating Banning in the attack, including traces of his hair and DNA found in the discarded van used to transport the drones, leading to his arrest.
En route to a detention facility, Banning's transport is ambushed, but he escapes after killing the assailants and unmasking them as mercenaries from Salient Global with whom he partook in the training exercise.
Realizing that Jennings has betrayed and framed him, he calls his wife Leah (Piper Perabo), letting her know he is alive and determined to expose the real perpetrator.
The call alerts Thompson to Banning's location, leading to a car chase by numerous police officers.
Banning manages to slip away into the night again, setting out the next morning to his Vietnam veteran father's cabin in the backwoods of White Hall, West Virginia.

At the White House, Vice President Martin Kirby (Tim Blake Nelson), now acting president, reveals to the press that Banning is responsible for the assassination attempt with support from the Russian government.
Banning and his father Clay
(Nick Nolte) observe Salient mercenaries approaching the house on surveillance cameras.
Clay detonates multiple explosives around the perimeter, killing the would-be attackers as he and Banning escape.
Banning reveals to Clay that he has a wife and daughter.
Leah and her daughter are on the verge of being kidnapped by Salient commandos when Clay saves them.
Finding the bodies of Jennings' gunmen lined up against Clay's cabin, Thompson deduces that Banning may have been set up after all.
Trumbull awakens from his coma and Kirby is revealed to be Jennings' secret co-conspirator, planning to retaliate for Trumbull's "attempted assassination" by declaring Cold War II.
Thompson and another agent Ramirez (Joseph Millson) meet Jennings on an airfield, but Jennings kills both of them.

Banning reaches the hospital and gives himself up, but Trumbull orders his release.
Banning leads Trumbull to safety with help from Gentry and other loyal agents as Jennings destroys the hospital's ICU by increasing the oxygen and nitrogen supply to unstable levels, causing a massive explosion that levels the hospital.
Banning hides Trumbull and Gentry as Jennings' men pursue them.
In an extended gun battle, Salient Global kills most of Trumbull's security detail, but Banning ambushes a flanking attempt and eventually the mercenaries are forced to retreat after government reinforcements arrive.
A handful of them, led by Jennings, are gathering on the rooftop to escape in a helicopter, when Banning blows up the helicopter with a grenade launcher.
Only Jennings survives the explosion, leaving the two of them to fight it out.
They engage in hand-to-hand combat ending with Banning fatally stabbing Jennings.
The remainder of Jennings' men are either killed in the firefight or arrested by U.S. federal law enforcement officers.

Banning is exonerated while Trumbull and Gentry arrest Kirby for treason, revealing that Jennings had kept detailed records of Kirby's involvement, as an insurance policy, and which is uncovered by Thompson.
Clay decides to live with Banning and his family.
Feeling guilty over his failure to protect Trumbull and concealing his ailments, Banning offers his resignation, but Trumbull forgives him and offers Banning the promotion to Director of the Secret Service, which he proudly accepts.

In the mid-credits scene, Banning convinces his father to try therapy at the Zero Gravity Center together.
There, they are placed in pools and float in water, exchanging comments until (and after) the lights go out.

== Cast ==
Gerard Butler as Secret Service Agent Mike Banning, Clay's son and Leah's husband.

Morgan Freeman as President Allan Trumbull
Jada Pinkett Smith as FBI Agent Helen Thompson
Lance Reddick as Secret Service Director David Gentry
Tim Blake Nelson as Vice President Martin Kirby
Piper Perabo as Leah Banning, Mike's wife.
Perabo replaced Radha Mitchell, who played the role in the previous films, due to Mitchell's scheduling conflicts.

Nick Nolte as Clay Banning, a Vietnam veteran Army Ranger/Tunnel Rat and Mike's estranged father who abandoned him at a young age.
Since then, he has taken up living in the woods all over the U.S.
Danny Huston as Wade Jennings, Mike's former Ranger commanding officer and the leader of Salient Global.

Frederick Schmidt as Travis Cole, head of security of Salient Global and Jennings' right-hand man.

Joseph Millson as FBI Agent Ramirez
Ori Pfeffer as Secret Service Agent Murphy
Mark Arnold as CIA Director James Haskell
Michael Landes as White House Chief of Staff Sam Wilcox
Chris Browning as Militia man
Jessica Cobley as Lynne Banning, Mike and Leah's daughter
Rocci Williams as Bruno, one of Jennings' soldiers


==
Production ==
On October 28, 2016, it was announced that a third Fallen installment, titled Angel Has Fallen, was in development, with Gerard Butler reprising his roles of both lead actor and producer.
On July 25, 2017, Ric Roman Waugh was announced as director.
On January 10, 2018, Holt McCallany was set to play Wade Jennings, an ex-military turned head of a technology company.
However, he later had to drop out of his role due to scheduling conflicts with the show Mindhunter, and was replaced by Danny Huston.
A week later, Jada Pinkett Smith and Tim Blake Nelson were confirmed added, and filming was scheduled to start on February 7, 2018.
On February 13, 2018, Piper Perabo joined the cast.
On March 12, 2018, Lance Reddick was set to play Secret Service Director Gentry.
Aaron Eckhart, who had played president Benjamin Asher in the first two films, announced he would not return in his role.
On March 21, 2018, Michael Landes was cast as White House Chief of Staff Sam Wilcox.
On January 22, 2019, David Buckley was announced as the film's composer, replacing Trevor Morris, who scored the previous two films.
Filming on Angel Has Fallen commenced at Virginia Water Lake, and continued throughout the United Kingdom and Bulgaria.
Filming also took place at Pinewood Studios, Bray Studios, Longcross Studios and Nu Boyana Film Studios.

==
Release ==
The film was released in the United States on August 23, 2019.
===
Box office ==
=
Angel Has Fallen grossed $69 million in the United States and Canada, and $78.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $147.5 million.
In the United States and Canada, the film was projected to gross $13–15 million from 3,286 theaters in its opening weekend.
It made $7.9 million on its first day.
This included $1.5 million from Thursday night previews, the highest of the series.
It went on to debut to $21.3 million, finishing first and over-performing.
It was Butler's first time atop the box office since 300 (2007), and was just below the opening of London Has Fallen ($21.6 million).
The film remained in first place the following weekend, grossing $11.8 million, as well as $3 million on Labor Day.
The film was finally dethroned in its third weekend, grossing $6 million and finishing second, behind newcomer
It Chapter Two.
===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 38% based on 186 reviews, with an average rating of 5.00/10.
The website's critical consensus reads: "
Cut from the same rough cloth as its predecessors, Angel Has Fallen rounds out a mostly forgettable action trilogy in fittingly mediocre fashion.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews."
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score earned by its predecessors, while those at PostTrak gave it an average 4.5 out of 5 stars and a 64% "definite recommend.
"Todd
McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that the film, "may not be appreciably better than the first two installments ..., but it's actually more fun — first and foremost because of a vastly amusing turn by Nick Nolte as Gerard Butler's eccentric Vietnam vet old coot father."
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club gave the film a grade C, and called it a "dramatic improvement" though was critical of the action sequences, saying, "they all fall victim to having too much repetitive editing and not enough kinetic energy, a problem that no amount of onscreen firepower, twisted wreckage, or offbeat overhead camera angles can solve."
David Ehrlich of IndieWire gave the film a "D+", specifying that "[w]ith Nolte as his bonkers dad, Gerard Butler's mediocre action franchise and his mediocre American accent find a mediocre conclusion."
==
Future ==
In November 2019, series producer Alan Siegel announced plans for a fourth, fifth and sixth film, as well as local-language TV spin-offs that would tie-in with the theatrical features.
In November 2020 it was revealed at the American Film Market that a fourth film was in development with Butler returning titled Night
Has Fallen.

== See also ==
Olympus Has Fallen
London Has Fallen
List of films featuring drones


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Angel Has Fallen at IMDb
Angel Has Fallen at Box Office Mojo
Has Fallen is an American action film series starring Gerard Butler as United States Secret Service agent Mike Banning.
The series includes the films Olympus Has Fallen (2013), London Has Fallen (2016), and Angel Has Fallen (2019).
The films also stars Aaron Eckhart as U.S. President Benjamin Asher, and Morgan Freeman as the Speaker of the House (and eventual President) Allan Trumbull.
The films have received generally mixed critical reception and have grossed a combined total of $523 million worldwide.

The film series will continue, as Butler has signed on for three more feature films.
With plans to expand into a franchise, producers have various foreign, local-language, TV spin-offs in development.

==
Films ==


===
Olympus Has Fallen (2013) ===
Disgraced Secret Service agent (and former presidential guard)
Mike Banning (Gerard Butler) finds himself trapped inside the White House when North Korean terrorists attack.
Using his inside knowledge, Banning must work with national security to rescue the President from his kidnappers.

===
London Has Fallen (2016) ===
In London for the British Prime Minister's funeral, Mike Banning discovers a plot to assassinate all the attending world leaders ordered by a Pakistani terrorist leader and his son.

===
Angel Has Fallen (2019) ===
Mike Banning is framed for the attempt to assassinate the President by a rogue private military company and must race against time to clear his name while uncovering the real threat.

===
Night Has Fallen (TBA) ===
In November 2019, Alan Siegel announced that three additional Has Fallen films are in development.
In November 2020 the fourth film, titled Night
Has Fallen, was given the greenlight with Butler confirmed to reprise his role as Mike Banning in addition to serving as producer.

Waugh will return to the series as director, with a script he co-wrote with Kamen.
The project will be a joint-venture production between G-BASE, Eclectic Pictures, Campbell Grobman Films, and Millennium Media.
Alan Siegel, Heidi Jo Markel, Les Weldon, Jeffrey Greenstein, Jonathan Yunger, and Yariv Lerner will also serve as producers.

===
Future ===
Following Night
Has Fallen, two more movies will follow.
In addition to the movies, television spin-offs are being considered.
Because of the film series' popularity in other territories, he also announced plans for various television series to debut in foreign countries, with each show's local mother tongues to be the spoken languages.
Siegel stated that the intent for TV show installments, would be to expand the franchise and add additional characters to appear in future films.
In November 2020, producer Greenstein confirmed development for a television series is on-going.

== Cast and characters ==


==
Additional crew and production details ==


==
Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===


===
Critical and public response ===


==
References ==
London Has Fallen is a 2016 American action thriller film directed by Babak Najafi and written by Creighton Rothenberger, Katrin Benedikt, Chad St. John and Christian Gudegast.
It is a sequel to Antoine Fuqua's 2013 film Olympus Has Fallen and stars Gerard Butler, Aaron Eckhart and Morgan Freeman, with Alon Moni Aboutboul, Angela Bassett, Robert Forster, Jackie Earle Haley, Melissa Leo, Radha Mitchell, Sean O'Bryan, Waleed Zuaiter and Charlotte Riley in supporting roles.
It is the second installment in the Has Fallen film series.
The film follows a plot to assassinate the world leaders of the G7 as they attend the British Prime Minister's funeral in London, and Secret Service agent Mike Banning's efforts to protect US President Benjamin Asher from being killed by the terrorists.

Filming began in London on October 24, 2014.
A Christmas break started in November with filming resuming in February 2015.
The film was released by Focus Features under their recently revived Gramercy Pictures label on March 4, 2016, and grossed $205 million worldwide.
However, the critical reception was generally negative, with Variety accusing it of fear-mongering and "terrorsploitation" while The A.V. Club named it worst film of the year.

A third film, titled Angel Has Fallen, was released on August 23, 2019.

==
Plot ==
G8 intelligence services locate Pakistani arms trafficker and terrorist mastermind Aamir Barkawi
(Alon Moni Aboutboul) at his compound on the outskirts of Lahore, and authorize a US Air Force drone strike during his daughter's wedding, killing Barkawi's family and seemingly Barkawi himself.

Two years later, British Prime Minister James Wilson suddenly dies, and the G7 prepare to attend his funeral in London.
Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs (Angela Bassett) assigns agent Mike Banning (Gerard Butler) to lead American President Benjamin Asher's (Aaron Eckhart) overseas security detail, even though Banning's wife Leah (Radha Mitchell) is due to give birth in a few weeks.
The entourage arrives via Air Force One at Stansted Airport, and Banning arranges an earlier arrival at Somerset House in London via Marine One.

As Asher's Presidential State Car arrives at St Paul's Cathedral, a group of mercenaries led by Barkawi's son Kamran (Waleed Zuaiter) launch coordinated attacks on the city disguised as Metropolitan Police, the Queen's Guardsmen, and other first responders, killing five Western leaders, damaging major landmarks and generating mass panic.
Asher's early arrival throws off the St. Paul's attack, and Banning returns him and Jacobs to Marine One.
The terrorists destroy the helicopter's escorts with Stinger missiles, forcing the damaged helicopter to crash-land in Hyde Park.
Fatally injured, Jacobs makes Banning promise to stay alive for his unborn child, and to punish those responsible for the attack.
Banning escorts Asher into the London Underground as the city's power is lost and residents shelter indoors.

In Washington, D.C., American Vice President Allan Trumbull (Morgan Freeman) investigates the incident with British authorities while trying to track down the President.
He receives a call from Barkawi, still alive after all and operating in Sanaa.
Seeking revenge for the drone strike that killed his daughter, and having poisoned Wilson to lure the G7 to London, Barkawi knows Asher is still alive, and promises that if Kamran captures him, he will broadcast Asher's execution online.
Trumbull orders his staff to locate Barkawi's known operatives and find any connection to the attack, while British authorities stand down all first responders so any left in the open can be identified as terrorists.

After leaving a sign to be picked up by satellite, Banning leads Asher to an MI6 safe-house, where agent Jacquelin "Jax" Marshall (Charlotte Riley) briefs them.
Marshall receives a voice message from Trumbull that they saw Banning's sign and an extraction team is en route.
Security monitors display an approaching Delta Force team, but Banning realizes they have arrived too soon and are actually Barkawi’s mercenaries.
He fights and kills all of them and drives away with Asher, but their car is struck before they can reach the US Embassy, and Asher is taken.
Banning is rescued by the combined Delta/SAS extraction team, who suspect a mole in the British government.

Trumbull's staff identify a building owned by one of Barkawi's front companies, drawing massive power despite being unoccupied, and realize it is Kamran's headquarters.
Banning joins the extraction team to infiltrate the building, arriving seconds before Kamran can decapitate Asher.
Kamran escapes when his hacker Sultan Mansoor (Mehdi Dehbi) drops a grenade with his dying breath, forcing Banning to protect Asher from the blast.
Banning and Asher escape just before the building is destroyed by the Delta Force/SAS squad, killing Kamran and the remaining terrorists.
Marshall and British authorities restore London's security system and, discovering that MI5 Intelligence Chief John Lancaster (Patrick Kennedy) was Barkawi's mole, Marshall kills him when he resists arrest.
Trumbull tells Barkawi that his plan failed, moments before US federal authorities attack the building armed with another drone strike, killing Barkawi and the remaining members of his terrorist group.

Two weeks later, Banning is home spending time with Leah and their newborn child Lynne, named after Jacobs.
As Banning contemplates sending a letter of resignation, he watches Trumbull speak on television regarding the recent events, with a message that the U.S. will prevail.
Inspired, Banning deletes the letter.

== Cast ==
Gerard Butler as
Secret Service Agent Mike Banning
Aaron Eckhart as President Benjamin Asher
Morgan Freeman as Vice President Allan Trumbull
Alon Moni Aboutboul as Aamir Barkawi, a Pakistani international arms trafficker and terrorist mastermind who is No.
6 on the FBI's 10 Most Wanted list.

Angela Bassett as Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs
Robert Forster as
US Army General Edward Clegg, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Jackie Earle Haley as White House Deputy Chief of Staff DC Mason
Melissa Leo as Secretary of Defense Ruth McMillan
Radha Mitchell as Leah Banning, Mike's wife.

Sean O'Bryan as NSA Deputy Director Ray Monroe
Charlotte Riley as MI6 Agent Jacquelin "Jax" Marshall
Waleed Zuaiter as Kamran Barkawi, Aamir's son and sub-commander
Colin Salmon
as Commissioner Sir Kevin Hazard, head of the Metropolitan Police
Bryan Larkin as SAS Captain
Will Davies
Patrick Kennedy as MI5 Counter-Intelligence Chief John Lancaster
Mehdi Dehbi as Sultan Mansoor, the terrorist hacker
Adel Bencherif as Raza Mansoor, Sultan's brother and a terrorist
Michael Wildman as Secret Service Agent Voight
Andrew Pleavin as Secret Service Agent Bronson
Deborah Grant as Doris, Leah's mother
Clarkson Guy Williams as British Prime Minister Leighton Clarkson
Penny Downie as Home Secretary Rose Kenter
Philip Delancy as French President Jacques Mainard
Alex Giannini as Italian Prime Minister Antonio Gusto.
It was Giannini's last movie role before his death in October 2, 2015.

Elsa Mollien as Mrs Viviana Gusto
Nancy Baldwin as German Chancellor Agnes Bruckner
Nigel Whitmey as Canadian Prime Minister Robert Bowman
Julia Montgomery Brown as Mrs Bowman
Tsuwayuki Saotome as Japanese Prime Minister Tsutomu Nakushima
Lawrence O'Donnell as himself (uncredited)


==
Production
==
===
Casting ===
Butler, Eckhart, Freeman, Bassett, Leo, Forster and Mitchell reprised their roles from Olympus
Has Fallen.
Production had been scheduled to begin in May 2015 in London, with Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt returning to write the script.
Director Antoine Fuqua, however, did not return, due to his commitments with The Equalizer.
On May 1, 2014, it was announced Focus Features had acquired distribution rights to the sequel, and would release the film on October 2, 2015.
On August 18, 2014, it was announced that Charlie Countryman director Fredrik Bond would take over direction from Fuqua, but Bond left the film on September 18, six weeks before the shooting was to begin.
On September 28, director Babak Najafi signed on to direct the film.
On October 10, Jackie Earle Haley joined the film to play Deputy Chief Mason.
On November 12, Mehdi Dehbi joined the film to play Sultan Mansoor, the youngest of three brothers whose life has been forever changed after a drone strike.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on October 24, 2014, in London.
Four weeks of shooting were to take place, involving actors Freeman, Eckhart, Bassett and Melissa Leo, before a break for Christmas.
Butler and Angela Bassett were seen filming in Somerset House.
Butler stated in an interview that the movie was also filmed in India and was to continue in Bulgaria.
Then President of Bulgaria, Rosen Plevneliev, visited the set of London
Has Fallen during filming at Boyana Cinema Center in Bulgaria.
Filming lasted through April 2015.

===
Score ===
The music was composed and conducted by Trevor Morris, who provided the score for the first film.
The record was released on March 4, 2016, by Back Lot Music.
The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios with The Chamber Orchestra of London.

All music composed by Trevor Morris.

==
Release ==
On May 20, 2015, Focus Features relaunched their Gramercy Pictures label for action, horror, and science fiction releases, with
London Has Fallen being one of Gramercy's first titles.
The film was planned for an October 2, 2015, release, however, on June 12, 2015, it was announced that the film had been moved back to January 22, 2016, to avoid competition with The Martian, which swapped its original November 25 release date with Victor Frankenstein.
On July 1, 2015, the film's teaser trailer was released.
The timing of the release was criticized as "insensitive" by the Chair of the Tavistock Square Memorial Trust, Philip Nelson, as it coincided with the week of the 10th anniversary of the 7 July 2005
London bombings, in which 52 people were killed, and with the 2015 Sousse attacks, in which 30 British nationals were killed.
On September 16, 2015, the film's release was moved back again to March 4, 2016, because the studios needed more time to finish the film's visual effects.
The U.S. trailer was released on November 5, 2015.
A new theatrical poster of the film was released on January 21, 2016.

==
Home media ==
London Has Fallen was released on Blu-ray and DVD on June 14, 2016.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
London Has Fallen grossed $62.7 million in North America and $143.2 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $205.9 million, against a budget of $60 million.
The film outgrossed its predecessor's total of $170 million.

In the United States and Canada, pre-release tracking suggested the film would gross $20–23 million from 3,490 theaters in its opening weekend, trailing fellow newcomer Zootopia ($60–70 million projection) but besting Whiskey Tango Foxtrot ($10–12 million projection).
The film made $850,000 from its Thursday night previews and $7.6 million on its first day.
It went on to gross $21.6 million in its opening weekend, finishing second at the box office behind Zootopia ($75 million).

===
Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 28% based on 197 reviews, with an average rating of 4.10/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "London Has Fallen traps a talented cast – and all who dare to see it – in a mid-1990s basic-cable nightmare of a film loaded with xenophobia, and threadbare action-thriller clichés.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a score of 28 out of 100, based on reviews from 35 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the first film.
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote: "
A murky, brain-dead stab-a-thon packed with so many inane chases, laughable special effects, and mismatched stock footage shots that it begs to be made into a drinking game
, London Has Fallen is one of those rare films that is good at absolutely nothing."
The A.V. Club later picked it as their worst film of the year.

===
Controversy ===
Variety described London Has Fallen as "effortlessly racist" invoking "familiar Islamophobia", a "terrorsploitation" fantasy designed to spread fear after the November 2015 Paris attacks, and "ugly, reactionary fear-mongering."

Meanwhile, The Hollywood Reporter styled it as "major world capitals destruction porn sub-genre" that feeds a "paranoia".
The film has been called "extremely insensitive" by families of the victims of the 7/7 bombings after an early trailer was released ahead of the 10th anniversary of the attacks.

==
Sequel ==
On October 26, 2016, it was announced that a sequel titled Angel Has Fallen is in development, with Gerard Butler reprising his role, as well as once again acting as a producer on the film.
On July 25, 2017, Ric Roman Waugh was announced as director for Angel Has Fallen.
On January 10, 2018, Holt McCallany joined the cast as Wade Jennings, an ex-military turned head of a technology company, but was replaced later by Danny Huston.
On January 18, 2018, Jada Pinkett Smith and Tim Blake Nelson were confirmed to appear in Angel Has Fallen.
On February 13, 2018, Piper Perabo joined the cast.
Filming started on February 7, 2018 in Virginia Water Lake.
The film was released on August 23, 2019.

== See also ==
List of fictional Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
London Has Fallen at IMDb
London Has Fallen at Box Office Mojo
London Has Fallen at Rotten Tomatoes
London Has Fallen at Metacritic
London Has Fallen at AllMovie
London Has Fallen at the TCM Movie Database
Olympus Has Fallen is a 2013 American action thriller film directed by Antoine Fuqua from a screenplay written by Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt.

It is the first installment in the Has Fallen film series.
The film stars Gerard Butler, Aaron Eckhart, Morgan Freeman, Angela Bassett, Robert Forster, Cole Hauser, Ashley Judd, Melissa Leo, Dylan McDermott, Radha Mitchell, and Rick Yune.
The plot depicts a North Korean-led guerrilla assault on the White House, and focuses on disgraced United States Secret Service agent Mike Banning's efforts to rescue  U.S. President Benjamin Asher.

The film was released in the United States on March 22, 2013, by FilmDistrict.
It earned $170 million against a $70 million production budget.
The film received mixed reviews from critics, who praised Fuqua's direction and Butler's performance, but criticized the violence and screenplay.
Olympus Has Fallen was one of two films released in 2013 that depicted a terrorist attack against the White House; the other was White House
Down.

A sequel, titled London Has Fallen, was released on March 4, 2016, with the principal cast members reprising their roles.
Another sequel, Angel Has Fallen, was released on August 23, 2019.

==
Plot ==
Former U.S. Army Ranger Mike
Banning is a Secret Service agent assigned to be the chief of the U.S. presidential detail, maintaining a personal, friendly relationship with President Benjamin Asher, First Lady Margaret, and their son Connor.
On a snowy Christmas drive from Camp David to a campaign fundraiser, the car transporting the First Family spins out of control on an icy bridge.
Banning pulls Asher from the vehicle, but fails to save Margaret as she falls to her death.

Eighteen months later, Banning works at the Treasury Department, having been removed from the presidential detail.
During Asher's meeting with South Korean Prime Minister Lee Tae-Woo at the White House, the Koreans for United Freedom (KUF), a North Korean terrorist group led by Kang Yeonsak, mounts an air attack (with an AC-130 gunship) and hundreds of ground assault mercenaries to capture the building and kill most of the White House defense force.
Aided by rogue members of the prime minister's own detail, including former Secret Service agent-turned-private contractor Dave Forbes, they hold Asher and several top officials hostage in the PEOC.
Lee is executed on live video.
Before being killed, agent Roma alerts Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs that "Olympus has fallen."
Banning joins the White House's defenders during KUF's initial assault.
He falls back into the White House, disabling internal surveillance and gaining access to Asher's satellite earphone, which he uses to maintain contact with Jacobs and Speaker of the House Allan Trumbull, now acting president, in the Pentagon's emergency briefing room.

Kang uses Asher's hostage status to force Trumbull to withdraw the Seventh Fleet and U.S. forces from the Korean Peninsula, thus removing American opposition to a third Korean War.
He seeks to detonate the American nuclear arsenal to turn the United States into an irradiated wasteland in revenge for his mother's death.
To do this, he needs the access codes to the Cerberus system, held only by Asher, Secretary of Defense Ruth McMillan, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Admiral Joseph Hoenig, all of whom are inside the PEOC.
Asher orders McMillan and Hoenig to reveal their codes to save their lives, certain that he will not give up his own code.

Authorized to proceed, Banning's first act is to save Connor, whom Kang plans to use to force Asher to reveal his Cerberus code.
Banning finds Connor hiding in the building's walls and sneaks him to safety.
On reconnaissance, Banning kills several of the terrorists, including Forbes.
Army Chief of Staff General Edward Clegg convinces Trumbull to order an aerial SEAL assault on the White House.
The KUF discovers the assault force and activates the advanced Hydra 6 anti-aircraft system.
Kang retaliates by executing Vice President Charlie Rodriguez.

After Banning disables Kang's communications, Kang tries to execute McMillan outside the White House in front of the media, but Banning rescues her.
Banning takes out most of the KUF as they retreat back to the bunker.
With the KUF dwindling, Kang fakes his and Asher's death by sacrificing several of his commandos and the remaining hostages in a helicopter explosion.
Banning sees through the ruse.
With two codes already in hand, Kang eventually cracks Asher's code using a brute-force attack and activates the system.

As Kang and his remaining KUF men attempt to escape, Banning ambushes and kills all of them except Kang.
After Asher is shot, Banning confronts and engages in hand-to-hand combat with Kang.
Asher momentarily distracts Kang, allowing Banning to kill him.
After Asher informs Banning about Cerberus, Banning disables it with the assistance of Trumbull and his staff.

Banning escorts Asher out of the White House to receive medical attention.
Afterwards, Banning is reappointed to the head of the president's security detail as Asher speaks about the aftermath of the attack.

== Cast ==
Gerard Butler as Mike Banning, a former  Army Ranger who becomes a Secret Service agent who heads the president's security detail.

Aaron Eckhart as President Benjamin Asher
Morgan Freeman as Speaker of the House
Allan Trumbull
Rick Yune as Kang Yeonsak, a ruthless North Korean ultra-nationalist mastermind disguised as a South Korean ministerial aide
Angela Bassett as Secret Service Director Lynne Jacobs
Robert Forster as Army General Edward Clegg, Army Chief of Staff
Cole Hauser as Agent Roma, a Secret Service Special Agent in Charge
Finley Jacobsen as Connor Asher, the son of Benjamin and Margaret Asher.

Ashley Judd as First Lady Margaret Asher
Melissa Leo as Secretary of Defense Ruth McMillan
Dylan McDermott as Dave Forbes, a former Secret Service agent now working for South Korean Prime Minister's private security detail
Radha Mitchell as Leah Banning, a nurse and Mike's wife
Sean O'Bryan as NSA Deputy Director Ray Monroe
Lance Broadway as Agent O'Neil, a member of the President's security detail
Tory Kittles as Agent Jones, a member of the President's security detail
Keong Sim as South Korean Prime Minister Lee Tae-Woo
Phil Austin as Vice President Charlie Rodriguez
James Ingersoll as Navy Admiral Joe Hoenig, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Freddy Bosche as Agent Mark Diaz, Secret Service.

Kevin Moon as Cho, Kang's henchman
Malana Lea as Lim, Kang's henchwoman who serves as the technical expert of the group
Sam Medina as Yu, Kang's henchman
Lawrence O'Donnell as himself


== Production
==
Olympus Has Fallen was directed by Antoine Fuqua, based on a script by Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt in their first screenwriting effort.
The production company Millennium Films acquired the spec script in March 2012, and Gerard Butler was cast later in the month as the star of the film.
The rest of the characters were cast throughout June and July.

In 2012, Millennium Films competed against Sony Pictures, which was producing White House Down (also about a takeover of the White House) to complete casting and to begin filming.
Filming began in Shreveport, Louisiana, in mid-July 2012.
Because Olympus Has Fallen was filmed so far from its actual setting of Washington, D.C.
, the entire production relied heavily upon visual effects, particularly computer-generated imagery.
For example, computers were used to create nearly all of the opening sequence in which the First Lady is killed in a car accident, with chroma key greenscreen technology used to composite the actors into the computer-generated snowy scenery.
For scenes where actors walked in or out of the White House, a first-floor façade and entrance were built; computers added the second floor, roof, and downtown D.C. cityscape.
Action scenes with the White House in the background were filmed in open fields and the White House and D.C. were added in post-production.

==
Score ==
The score was composed by Trevor Morris whose past projects included The Tudors and The Borgias.

The score was recorded at Trevor Morris Studios in Santa Monica with the Bratislava Slovak National Orchestra.

The record was released on March 15, 2013 via Relativity Music Group label.

==
Release ==
Olympus Has Fallen was released in the United States on March 22, 2013.
It was initially scheduled for an April 5, 2013 release, but moved to avoid competition with The Heat, which was to open at the same time (its release was later pushed back to June 28).
FilmDistrict distributed the film.
The film's trailer was criticized for using the U.S. Emergency Alert System, and several cable companies were fined by the Federal Communications Commission for airing the ad.
Olympus Has Fallen grossed $98.9 million in the U.S. and Canada and $71.3 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $170.2 million against a budget of $70 million.
In its first weekend, the film earned $30.5 million finishing second at the box office, and exceeded predictions of $23 million.
The film was released to home video in the United States on DVD and Blu-ray formats on August 13, 2013.

It earned $38.2 million in video rental sales in the U.S.


==
Authorship dispute ==
A lawsuit was filed in 2013 by John S. Green against Rothenberger alleging Green was the source of the movie's characters and material.
Rothenberger countersued, seeking a declaration that he was sole author.
The case was eventually settled for $175,000, with Rothenberger retaining the rights to the film.

== Reception ==
Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 49% based on 198 reviews and a weighted average rating of 5.40/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "It's far from original, but
Olympus Has Fallen benefits from Antoine Fuqua's tense direction and a strong performance from Gerard Butler—which might be just enough for action junkies.
"
Metacritic assigns the film a weighted average score of 41 out of 100 based on 30 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.
Richard Roeper compared Olympus
Has Fallen with the Die Hard series for sharing the same style and momentum, calling it as "just too much of a pale Die Hard ripoff."
He gave the film
a C.David Edelstein was much more negative about the film.
While praising Butler's role as a "solid" character, Edelstein criticized the script and the violence of the film, writing "Olympus Has Fallen is a disgusting piece of work, but it certainly hits its marks – it makes you sick with suspense."
==
Sequel ==
Gerard Butler, Morgan Freeman, Aaron Eckhart, Angela Bassett and Radha Mitchell returned for a sequel titled London
Has Fallen revolving around a major terrorist strike on London during the funeral of the British Prime Minister.
Production was scheduled to begin in May 2014 in London, with Creighton Rothenberger and Katrin Benedikt returning to pen the script.
Director Antoine Fuqua, however, did not return due to his commitments on The Equalizer.
On May 1, 2014, it was announced that Focus Features had acquired distribution rights to the sequel and would release it on October 2, 2015, though this was later pushed back to January 22, 2016.
However, the film's release was delayed to March 4, 2016.
On August 18, 2014, it was announced that Charlie Countryman director Fredrik Bond would take over direction from Fuqua, but Bond left the film on September 18, just six weeks before shooting was set to begin.
However, on September 28, 2014, it was announced that Babak Najafi would take over direction of the sequel.
On October 10, 2014, it was announced that Jackie Earle Haley would join London Has Fallen as a Deputy Chief Mason.
Filming for the sequel began on October 24, 2014.
The film was released on March 4, 2016.

== See also ==
Transfer of Power (1999)
The Lions of Lucerne  (2002)
Air Force One  (1997)
White House
Down  (2013)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Olympus Has Fallen at IMDb
Olympus Has Fallen at AllMovie
Olympus Has Fallen at the TCM Movie Database
Olympus Has Fallen at the American Film Institute Catalog
Olympus Has Fallen at Box Office Mojo
Olympus Has Fallen at Rotten Tomatoes
Olympus Has Fallen at Metacritic
Olympus Has Fallen at the Internet Movie Firearms Database
FXGuide
Article on the VFX for Olympus
Has Fallen
Animation World News article on VFX for Olympus Has Fallen
In Abrahamic religions, fallen angels are angels who were expelled from heaven.
The literal term "fallen angel" appears neither in the Bible nor in other Abrahamic scriptures, but is used to describe angels who were cast out of heaven or angels who sinned.
Such angels often tempt humans to sin.

The idea of fallen angels derived from the Book of Enoch, a Jewish pseudepigraph, or the assumption that the "sons of God" (בני האלוהים‎) mentioned in Genesis 6:1–4 are angels.
In the period immediately preceding the composition of the New Testament, some sects of Judaism, as well as many Christian Church Fathers, identified the "sons of God" of Genesis 6:1–4 as fallen angels.
Rabbinic Judaism and Christian authorities after the third century rejected the Enochian writings and the notion of an illicit union between angels and women producing giants.
Christian doctrine states that the sins of fallen angels start before the beginning of human history.
Accordingly, fallen angels became identified with angels who were led by Satan in rebellion against God and equated with demons.
However, during the late Second Temple period, demons were not thought of as the fallen angels themselves, but as the surviving souls of their monstrous offspring.
According to this interpretation, fallen angels have intercourse with human women, giving existence to the Biblical giants.
To purge the world of these creatures, God sends the Great Deluge and their bodies are destroyed.
However, their spiritual parts survive, henceforth roaming the earth as demons.

Evidence for the belief in fallen angels among Muslims can be traced back to reports attributed to some of the companions of Muhammad, such as Ibn Abbas (619–687) and Abdullah ibn Masud (594–653).
At the same time, some Islamic scholars opposed the assumption of fallen angels by stressing out the piety of angels supported by verses of Quran, such as 16:49 and 66:6, although none of these verses declare angels as immune from sin.
One of the first opponents of fallen angels was the early and influential Islamic ascetic Hasan of Basra (642–728).
To support the doctrine of infallible angels, he pointed at verses which stressed the piety of angels, while simultaneously reinterpreting verses which might imply acknowledgement of fallen angels.
For that reason, he read  the term mala'ikah (angels) in reference to Harut and Marut, two possible fallen angels mentioned in 2:102, as malikayn (kings) instead of malā'ikah (angels), depicting them as ordinary men and advocated the belief that Iblis was a jinn and had never been an angel before.
The precise degree of angelic fallibility is not clear even among scholars who accepted fallen angels; according to a common assertion, impeccability applies only to the messengers among angels or as long as they remain angels.
Academic scholars have discussed whether or not the Quranic jinn are identical to the Biblical fallen angels.
Although the different types of spirits in the Quran are sometimes hard to distinguish, the jinn in Islamic traditions seem to differ in their major characteristics from fallen angels.

==
Second Temple period ==
The concept of fallen angels is mostly in works dated to the Second Temple period between 530 BC and 70 AD: in the Book of Enoch, the Book of Jubilees and the Qumran Book of Giants; and perhaps in Genesis 6:1–4.
A reference to heavenly beings called "Watchers" originates in Daniel 4, in which there are three mentions, twice in the singular (v. 13, 23), once in the plural (v. 17), of "watchers, holy ones".
The Ancient Greek word for watchers is ἐγρήγοροι (egrḗgoroi, plural of egrḗgoros), literally translated as "wakeful".
Some scholars consider it most likely that the Jewish tradition of fallen angels predates, even in written form, the composition of Gen 6:1–4.
In the Book of Enoch, these Watchers "fell" after they became "enamored" with human women.
The Second Book of Enoch (Slavonic Enoch) refers to the same beings of the (First) Book of Enoch, now called Grigori in the Greek transcription.
Compared to the other Books of Enoch, fallen angels play a less significant role in 3 Enoch.
3 Enoch mentions only three fallen angels called Azazel, Azza and Uzza.
Similar to The first Book of Enoch, they taught sorcery on earth, causing corruption.
Unlike the first Book of Enoch, there is no mention of the reason for their fall and, according to 3 Enoch 4.6, they also later appear in heaven objecting to the presence of Enoch.

=== 1
Enoch ===
According to 1 Enoch 7.2, the Watchers become "enamoured" with human women and have intercourse with them.
The offspring of these unions, and the knowledge they were giving, corrupt human beings and the earth (1 Enoch 10.11–12).
Eminent among these angels are Shemyaza, their leader, and Azazel.
Like many other fallen angels mentioned in 1 Enoch 8.1–9, Azazel introduces men to "forbidden arts", and it is Azazel who is rebuked by Enoch himself for illicit instructions, as stated in 1 Enoch 13.1.
According to 1 Enoch 10.6, God sends the archangel Raphael to chain Azazel in the desert Dudael as punishment.
Further, Azazel is blamed for the corruption of earth:1 Enoch 10:12: "
All the earth has been corrupted by the effects of the teaching of Azazyel.
To him therefore ascribe the whole crime."

An etiological interpretation of 1 Enoch deals with the origin of evil.
By shifting the origin of mankind's sin and their misdeeds to illicit angel instruction, evil is attributed to something supernatural from without.
This motif, in 1 Enoch, differs from that of later Jewish and Christian theology; in the latter evil is something from within.
According to a paradigmatic interpretation, 1 Enoch might deal with illicit marriages between priests and women.
As evident from Leviticus 21:1–15, priests were prohibited to marry impure women.
Accordingly, the fallen angels in 1 Enoch are the priests counterpart, who defile themselves by marriage.
Just like the angels are expelled from heaven, the priests are excluded from their service at the altar.
Unlike most other apocalyptic writings, 1 Enoch reflects a growing dissatisfaction with the priestly establishments in Jerusalem in 3rd century BC.
The paradigmatic interpretation parallels the Adamic myth in regard of the origin of evil:
In both cases, transcending ones own limitations inherent in their own nature, causes their fall.
This contrasts the etiological interpretation, which implies another power besides God, in heaven.
The latter solution therefore poorly fits into monotheistic thought.
Otherwise, the introduction to illicit knowledge might reflect a rejection of foreign Hellenistic culture.
Accordingly, the fallen angels represent creatures of Greek mythology, which introduced forbidden arts, used by Hellenistic kings and generals, resulting in oppression of Jews.

=== 2
Enoch ===
The concept of fallen angels is also in the Second Book of Enoch.
It tells about Enoch's ascent through the layers of heaven.
During his journey, he encounters fallen angels imprisoned in the 2nd heaven.
At first, he decides to pray for them, but refuses to do so, since he himself as merely human, would not be worthy to pray for angels.
In the 5th heaven however, he meets other rebellious angels, here called Grigori, remaining in grief, not joining the heavenly hosts in song.
Enoch tries to cheer them up by telling about his prayers for their fellow angels and thereupon they join the heavenly liturgy.
Strikingly, the text refers to the leader of the Grigori as Satanail and not as Azael or Shemyaza, as in the other Books of Enoch.
But the Grigori are identified with the Watchers of 1 Enoch.
The narration of the Grigori in 2 Enoch 18:1–7, who went down on to earth, married women and "befouled the earth with their deeds", resulting in their confinement under the earth, shows that the author of 2 Enoch knew about the stories in 1 Enoch.
The longer recension of 2 Enoch, chapter 29 refers to angels who were "thrown out from the height" when their leader tried to become equal in rank with the Lord's power (2 Enoch 29:1–4), an idea probably taken from Ancient Canaanite religion about Attar, trying to rule the throne of Baal.
The equation of an angel called Satanail with a deity trying to usurp the throne of a higher deity, was also adapted by later Christian in regard to the fall of Satan.

===
Jubilees ===
The Book of Jubilees, an ancient Jewish religious work, accepted as canonical by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church and Beta Israel, refers to the Watchers, who are among the angels created on the first day.
However, unlike the (first) Book of Enoch, the Watchers are commanded by God to descend to earth and to instruct humanity.
It is only after they copulate with human women that they transgress the laws of God.
These illicit unions result in demonic offspring, who battle each other until they die, while the Watchers are bound in the depths of the earth as punishment.
In Jubilees 10:1, another angel called Mastema appears as the leader of the evils spirits.
He asks God to spare some of the demons, so he might use their aid to lead humankind into sin.
Afterwards, he becomes their leader: "'Lord, Creator, let some of them remain before me, and let them harken to my voice, and do all that I shall say unto them; for if some of them are not left to me, I shall not be able to execute the power of my will on the sons of men; for these are for corruption and leading astray before my judgment, for great is the wickedness of the sons of men.'
(
10:8)
Both the (first) Book of Enoch and the Book of Jubilees include the motif of angels introducing evil to humans.
However, unlike the Book of Enoch, the Book of Jubilees does not hold that evil was caused by the fall of angels in the first place, although their introduction to sin is affirmed.
Further, while the fallen angels in the Book of Enoch are acting against God's will, the fallen angels and demons in the Book of Jubilees seem to have no power independent from God but only act within his power.

==
Rabbinic Judaism ==
Although the concept of fallen angels developed from  Judaism during the Second Temple period, rabbis from the second century onward turned against the Enochian writings, probably in order to prevent fellow Jews from worship and veneration of angels.
Thus, while many angels were individualized and sometimes venerated during the Second Temple period, the status of angels was degraded to a class of creatures on the same level of humans, thereby emphasizing the omnipresence of God.
The 2nd-century rabbi Shimon bar Yochai cursed everyone who explained the term Sons of God as angels.
He stated Sons of God were actually sons of judges or sons of nobles.
Evil was no longer attributed to heavenly forces, now it was dealt as an "evil inclination" (yetzer hara) within humans.
However, narrations of fallen angels do appear in later rabbinic writings.
In some Midrashic works, the "evil inclination" is attributed to Samael, who is in charge of several satans in order to test humanity.
Nevertheless, these angels are still subordinate to God; the reacceptance of rebel angels in Midrashic discourse was posterior and probably influenced by the role of fallen angels in Islamic and Christian lore.
The idea of rebel angels in Judaism appears in the Aggadic-Midrashic work Pirke De-Rabbi Eliezer, which shows not one, but two falls of angels.
The first one is attributed to Samael, who refuses to worship Adam and objects to God favoring Adam over the angels, ultimately descending onto Adam and Eve to tempt them into sin.
This seems rooted in the motif of the fall of Iblis in the Quran and the fall of Satan in the Cave of Treasures.
The second fall echoes the Enochian narratives.
Again, the "sons of God" mentioned in Gen 6:1–4 are depicted as angels.
During their fall, their "strength and stature became like the sons of man" and again, they give existence to the giants by intercourse with human women.

===
Kabbalah ===
Although not strictly speaking fallen, evil angels reappear in Kabbalah.
Some of them are named after angels taken from the Enochian writings, such as Samael.
According to the Zohar, just as angels can be created by virtue, evil angels are an incarnation of human vices, which derive from the Qliphoth, the representation of impure forces.
However, the Zohar also recalls a narration of two angels in a fallen state, called Aza and Azael.
These angels are cast down from the heaven after mistrusting Adam for his inclination towards sin.
Once in Earth, they complete the Enochian narrative by teaching magic to humans and producing offspring with them, as well as consorting with Lilith (hailed as "the sinner").
In the narrative, the Zohar affirms but simultaneously prohibits magical practices.
As a punishment, God puts the angels in chains, but they still copulate with the demoness Naamah, who gives birth to demons, evil spirits and witches.

==
Christianity ==


===
Bible ===
Luke 10:18 refers to "Satan falling from heaven" and Matthew 25:41 mentions "the Devil and his angels", who will be thrown into hell.
All Synoptic Gospels identify Satan as the leader of demons.
Paul the Apostle (c. 5 – c. 64 or 67) states in 1 Corinthians 6:3 that there are angels, who will be judged, implying the existence of wicked angels.
2
Peter 2:4 and Jude 1:6 refer paraenetically to angels who have sinned against God and await punishment on Judgement Day.
The Book of Revelation, chapter 12, speaks of Satan as a great red dragon whose "tail swept a third part of the stars of heaven and cast them to the earth".
In verses 7–9, Satan is defeated in the War in Heaven against Michael and his angels: "the great dragon was thrown down, that ancient serpent, who is called the Devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world—he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him".
Nowhere within the New Testament writings, fallen angels are identified with demons.
But by combining the references to Satan, demons and angels, early Christian exegetes equated fallen angels with demons, for which Satan was regarded as the leader.
Origen and other Christian writers linked the fallen morning star of Isaiah 14:12 of the Old Testament to Jesus' statement in Luke 10:18 that he "saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven", as well as a passage about the fall of Satan in Revelation 12:8–9.
The Latin word lucifer, as introduced in the late 4th-century AD Vulgate, gave rise to the name for a fallen angel.
Christian tradition has associated Satan not only with the image of the morning star in Isaiah 14:12, but also with the denouncing in Ezekiel 28:11–19 of the king of Tyre, who is spoken of as having been a "cherub".
The Church Fathers saw these two passages as in some ways parallel, an interpretation also testified in apocryphal and pseudepigraphic works.
However, "no modern evangelical commentary on Isaiah or Ezekiel sees Isaiah 14 or Ezekiel 28 as providing information about the fall of Satan".

===
Early Christianity ===
During the period immediately before the rise of Christianity, the intercourse between the Watchers and human women was often seen as the first fall of the angels.
Christianity stuck to the Enochian writings at least until the third century.
Many Church Fathers such as Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria and Lactantius accepted the association of the angelic descent myth to the "sons of God" passage in Genesis 6:1–4.
However, some ascetics, such as Origen (c. 184 – c. 253), rejected this interpretation.
According to the Church Fathers who accepted the doctrine by Origen, these angels were guilty of having transgressed the limits of their nature and of desiring to leave their heavenly abode to experience sensual experiences.
Irenaeus referred to fallen angels as apostates, who will be punished by an everlasting fire.
Justin Martyr (c. 100 – c. 165) identified pagan deities as fallen angels or their demonic offspring in disguise.
Justin also held them responsible for Christian persecution during the first centuries.
Tertullian and Origen also referred to fallen angels as teachers of astrology.
The Babylonian king, who is described as a fallen "morning star" in Isaiah 14:1–17, was probably the first time identified with a fallen angel by Origen.
This description was interpreted typologically both as an angel and a human king.
The image of the fallen morning star or angel was thereby applied to Satan by early Christian writers, following the equation of Lucifer to Satan in the pre-Christian century.

===
Catholicism ===
By the third century, Christians began to reject the Enochian literature.
The sons of God came to be identified merely with righteous men, more precisely with descendants of Seth who had been seduced by women descended from Cain.
The cause of evil was shifted from the superior powers of angels, to humans themselves, and to the very beginning of history; the expulsion of Satan and his angels on the one hand and the original sin of humans on the other hand.
However, the Book of Watchers, which identified the sons of God with fallen angels, was not rejected by Syriac Christians.
Augustine of Hippo's work
Civitas Dei (5th century) became the major opinion of Western demonology and for the Catholic Church.
He rejected the Enochian writings and stated that the sole origin of fallen angels was the rebellion of Satan.
As a result, fallen angels came to be equated with demons and depicted as non-sexual spiritual entities.
The exact nature of their spiritual bodies became another topic of dispute during the Middle Ages.
Augustine based his descriptions of demons on his perception of the Greek Daimon.
The Daimon was thought to be a spiritual being, composed of ethereal matter, a notion also used for fallen angels by Augustine.
However, these angels received their ethereal body only after their fall.
Later scholars tried to explain the details of their spiritual nature, asserting that the ethereal body is a mixture of fire and air, but that they are still composed of material elements.
Others denied any physical relation to material elements, depicting the fallen angels as purely spiritual entities.
But even those who believed the fallen angels had ethereal bodies did not believe that they could produce any offspring.
Augustine, in his Civitas Dei describes two cities (Civitates) distinct from each other and opposed to each other like light and darkness.
The earthly city is caused by the act of rebellion of the fallen angels and is inhabited by wicked men and demons (fallen angels) led by Satan.
On the other hand, the heavenly city is inhabited by righteous men and the angels led by God.
Although, his ontological division into two different kingdoms shows resemblance of Manichean dualism, Augustine differs in regard of the origin and power of evil.
In Augustine works, evil originates from free will.
Augustine always emphasized the sovereignty of God over the fallen angels.
Accordingly, the inhabitants of the earthly city can only operate within their God-given framework.
The rebellion of angels is also a result of the God-given freedom of choice.
The obedient angels are endowed with grace, giving them a deeper understanding of God's nature and the order of the cosmos.
Illuminated by God-given grace, they became incapable of feeling any desire for sin.
The other angels, however, are not blessed with grace, thus they remain capable of sin.
After these angels decide to sin, they fall from heaven and become demons.
In Augustine's view of angels, they cannot be guilty of carnal desires since they lack flesh, but they can be guilty of sins that are rooted in spirit and intellect such as pride and envy.
However, after they have made their decision to rebel against God, they cannot turn back.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church does not take "the fall of the angels" literally, but as a radical and irrevocable rejection of God and his reign by some angels who, though created as good beings, freely chose evil, their sin being unforgivable because of the irrevocable character of their choice, not because of any defect in infinite divine mercy.
Present-day Catholicism rejects Apocatastasis, the reconciliation with God suggested by the Church Father Origen.
===
Orthodox Christianity ===


====
Eastern Orthodox Christianity ====
Like Catholicism, Eastern Orthodox Christianity shares the basic belief in fallen angels as spiritual beings who rebel against God.
Unlike Catholicism, however, there is no established doctrine about the exact nature of fallen angels, but Eastern Orthodox Christianity unanimously agrees that the power of fallen angels is always inferior to God.
Therefore, belief in fallen angels can always be assimilated with local lore, as long it does not break basic principles and is in line with the Bible.
Historically, some theologians even tend to suggest that fallen angels could be rehabilitated in the world to come.
Fallen angels, just like angels, play a significant role in the spiritual life of believers.
As in Catholicism, fallen angels tempt and incite people into sin, but mental illness is also linked to fallen angels.
Those who have reached an advanced degree of spirituality are even thought to be able to envision them.
Rituals and sacraments performed by Eastern Orthodoxy are thought to weaken such demonic influences.

====
Ethiopian Church ====
Unlike most other Churches, the Ethiopian Church accepts 1 Enoch and the Book of Jubilees as canonical.
As a result, the Church believes that human sin does not originate in Adam's transgression alone, but also from Satan and other fallen angels.
Together with demons, they continue to cause sin and corruption on earth.

===
Protestantism ===
Like Catholicism, Protestantism continues with the concept of fallen angels as spiritual entities unrelated to flesh, but it rejects the angelology established by Catholicism.
Martin Luther's (1483–1546) sermons of the angels merely recount the exploits of the fallen angels, and does not deal with an angelic hierarchy.
Satan and his fallen angels are responsible for some misfortune in the world, but Luther always believed that the power of the good angels exceeds those of the fallen ones.
The Italian Protestant theologian Girolamo Zanchi (1516–1590) offered further explanations for the reason behind the fall of the angels.
According to Zanchi, the angels rebelled when the incarnation of Christ was revealed to them in incomplete form.
Nevertheless, Protestants are much less concerned with the cause of angelic fall, since it is thought as neither useful nor necessary to know.

==
Islam ==
The concept of fallen angels is debated in Islam.
Opposition to the possibility of erring angels can be attested as early as Hasan of Basra.
On the other hand Abu Hanifa (d. 767), founder of the Hanafi school of jurisprudence, distinguished between obedient angels, disobedient angels and unbelievers among the angels, who in turn differ from the jinn and demons (shayatin).
The Quran mentions the fall of Iblis in several Surahs.
Further, Surah 2:102 implies that a pair of fallen angels introduces magic to humanity.
However, the latter angels did not accompany Iblis.
Fallen angels work in entirely different ways in the Quran and Tafsir.
According to Umm al-Kitab, Azazil boasts about himself being superior to God until he is thrown into lower celestial spheres and ends up on earth.

According to a hadith (tradition) mentioned in Al-Tha'alibis (961–1038) Qisas Al-Anbiya, Iblis commands his host of rebel angels and the fiercest jinn from the lowest layer of hell.
In a Shia narrative from Ja'far al-Sadiq (700 or 702–765), Idris (Enoch) meets an angel, which the wrath of God falls upon, and his wings and hair are cut off; after Idris prays for him to God, his wings and hair are restored.
In return they become friends and at his request the angel takes Idris to the heavens to meet the angel of death.
Some recent non-Islamic scholars suggest Uzair, who is according to Surah 9:30 called a son of God by Jews, originally referred to a fallen angel.
While exegetes almost unanimously identified Uzair as Ezra, there is no historical evidence that the Jews called him son of God.
Thus, the Quran may refer not to the earthly Ezra, but to the heavenly Ezra, identifying him with the heavenly Enoch, who in turn became identified with the angel Metatron (also called lesser YHWH) in merkabah mysticism.

===
Iblis ===
The Quran repeatedly tells about the fall of Iblis.
According to Surah 2:30, the angels object to God's intention to create a human, because they will cause corruption and shed blood, echoing the account of 1 Enoch and the Book of Jubilees.
This happens after the angels observe men causing unrighteousness.
However, after God demonstrates the superiority of Adam's knowledge in comparison to the angels, He orders them to prostrate themselves.
Only Iblis refuses to follow the instruction.
When God asks for the reason behind Iblis' refusal, he boasts about himself being superior to Adam, because he is made of fire.
Thereupon God expels him from heaven.
In the early Meccan period, Iblis appears as a degraded angel.
But since he is called a jinni in Surah 18:50, some scholars argue that Iblis is actually not an angel, but an entity apart, stating he is only allowed to join the company of angels as a reward for his previous righteousness.
Therefore, they reject the concept of fallen angels and emphasize the nobility of angels by quoting certain Quranic verses like 66:6 and 16:49, distinguishing between infallible angels and jinn capable of sin.
However, the notion of jinni cannot clearly exclude Iblis from being an angel.
According to Ibn Abbas, angels who guard the jinan (here: heavens) are called Jinni, just as humans who were from Mecca are called Mecci, but they are not related to the jinn-race.
Other scholars assert that a jinn is everything hidden from human eye, both angels and other invisible creatures.
Therefore, Surah 18:50 could not exclude Iblis from being an angel.
In Surah 15:36, God grants Iblis' request to prove the unworthiness of humans.
Surah 38:82 also confirms that Iblis' intrigues to lead humans astray are permitted by God's power.
However, as mentioned in Surah 17:65, Iblis' attempts to mislead God's servants are destined to fail.
The Quranic episode of Iblis parallels another wicked angel in the earlier Books of Jubilees:
Like Iblis, Mastema requests God's permission to tempt humanity, and both are limited in their power, that is, not able to deceive God's servants.
However, the motif of Iblis' disobedience derives not from the Watcher mythology, but can be traced back to the Cave of Treasures, a work that probably holds the standard explanation in Proto-orthodox Christianity for the angelic fall of Satan.
According to this explanation, Satan refuses to prostrate himself before Adam, because he is "fire and spirit" and thereupon Satan is banished from heaven.
Unlike the majority opinion in later Christianity, the idea that Iblis tries to usurp the throne of God is alien to Islam and due to its strict monotheism unthinkable.

===
Harut and Marut ===
Harut and Marut are a pair of angels mentioned in Surah 2:102 teaching magic.
Although the reason behind their stay on earth is not mentioned in the Quran, the following narration became canonized in Islamic tradition.
The Quran exegete Tabari attributed this story to Ibn Masud and Ibn Abbas and is also attested by Ahmad ibn Hanbal.
Briefly summarized, the angels complain about the mischievousness of mankind and make a request to destroy them.
Consequently, God offers a test to determine whether or not the angels would do better than humans for long: the angels are endowed with human-like urges and Satan has power over them.
The angels choose two (or in some accounts three) among themselves.
However, on Earth, these angels entertain and act upon sexual desires and become guilty of idol worship, whereupon they even kill an innocent witness of their actions.
For their deeds, they are not allowed to ascend to heaven again.
Probably the names Harut and Marut are of Zoroastrian origin and derived from two Amesha Spentas called Haurvatat and Ameretat.
Although the Quran gave these fallen angels Iranian names, mufassirs recognized them as from the Book of Watchers.
In accordance with 3 Enoch, al-Kalbi (737 AD – 819 AD) named three angels descending to earth, and he even gave them their Enochian names.
He explained that one of them returned to heaven and the other two changed their names to Harut and Marut.
However, like in the story of Iblis, the story of Harut and Marut does not contain any trace of angelic revolt.
Rather, the stories about fallen angels are related to a rivalry between humans and angels.
As the Quran affirms, Harut and Marut are sent by God and, unlike the Watchers, they only instruct humans to witchcraft by God's permission, just as Iblis can just tempt humans by God's permission.

==
Popular culture ==
In the Divine Comedy (1308–1320) by Dante Alighieri, fallen angels guard the City of Dis surrounding the lower circles of hell.
They mark a transition: While in previous circles, the sinners are condemned for sins they just could not resist, later on, the circles of hell are filled with sinners who deliberately rebel against God, such as fallen angels or Christian heretics.
In John Milton's 17th-century epic poem Paradise Lost, both obedient and fallen angels play an important role.
They appear as rational individuals: their personality is similar to that of humans.
The fallen angels are named after entities from both Christian and Pagan mythology, such as Moloch, Chemosh, Dagon, Belial, Beelzebub and Satan himself.
Following the canonical Christian narrative, Satan convinces other angels to live free from the laws of God, thereupon they are cast out of heaven.
The epic poem starts with the fallen angels in hell.
The first portrayal of God in the book is given by fallen angels, who describe him as a questionable tyrant and blame him for their fall.
Outcast from heaven, the fallen angels establish their own kingdom in the depths of hell, with a capital called Pandæmonium.
Unlike most earlier Christian representations of hell, it is not the primary place for God to torture the sinners, but the fallen angels' own kingdom.
The fallen angels even build a palace, play music and freely debate.
Nevertheless, without divine guidance, the fallen angels themselves turn hell into a place of suffering.
The idea of fallen angels plays a significant role in the various poems of Alfred de Vigny.
In Le Déluge (1823), the son of an angel and a mortal woman learns from the stars about the great deluge.
He seeks refuge with his beloved on Mount Ararat, hoping that his angelic father will save them.
But since he does not appear, they are caught by the flood.
Éloa (1824) is about a female angel created by the tears of Jesus.
She hears about a male angel, expelled from heaven, whereupon she seeks to comfort him, but goes to perdition as a consequence.

== See also ==
Archon
Fairy
Nephilim


== Notes ==


==
Citations ==


==
References ==
Anderson, Gary, ed.
(
2000).
Literature on Adam and Eve.
Leiden:
Brill.
ISBN 978-9004116009.

Bamberger, Bernard J. (2006).
Fallen angels : soldiers of Satan's realm (first paperback ed.).
Philadelphia, Pa.:
Jewish Publ.
Soc.
of America.
ISBN 978-0-8276-0797-2.

Charlesworth, James H., ed.
(
2010).
The Old Testament pseudepigrapha.
Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson.
ISBN 978-1598564914.

Davidson, Gustav (1994).
A dictionary of angels: including the fallen angels (1st Free Press pbk.
ed.).
New York:
Free Press.
p. 111.
ISBN 978-0-02-907052-9.

DDD, Karel van der Toorn, Bob Becking, Pieter W. van der Horst (1998).
Dictionary of deities and demons in the Bible (DDD) (2.,
extensively rev.
ed.).
Leiden:
Brill.
ISBN 978-9004111196.

Douglas, James D.; Merrill, Chapin Tenney; Silva, Moisés, eds.
(
2011).
Zondervan Illustrated Bible Dictionary.
Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan.
ISBN 978-0-310-22983-4.

Orlov, Andrei A. (2011).
Dark mirrors:
Azazel and Satanael in early Jewish demonology.
Albany:
State University of New York Press.
ISBN 978-1-4384-3951-8.

Reed, Annette Yoshiko (2005).
Fallen angels and the history of Judaism and Christianity : the reception of Enochic literature (1.
publ.
ed.).
Cambridge [u.a.]:
Cambridge University Press.
p. 1.
ISBN 978-0521853781.

Schwartz, Howard (2004).
Tree of souls: The mythology of Judaism.
New York:
Oxford U
Pr.
ISBN 978-0195086799.

Wright, Archie T. (2004).
The origin of evil spirits the reception of Genesis 6.1–4 in early Jewish literature.
Tübingen:
Mohr Siebeck.
ISBN 978-3-16-148656-2.
==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Catholic Encyclopedia:
Angels, see section "The Evil Angels"
Jewish Encyclopedia: Fall of Angels
Daniel Sallis Huston (born May 14, 1962) is an American actor, writer, and director.
In 1989, Huston directed Mr. North which starred his half-sister, Anjelica Huston.
Huston was nominated for Best Male Performance at the Independent Spirit Awards in 2003 for his performance in the independent film Ivans Xtc.
His film credits include Birth and Martin Scorsese's The Aviator, for which the ensemble cast was nominated for a 2004 Screen Actors Guild Award.
Huston received the Golden Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance in The Constant Gardener.
He appeared in Sofia Coppola's Marie Antoinette, Peter Berg's The Kingdom, Ridley Scott's Robin Hood and Sacha Gervasi's Hitchcock.
He starred in The Congress, which opened the 45th Directors' Fortnight sidebar at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.
Huston co-starred as gossip columnist Dick Nolan in Tim Burton's film Big Eyes.
He portrayed The Axeman in the FX thriller series American Horror Story:
Coven and Massimo Dolcefino in American Horror Story: Freak Show.
He starred as General Erich Ludendorff in the 2017 film Wonder Woman and
as Wade Jennings in Angel Has Fallen.
Huston is a graduate of London Film School.

==
Early life ==
Huston was born May 14, 1962 in Rome, Italy.
He is the son of actress and author Zoe Sallis and director John Huston.
Through his father he has an adoptive half-brother, Pablo Huston and is the half-brother of actress Anjelica Huston and screenwriter Tony Huston.
He is the uncle of actor Jack Huston and grandson of Academy Award-winning actor Walter Huston.
His father was an American and Irish citizen, of  English, Welsh, Scots-Irish and Scottish ancestry.
His mother was of Indian and English descent.

==
Career ==
In 1998, Huston's directed Mr. North, which was an adaptation of Thornton Wilder's Theophilus North.
The film produced by his father, John Huston, who died before its completion.
In 1995, Huston played Bartender #2 in Leaving Las Vegas and directed the film The Maddening.
Huston was nominated for Best Male Performance at the Independent Spirit Awards in 2003 for his performance in the independent film Ivans Xtc.
Huston appeared in Martin Scorsese's The Aviator.
The ensemble cast was nominated for a 2004 SAG Award.
In 2006, Huston received the Golden Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor for his performance as Sandy Woodrow in Fernando Meirelles' The Constant Gardener.
Huston starred in the Australian western The Proposition.
Huston starred in Alpha Male and Oliver Parker's Fade to Black, in which he played Orson Welles.
He starred in The Kreutzer Sonata, which premiered at the 2008 Edinburgh International Film Festival.
His other film credits include Birth, Silver City, Marie Antoinette, The Number 23, The Kingdom, How to Lose Friends & Alienate People and 30 Days of Night.
He portrayed Samuel Adams in the award-winning HBO miniseries John Adams and Colonel William Stryker in X-Men Origins:
Wolverine, a prequel for the trilogy.
Huston has been featured in Boogie Woogie, The Warrior's Way, Edge of Darkness, Clash of the Titans, Robin Hood
, You Don't Know Jack and Medallion.
Huston played gangster Ben "The Butcher" Diamond on Mitch Glazer's Magic City for which was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film in 2013.
He portrayed The Axeman in the FX thriller series American Horror Story:
Coven and Massimo Dolcefino in American Horror Story: Freak Show.
Huston starred as General Erich Ludendorff in the 2017 film Wonder Woman and
as Wade Jennings in Angel Has Fallen.

==
Personal life ==
In 1989, Huston married Academy Award nominee Virginia Madsen.
They divorced in 1992.
In 2001, Huston married Katie Jane Evans with whom he had a child, Stella.
Huston and Evans separated in 2006.
Evans committed suicide in October 2008 before the divorce was finalized.
He dated his Magic City co-star Olga Kurylenko for about a year.
Huston's relationship with New York socialite Anastasia Lenglet in 2016 resulted in the birth of a son, Balthazar.
As Lenglet pursued a child-support proceeding against Huston, another Huston girlfriend, English actress Rosie Fellner, became pregnant with the couple's daughter.

==
Filmography ==


===
As Actor ===


====
Film ====


====
Television ====


===
As Director ===
Mr. North (1988)
Becoming Colette (1991)
The Maddening (1995)
The Ice Princess (1996)
The Last Photograph (2017)


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Danny Huston at IMDb
Haley Bishop is an American actress, producer, and screenwriter best known for her roles in films such as Host (2020), Angel Has Fallen (2019), and the horror short Dawn of the Deaf (2016).
She also runs her own production company called Bish Media.

==
Early life and education ==
Bishop was raised in the suburbs of Detroit, Michigan.
Bishop graduated from San Diego State University in 2010 with a bachelor's degree in Theatre and Performance, and obtained a master's degree from the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama.
As of 2020, she lives in London.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Web ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Haley Bishop on IMDb
Piper Lisa Perabo ( (listen); born October 31, 1976) is an American actress.
Following her breakthrough in the comedy-drama film Coyote Ugly (2000), Perabo has starred in The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle (2000), Lost and Delirious (2001), Cheaper by the Dozen (2003)
, George and the Dragon (2004), Imagine Me & You (2005), Cheaper by the Dozen 2 (2005), The Prestige (2006),
Because I Said So (2007), Beverly Hills Chihuahua (2008), Carriers (2009), Looper (2012), Black Butterfly (2017), and Angel Has Fallen (2019).
Perabo also starred as CIA Agent Annie Walker in the USA Network spy drama series Covert Affairs (2010–2014), for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama.

==
Early life ==
Perabo was born in Dallas, Texas, the daughter of Mary Charlotte (née Ulland), a physical therapist, and George William Perabo, a lecturer in poetry at Ocean County College.
She is of English, German, and Irish (father) and Norwegian (mother) descent; her surname is sometimes mistakenly described as Portuguese.
She grew up in Toms River, New Jersey.

Perabo's parents named her after actress Piper Laurie.
She is the eldest of three children with two brothers, Noah and Adam.
She graduated from Toms River High School North in 1994, and earned a bachelor's degree in theater from Honors Tutorial College at Ohio University in 1998.
In 1996, she attended the Trinity/La MaMa Performing Arts Program.
She also studied Latin, physics, and poetry in her final year.
Perabo was first noticed a year before she graduated from college.
She was in New York City, visiting her then-boyfriend, and accompanied him to an audition.
Casting director Denise Fitzgerald spotted her and asked her to read for a part.
She was not cast, but when Fitzgerald found out that she did not have any representation, she made phone calls on Perabo's behalf and found her an agent.

==
Career ==


=== 1997–2007:
Early career and breakthrough
===
After graduating, Perabo moved to New York, where she worked as a waitress.
She also studied acting at the La MaMa Experimental Theatre Club and had roles in various plays.
She was cast in her first feature film just a month after moving to the city, Marc Levin's comedy Whiteboyz.
In 2000, she was cast in the romantic musical comedy-drama film Coyote Ugly as Violet "Jersey" Sanford, for which she won an MTV Movie Award for Best Music Moment for "One Way or Another".
Despite the film's mixed response from critics, it was a box office success, grossing over $113 million worldwide.
She also appeared in The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle as FBI agent Karen Sympathy.

After the success of Coyote Ugly, Perabo decided to focus on independent films.
In 2001, she starred in an independent Canadian drama called Lost and Delirious, playing a boarding school student who falls in love with a female classmate (played by Jessica Paré).
The film was met with mixed reviews, but the performances of Perabo, Paré and co-star Mischa Barton were, however, widely praised.
Perabo's performance in particular received critical acclaim, which Loren King of the Chicago Tribune remarked was her "breakout performance".
Entertainment Weekly's Owen Gleiberman called her "an actress of glittering ferocity" and her performance "a geyser of emotion".
Jim Lane of the Sacramento News & Review said that "Perabo is a revelation, wild and fiery — it's a breakthrough performance, astonishing in its fervency" and Roger Ebert praised her performance for its sincerity and "wonderful abandon and conviction"
.
The next year she starred as a French exchange student in the independent comedy Slap Her...
She's French, which was shelved in North America for two years, then released under the new title
She Gets What She Wants.
The film was released under its original title in Europe.
She had a role as the eldest Baker child, Nora, in Cheaper by the Dozen (2003), a role she reprised in the film's 2005 sequel.
Her other films include
The I Inside (2003),
Perfect Opposites (2004), George and the Dragon (2004), The Cave (2005), Imagine Me & You (2005), Edison (2005), and The Prestige (2006).
She appeared as a nutritionist on the Fox show House, in an episode entitled "Resignation".

=== 2008–present:
Covert Affairs and further recognition ===
In 2008, Perabo co-starred with Jamie Lee Curtis in the family comedy film Beverly Hills Chihuahua.
Also that year, she made her off-Broadway debut in the Neil LaBute play Reasons to Be Pretty.
As the play's run was coming to an end, she read the script for the USA Network television spy drama series Covert Affairs: "I was reading movie scripts
and I wasn't finding anything that was really speaking to me
and my agent suggested that I read [the Covert Affairs script].
And I hadn't thought about doing television, but when I read it, it kind of changed everything for me.
She's such a powerful character, she's so smart, the action is so intense, and I really thought it would be fun to do.
"The
following year, Perabo was cast as CIA field agent Annie Walker, the lead character in Covert Affairs.
For her work in the series, she received a nomination for the 2010 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama.
The series ran for five seasons, from 2010 to 2014.In September 2012, Perabo had a supporting role, alongside Bruce Willis, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Emily Blunt, in the time travel thriller film Looper.
In December 2012, she was cast in a recurring role on the sitcom Go On.
Her character, Simone, was a former member of Matthew Perry's character's support group, who returned and became his love interest.
She was originally scheduled to appear in three episodes, but this was increased to four.
Perabo had a starring role in the thriller Into the Grizzly Maze, which was released in 2015.
She starred as Julia George in the ABC drama series Notorious (2016).
She co-starred with Antonio Banderas in the thriller film Black Butterfly, which was released in May 2017.
In June 2018, it was announced that Perabo was cast as Sara in the Netflix comedy series Turn Up Charlie.
Also in 2019, she starred as Leah Banning in the action film Angel
Has Fallen.
In 2020, she had a recurring role as Linda Craft in the Showtime supernatural horror series Penny Dreadful: City of Angels.

Perabo is next set to star as Angela in the science fiction fantasy film
Spontaneous.

==
Personal life ==
In 2013, Perabo became engaged to director and writer Stephen Kay; they married on July 26, 2014, in New York City.
The couple have no children, but Perabo is stepmother to Kay's daughter.
Perabo has been close friends with actress Lena Headey since they starred together in the 2005 films
The Cave and Imagine Me & You.
She speaks fluent French, advocates for LGBT rights and women's political leadership, and serves on the advisory board of VoteRunLead.
She is part owner of Employees
Only, a Prohibition-themed bar in West Village, Manhattan, that opened in 2005, and Jack's Wife Freda, a SoHo restaurant that opened in 2012.
==
Political activism ==
Perabo was arrested for protesting Brett Kavanaugh's Supreme Court confirmation hearing.

She was also arrested in November 2019 while attending one of Jane Fonda's weekly climate change protests.
Perabo endorsed Elizabeth Warren in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries and regularly uses her Twitter and Instagram accounts to advocate for voter registration and voter education.
She recently encouraged followers to seek out VoteRiders to learn more about Voter ID requirements.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Stage ===


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Piper Perabo at the Internet Broadway Database 
Piper Perabo at the TCM Movie Database
Piper Perabo at IMDb
