Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones is a 2002 American epic space-opera film directed by George Lucas and written by Lucas and Jonathan Hales.
It is the second installment of the Star Wars prequel trilogy, the fifth Star Wars film to be produced, and the second episode in the "Skywalker saga.
"
The film stars Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christensen, Ian McDiarmid, Samuel L. Jackson, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, and Frank Oz.
The story is set ten years after The Phantom Menace, as thousands of planetary systems slowly secede from the Galactic Republic and join the newly-formed Confederacy of Independent Systems, led by former Jedi Master Count Dooku.
With the galaxy on the brink of civil war, Obi-Wan Kenobi investigates a mysterious assassination attempt on Senator Padmé Amidala, which leads him to uncover a clone army in service of the Republic and the truth behind the Separatist movement.
Meanwhile, his apprentice Anakin Skywalker is assigned to protect Amidala and develops a secret relationship with her.
Soon, the trio witness the onset of a new threat to the galaxy: the Clone Wars.

Development of Attack of the Clones began in March 2000, some months after the release of The Phantom Menace.
By June 2000, Lucas and Hales completed a draft of the script, and principal photography took place from June to September 2000.
The film crew primarily shot at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, Australia, with additional footage filmed in Tunisia, Spain, and Italy.
It was one of the first motion pictures shot completely on a high-definition digital 24-frame system.

The film was released in the United States on May 16, 2002.
It received mixed reviews, with some critics hailing it as an improvement over its predecessor The Phantom Menace and others considering it the worst installment of the franchise.
The film was praised for an increased emphasis on action, visual effects, musical score, and costume design, but criticized for the screenplay, Christensen's performance, romantic scenes, and underdeveloped characters.
It performed well in the box office, making over $653 million worldwide; however, it also became the first Star Wars film to be outgrossed in its year of release, placing third domestically and fourth-highest-grossing worldwide.
The third and final film of the prequel trilogy, Revenge of the Sith, was released in 2005.

==
Plot ==
Ten years after the battle at Naboo, the Galactic Republic is threatened by a Separatist movement organized by former Jedi Master Count Dooku.
Senator Padmé Amidala comes to Coruscant to vote on a motion to create an army to assist the Jedi against the threat.
Narrowly avoiding an assassination attempt upon her arrival, she is placed under the protection of Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice Anakin Skywalker.
The pair thwart a second attempt on Padmé's life and subdue the assassin, Zam Wesell, who is killed by her employer, a bounty hunter, before she can reveal his identity.
The Jedi Council instructs Obi-Wan to find the bounty hunter, while Anakin is tasked to protect Padmé and escort her back to Naboo, where the two fall in love in spite of the Jedi Code that forbids relationships.

Obi-Wan's search leads him to the mysterious ocean planet of Kamino, where he discovers an army of clones being produced for the Republic under the name of Sifo Dyas, a deceased Jedi Master, with bounty hunter Jango Fett serving as their genetic template.
Obi-Wan meets with Jango, who reveals that the clones were the idea of a man called Tyranus.
Obi-Wan deduces Jango to be the bounty hunter he is seeking, and after a brief battle, places a homing beacon on Jango's ship,
Slave I. He then follows Jango and his clone son, Boba, to the planet Geonosis.
Meanwhile, Anakin is troubled by visions of his mother, Shmi, in pain and decides to return to his homeworld of Tatooine with Padmé to save her.
Watto reveals that he sold Shmi to moisture farmer Cliegg Lars, who then freed and married her.
Cliegg tells Anakin that she was abducted by Tusken Raiders weeks earlier and is likely dead.
Determined to find his mother, Anakin ventures out and finds her at the Tusken campsite, still barely alive.
After she dies in his arms, an enraged Anakin massacres the tribe.
He later declares to Padmé that he will find a way to prevent the deaths of those he loves.

On Geonosis, Obi-Wan discovers a Separatist gathering led by Count Dooku, who is developing a droid army with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray and ordered the attempts on Padmé's life.
Obi-Wan transmits his findings to the Jedi Council but is captured by Separatist droids.
Dooku meets Obi-Wan in his cell and explains his role in the Confederacy of Independent Systems' formation, while implying that a large portion of the Galactic Senate is under the control of his new master, Darth Sidious.
He then invites Obi-Wan to join him and stop the Dark Lord of the Sith.
When Obi-Wan refuses, Dooku claims that Obi-Wan's late master and Dooku's former apprentice Qui-Gon Jinn would have, had he been alive.
Meanwhile, Senate Representative Jar Jar Binks proposes a successful vote to grant emergency powers to Chancellor Palpatine, allowing the clone army to be authorized.

Anakin and Padmé head to Geonosis to rescue Obi-Wan, but Anakin loses his lightsaber
and they are captured by Jango.
Dooku sentences the trio to death, but they are saved by a battalion of clone troopers led by Yoda, Mace Windu, and other Jedi.
Windu beheads Jango during the ensuing battle.
Obi-Wan and Anakin intercept Dooku, and they engage in a lightsaber duel.
Dooku injures Obi-Wan and severs Anakin's right arm, but Yoda intercepts and defends them.
Dooku uses the Force to distract Yoda and escapes to Coruscant, where he delivers the plans of a super-weapon to Sidious, who addresses him by his Sith name Darth Tyranus.
The Council is left disturbed by Dooku's claim of Sidious controlling the Senate.
As the Jedi acknowledge the beginning of the Clone Wars, Anakin is fitted with a robotic hand and marries Padmé on Naboo, with C-3PO and R2-D2 as the only witnesses.

== Cast ==
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi: A Jedi Knight and mentor to his Padawan learner, Anakin Skywalker, who investigates the assassination attempt of Padmé, leading him to discover the production of a Clone Army for the Galactic Republic.
In the 10 years since The Phantom Menace, he has grown wiser and more powerful in the use of the Force.

Natalie Portman as Senator Padmé Amidala: Former Queen of Naboo, who has recently been elected the planet's Senator, and Anakin's love interest.

Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker:
A former slave from Tatooine and Obi-Wan's gifted Padawan apprentice who is assigned to protect Padmé with whom he falls in love.
He is believed to be the "chosen one" of Jedi prophecy destined "to bring balance to The Force."
In the 10 years since The Phantom Menace, he has grown powerful but arrogant, and believes that Obi-Wan is holding him back.
A large search for an actor to portray Anakin Skywalker was performed.
Lucas auditioned various actors, mostly unknown, before casting Christensen.
Among the many established actors who auditioned were Jonathan Brandis, Ryan Phillippe, Colin Hanks, and Paul Walker.
Leonardo DiCaprio also met with Lucas for the role, but was "definitely unavailable" according to DiCaprio publicist Ken Sunshine.
Co-star Natalie Portman later told Time magazine that Christensen "gave a great reading.
He could simultaneously be scary and really young."

Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus: A former Jedi Master and the old mentor of Obi-Wan's late master Qui-Gon Jinn, who is now the puppet leader of the Separatist movement as Sidious' new Sith apprentice and a suspect in Obi-Wan's investigation.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu:
A Jedi Master sitting on the Jedi Council who warily watches the Galactic Senate's politics.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda:
The centuries-old Jedi Grandmaster of an unknown alien species.
In addition to leading the Jedi Council, Yoda is the instructor for the young Jedi padawans.

Ian McDiarmid as Supreme Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious: A former Galactic Senator from Naboo and secret Sith Lord, who amasses vast emergency powers as the Chancellor of the Galactic Republic upon the outbreak of the Clone Wars.

Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker:
Anakin's mother and a former slave.

Temuera Morrison as Jango Fett: A bounty hunter who gave his DNA for use by the cloning facilities on Kamino for the creation of the clone army.
In addition to his wage, he requested an unaltered clone for himself to take as his son – Boba Fett.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid built by Anakin as a child who now serves the Lars family.
He later leaves Tatooine to accompany Anakin and Padmé.
Daniels also makes a cameo appearance as Dannl Faytonni:
An attendee of the Coruscant Outlander Club who witnesses Anakin and Obi-Wan capturing Zam WesellKenny Baker as R2-D2: Anakin's astromech droid who often accompanies him and Obi-Wan on missions.

Daniel Logan as Boba Fett: Jango Fett's clone and adopted son.

Leeanna Walsman as Zam Wesell: A bounty hunter and partner of Jango Fett, who is given the task of assassinating Padmé.
Although her appearance is human, she is actually a Clawdite, who can shapeshift.

Silas Carson as Nute Gunray and Ki-Adi-Mundi:
Gunray is the Nemoidian Viceroy of the Trade Federation and one of the leaders of the Separatist movement, who puts a hit on Padmé as revenge for his loss against her people on Naboo in The Phantom Menace.
Mundi is a Cerean Jedi Master sitting on the Jedi Council.

Ahmed Best as Delegate Jar Jar Binks: Padmé's loyal Gungan friend whom she appoints Representative of Naboo in the Galactic Senate.
Best also makes a cameo appearance as Achk Med-Beq:
An attendee of the Coruscant Outlander Club who witnesses Anakin and Obi-Wan capturing Zam WesellJimmy Smits as Bail Organa: A senator from Alderaan.

Jay Laga'aia as Gregar Typho:
Padmé's newly appointed captain of security.

Oliver Ford Davies as Sio Bibble: Governor of Naboo.

Rose Byrne as Dormé: Handmaiden of Padmé.

Jack Thompson as Cliegg Lars: Shmi's husband, Owen's father and Anakin's stepfather.

Joel Edgerton as Owen Lars: Cliegg's son and Anakin's stepbrother.

Bonnie Piesse as Beru Whitesun: Owen's girlfriend.

Andy Secombe as Watto:
Anakin and Shmi's former slave owner.

Ronald Falk as Dexter Jettster:
Obi-Wan's Besalisk friend who runs a diner on Coruscant and informs him about Kamino.

Alethea McGrath as Jocasta Nu:
The librarian at the Jedi Temple who helps Obi-Wan gain information about Kamino.
E!
reported that Lucas had asked NSYNC to film a small background cameo appearance, in order to satisfy his daughters.
They were subsequently cut out of the film in post-production.
The end credits erroneously list Alan Ruscoe as playing Neimoidian senator Lott Dod.
The character was actually another Neimoidian, played by an uncredited David Healey and voiced by Christopher Truswell.
Liam Neeson reprised his role as Qui-Gon Jinn from The Phantom Menace, who only appears as a disembodied voice heard by Anakin while slaughtering the Tusken Raiders.

==
Production
==
===
Writing ===
After the mixed critical response to The Phantom Menace, Lucas was hesitant to return to the writing desk.
In March 2000, just three months before the start of principal photography, Lucas finally completed his rough draft for Episode II.
Lucas continued to iterate on his rough draft, producing a proper first and second draft.
For help with the third draft, which would later become the shooting script, Lucas brought on Jonathan Hales, who had written several episodes of The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles for him, but had limited experience writing theatrical films.
The final script was completed just one week before the start of principal photography.

As an in-joke, the film's working title was Jar Jar's Great Adventure, a sarcastic reference to the negative fan response to the Episode I character.
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially decided that Lando Calrissian was a clone and came from a planet of clones which caused the "Clone Wars" mentioned by Obi-Wan Kenobi in A New Hope; he later came up with an alternate concept of an army of clone shocktroopers from a remote planet which were used by the Republic as an army in the war that followed.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography occurred between June 26, 2000 and September 20, 2000 at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney.
Location shooting took place in the Tunisian desert, at the Plaza de España in Seville, London, China, Vancouver, San Diego, and Italy (Villa del Balbianello on Lake Como, and in the former royal Palace of Caserta).
At his own personal request, Samuel L. Jackson's character Mace Windu received a lightsaber that emits a purple glow, as opposed to traditional blue and green for "good guys" and red for "bad guys".
Reshoots were performed in March 2001.
During this time, a new action sequence was developed featuring the droid factory after Lucas had decided that the film lacked a quick enough pace in the corresponding time-frame.
The sequence's previsualization was rushed, and the live-action footage was shot within four and a half hours.
Because of Lucas' method of creating shots through various departments and sources that are sometimes miles and years apart from each other, Attack of the Clones became the first film ever to be produced through what Rick McCallum called "virtual filmmaking".
Like The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones furthered technological development, effectively moving Hollywood into the "digital age" with the use of the HDW-F900, developed by Sony and Panavision, a digital camera using an HD digital 24-frame system.
This spawned controversy over the benefits and disadvantages of digital cinematography that continues as more filmmakers "convert" to digital filmmaking while many filmmakers oppose it.
In contrast to previous installments, for which scenes were shot in the Tunisian desert in temperatures up to 125 °F (51 °C), the camera would still run without complications.
Lucas had stated that he wished to film The Phantom Menace on this format but Sony was unable to build the cameras quickly enough.
In 2002, Attack of the Clones became the third film to be released that was shot entirely on a 24p digital camera (preceded by 2001's Jackpot and Vidocq).
The cameras record in the 16:9 HDCAM format (1080p), although the image was cropped to a 2.40:1 widescreen ratio.
The area above and below the 2.40 extraction area was available for Lucas to reframe the picture as necessary in post-production.

Despite Lucas' efforts to persuade movie theaters to switch to digital projectors for viewing of Episode II, few theaters did.

===
Visual effects ===
The film relied almost solely on digital animatics as opposed to storyboards in order to previsualize sequences for editing early on in the film's production.
While Lucas had used other ways of producing motion-based storyboards in the past, after The Phantom Menace the decision was made to take advantage of the growing digital technology.
The process began with Ben Burtt's creation of what the department dubbed as "videomatics", so called because they were shot on a household videocamera.
In these videomatics, production assistants and relatives of the department workers acted out scenes in front of greenscreen.
Using computer-generated imagery (CGI), the previsualization department later filled in the green screen with rough background footage.
Burtt then cut together this footage and sent it off to Lucas for changes and approval.
The result was a rough example of what the final product was intended to be.
The previsualization department then created a finer version of the videomatic by creating an animatic, in which the videomatic actors, props, and sets were replaced by digital counterparts to give a more precise, but still rough, look at what would eventually be seen.
The animatic was later brought on set and shown to the actors so that they could understand the concept of the scene they were filming in the midst of the large amount of bluescreen used.
Unlike most of the action sequences, the Battle of Geonosis was not story-boarded or created through videomatics but was sent straight to animatics after the department received a small vague page on the sequence.
The intent was to create a number of small events that would be edited together for pacing inside the finished film.
The animatics department was given a free hand regarding events to be created within the animatic; Lucas only asked for good action shots that he could choose from and approve later.
In addition to introducing the digital camera, Attack of the Clones emphasized "digital doubles" as computer-generated models that doubled for actors, in the same way that traditional stunt doubles did.
It also furthered the authenticity of computer-generated characters by introducing a new, completely CGI-created version of the character Yoda.
Rob Coleman and John Knoll prepared two tests featuring a CGI-animated Yoda using audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Yoda's appearance in Episode V also served as the reference point for the creation of the CGI Yoda; Lucas repeatedly stated to the animation department that "the trick" to the animation of the CGI Yoda was to make him like the puppet from which he was based, in order to maintain a flow of continuity.
Frank Oz (voice and puppeteer for Yoda in the original trilogy and The Phantom Menace) was consulted; his main piece of advice was that Yoda should look extremely old, sore, and frigid.
Coleman later explained the process of making the digital Yoda like the puppet version, by saying "When Frank [Oz] would move the head, the ears would jiggle.
If we hadn't put that in, it wouldn't look like Yoda."
Because of the acrobatics of the lightsaber fight between Count Dooku and Yoda, the then 78-year-old Christopher Lee relied on a stunt double to perform the most demanding scenes instead.
Lee's face was superimposed onto the double's body in all shots other than close-ups, which he performed himself.
Lucas often called the duel crucial to the animation department, as it had such potential to be humorous rather than dramatic.

===
Music ===
The soundtrack to the film was released on April 23, 2002 by Sony Classical Records.
The music was composed and conducted by John Williams, and performed by the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra.
The soundtrack recreates "The Imperial March" from the film The Empire Strikes Back for its first chronological appearance in Attack of the Clones, even though a hint of it appeared in the previous movie in one of the final scenes.
A music video for the main theme "Across the Stars" was produced specifically for the DVD.On March 15, 2016, a limited edition vinyl version of the soundtrack was released.
Only 1,000 copies were pressed initially.

==
Themes ==
Lucas has noted that Palpatine's rise to power is very similar to that of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany; as Chancellor of Germany, the latter was granted emergency powers, as is Palpatine.
Comparisons have been made to Octavian—who became Augustus, the first emperor of Rome—and to Napoleon Bonaparte, who rose to power in France from 1796 to 1799.
Octavian was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of political opponents well before he was granted tribunician powers; Bonaparte was appointed First Consul for life (and later Emperor) by the French Consulate after a failed attempt on his life and the subsequent coup of 18 Brumaire in 1799.
References to the American Civil War can also be discerned.
War journalism, combat films, and footage of World War II combat influenced the documentary-style camera work of the Battle of Geonosis, even to the point that hand-held shakes were digitally added to computer-generated sequences.
English scholar Anne Lancashire describes Attack of the Clones as "thoroughly political in its narrative", to the point that interpersonal relations are made subordinate to the political drama that unfolds, and "a critique of the increasing role played by economic and political appetite in contemporary First World international politics in general".
In this political drama, the Trade Federation, the former idealist Dooku, and Palpatine "[represent] the economic and political greed and ambition ... of the political and business classes", while the intuition of the Jedi has been clouded by the dark side of the Force.
The cityscape of Coruscant, the location of the Jedi Temple, is a dystopian environment that refers to 1982's Blade Runner.
Nevertheless, the Jedi endure as the heroes; Obi-Wan's role has been noted as similar to that of James Bond, and Zam Wesell's attempt on Padmé's life is similar to a scene in the first 007 film,
Dr. No.
The prequel trilogy films often refer to the original trilogy in order to help connect the films together.
Lucas has often referred to the films as a long poem that rhymes.
Such examples include the line "I have a bad feeling about this", a phrase used in each film, and lightsaber duels which almost always occur over a pit.
As with Attack of the Clones, The Empire Strikes Back was the middle film in a trilogy, and of the original trilogy films, The Empire Strikes Back is the object of the most references in Attack of the Clones.
In both films, an asteroid field is the backdrop of a major star battle in the middle of the film.
Obi-Wan escapes Jango Fett by attaching his spacecraft to an asteroid in order to disappear from the enemy sensors; Han Solo uses a similar tactic by attaching the Millennium Falcon to a Star Destroyer in The Empire Strikes Back.
As a retcon, John Knoll confirms on the film's DVD commentary that Boba Fett, who would later catch Solo in the act in The Empire Strikes Back, "learned his lesson" from the events of Attack of the Clones.

==
Release ==
After a teaser trailer premiered with the film Monsters, Inc., a new trailer for the film aired on the Fox Network on March 10, 2002 between Malcolm in the Middle and The X-Files, then on March 15, 2002 with Ice Age in theatres and was made available on the official Star Wars web site the same day.
The outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas from Chicago predicted before the film's release that U.S. companies could lose more than $319 million in productivity due to employees calling in sick and then heading to theaters to see the film.
The film premiered as part of the inaugural Tribeca Film Festival at the BMCC Performing Arts Center, 199 Chambers St. in New York City at a Sunday, May 12 set of screenings benefitting the Children's Aid Society, a charity supported by George Lucas.
Attack of the Clones was then screened out of competition at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival, before getting a worldwide theatrical release on May 16, 2002.
The film was also later released in IMAX theaters; the film had not been filmed for IMAX but was "up converted" with the digital remastering process.
Because of the technical limitations of the IMAX projector at the time, an edited, 120-minute version of the film was presented.
Before the film's release, there was a string of controversies regarding copyright infringement.
In 2000, an underground organization calling itself the Atlas Group, based in Perth, Western Australia offered a copy of the screenplay, with an asking price of US$100,000, to various fan sites and media organizations, including TheForce.
Net.
The scheme was subsequently reported to Lucasfilm Ltd. by the fan site.

An unauthorized copy was allegedly made at a private showing, using a digital recorder that was pointed at the screen.
This copy spread over the internet, and analysts predicted up to a million fans would have seen the film before the day of its release.
In addition, authorities seized thousands of bootlegs throughout Kuala Lumpur before the film opened.
===
Home media ===
Attack of the Clones was released on DVD and VHS on November 12, 2002.
The DVD features an audio commentary from director George Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, editor and sound designer Ben Burtt, ILM animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors Pablo Helman, John Knoll, and Ben Snow.
Eight deleted scenes are included along with multiple documentaries, which include a full-length documentary about the creation of digital characters and two others that focus on sound design and the animatics team.
Three featurettes examine the storyline, action scenes, and love story, and a set of 12 short web documentaries cover the overall production of the film.
The Attack of the Clones DVD also features a trailer for a mockumentary-style short film known as R2-D2: Beneath the Dome.
Some stores offered the full mockumentary as an exclusive bonus disc for a small extra charge.
The film gives an alternate look at the "life" of the droid R2-D2.
The story, which Lucas approved, was meant to be humorous.
The film was re-released in a prequel trilogy DVD box set on November 4, 2008.The six-film Star Wars saga was released on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Attack of the Clones was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Attack of the Clones on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010 (2010-09-28), it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo-converted to 3D, and re-released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace which was released on February 10, 2012 (2012-02-10).
Attack of the Clones was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3D on September 20, 2013 (2013-09-20), but was postponed due to Lucasfilm's desire to focus on Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
However, the 3D presentation of the film was first shown at Celebration Europe II from July 26 to 28, 2013.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 65% based on 253 reviews, with an average rating of 6.59/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones benefits from an increased emphasis on thrilling action, although they're once again undercut by ponderous plot points and underdeveloped characters.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 54 out of 100, based on 39 critics, which indicates "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the previous film.
Numerous critics characterized the dialogue as "stiff" and "flat".
The acting was also disparaged by some critics.
Conversely, other critics felt fans would be pleased to see that Jar Jar Binks has only a minor role.
Additionally, Jar Jar's attempts at comic relief seen in The Phantom Menace were toned down; instead, C-3PO reprised some of his bumbling traditions in that role.
McGregor referred to the swordplay in the film as "unsatisfactory" when comparing it to the climactic duel in Revenge of the Sith as it neared release.
ReelViews.net's James Berardinelli gave a positive review, saying "in a time when, more often than not, sequels disappoint, it's refreshing to uncover something this high-profile that fulfills the promise of its name and adds another title to a storied legacy.
"Roger
Ebert, who had praised the previous Star Wars films, gave Episode II only two out of four stars, noting "[As] someone who admired the freshness and energy of the earlier films, I was amazed, at the end of Episode II, to realize that I had not heard one line of quotable, memorable dialogue."
About Anakin and Padme's relationship, Ebert stated, "There is not a romantic word they exchange that has not long since been reduced to cliché."
Leonard Maltin, who also liked all of the previous installments, awarded two stars out of four to this endeavor as well, as seen in his Movie and Video Guide from the 2002 edition onward.
Maltin cited an "overlong story" as reason for his dissatisfaction and added "Wooden characterizations and dialogue don't help."
While TheWrap considered Attack of the Clones a "marginal improvement" over The Phantom Menace, Screen Rant ranked it as inferior to Episode I and as the worst Star Wars film overall, citing its romance story, characterization, and acting as weak points.
Following suit with the series' previous installments, the Academy Awards nominated Attack of the Clones' Rob Coleman, Pablo Helman, John Knoll, and Ben Snow for Best Visual Effects at the 2003 Academy Awards, but the award ultimately went to The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers.
Natalie Portman was also honored at the Teen Choice Awards, and the film received an award for Best Fight at the MTV Movie Awards.
In contrast, the film also received seven nominations from the Golden Raspberry Awards for Worst Picture, Worst Director (George Lucas), Worst Screenplay (George Lucas), Worst Supporting Actor (Hayden Christensen), Worst Supporting Actress (Natalie Portman), Worst Screen Couple
(Hayden Christensen and Natalie Portman) and Worst Remake or Sequel.
It took home two awards for Worst Screenplay (George Lucas) and Worst Supporting Actor (Hayden Christensen).
===
Box office ===
The film grossed $310,676,740 in North America and $338,721,588 overseas for a worldwide total of $649,398,328.
Though a box office success, it was nevertheless overshadowed by the even greater box-office success of The Phantom Menace three years earlier.
It was not the top-grossing film of the year, either in North America (where it finished in third place) or worldwide (where it was fourth), the first time that a Star Wars film did not have this distinction.
In North America it was outgrossed by Spider-Man and The Lord of the Rings:
The Two Towers, both of which were more favorably received by critics.
Worldwide, it was also outgrossed by Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets.
Adjusted for inflation, Attack of the Clones is the lowest-performing live-action Star Wars film at the North American box office, though is still among the 100 highest-grossing films of all time when adjusted for inflation.
It sold an estimated 52,012,300 tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
===
Accolades ===


==
Novelizations ==
Two novels based on the movie were published, a tie-in junior novel by Scholastic, and a novelization written by R. A. Salvatore, which includes some unique scenes.
A four-issue comic book adaptation was written by Henry Gilroy and published by Dark Horse Comics.

==
Sequel ==
A sequel titled Revenge of the Sith was released May 19, 2005 and was written and directed by George Lucas.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Bouzereau, Laurent (1997).
The Annotated Screenplays.
Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-40981-7.
OCLC 37691005.

Kaminski, Michael (2007). "
The Secret History of Star Wars".
Archived from the original on July 6, 2007.

—— (2008)
[2007].
The Secret History of Star Wars (3.0 ed.).
Legacy Books Press.
ISBN 978-0-9784652-3-0.
==
External links ==

Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at StarWars.com
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at IMDb
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones at AllMovie
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones Official Production Notes
Ahsoka Tano is a character in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced as the Jedi Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, she is a protagonist of the 2008 animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars and the subsequent television series.
Ahsoka reappears in Star Wars Rebels, where she uses the codename Fulcrum, and as a voiceover cameo in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
Ashley Eckstein voices Ahsoka in these appearances.
Ahsoka is also the main character of the eponymous novel Star Wars: Ahsoka, which has Eckstein narrating the audiobook version.
Ahsoka's live-action debut was in the second season of The Mandalorian, portrayed by Rosario Dawson.
Dawson will return to play Ahsoka in her own series Ahsoka on Disney+, releasing in 2022.

Although initially disliked by both fans and critics at first, Ahsoka eventually developed into a more complex, well-rounded character, and ultimately became a fan favorite.
Serving as a foil for Anakin Skywalker, she has been highlighted as a strong female character of the franchise.

== Creation and development ==


===
Concept ===
Ahsoka was developed to illustrate how Anakin Skywalker develops from the brash, undisciplined Padawan apprentice in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) to the more reserved Jedi Knight in Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Star Wars creator George Lucas, who had two daughters, also wanted the character to appeal to girls.
Early in development, Ahsoka's name was "Ashla".
Lucas renamed her after the ancient Indian emperor Ashoka; the spelling was then altered by screenwriter Henry Gilroy.
The Clone Wars supervising director and writer Dave Filoni wrote a fable about Ahsoka's early childhood to help develop the character.
He imagined the discovery that she has "the right stuff" to become a Jedi would be a cause for celebration in her hometown.
Filoni said he is protective of the Ahsoka character.
Giving Anakin responsibility for a Padawan was meant to place the character in a role that forced him to become more cautious and responsible.
It would also provide him with insight into his relationship with his own master, Obi-Wan Kenobi, and depict how their relationship matured.
Ahsoka and Anakin's relationship was seen as an essential story arc spanning both the animated film and the Clone Wars television series.

===
Writing ===
Filoni initially struggled with writing Ahsoka because he had "zero perspective" on what it was like to be a 14-year-old girl.
He, therefore, shifted his focus and instead wrote Ahsoka primarily as a Jedi who just happens to be an adolescent female.
Filoni said he "has always had a story in mind" for Ahsoka's overall development.
He began thinking about the final confrontation between Ahsoka and Vader ever since he created Ahsoka; different iterations had different endings, including one in which Vader kills Ahsoka just as she slashes open his helmet to reveal Anakin's scarred face.
Ashley Eckstein, who primarily voiced Ahsoka, said she and the writers were aware that audiences initially found the character annoying, and that there was a "fine line" between Ahsoka being bratty and becoming endearing.
Because production was a year ahead of what was broadcast, with Ahsoka developing over that time, Eckstein implored fans to be patient with the character's growth.
Although Ahsoka leaves the Jedi Order at the end of The Clone Wars' fifth season, the storyline initially had her return to the Order.
Filoni said this would be the "normal" arc and suggested to Lucas that she instead remain expelled; Lucas agreed.
Lucas believed Ahsoka survived Order 66,
the command that led the Republic's clone army to murder the Jedi.
The Fulcrum character introduced early in Star Wars Rebels was always understood to be Ahsoka.
Filoni, who served as executive producer and co-creator of Rebels, worked with Lucas on identifying what Ahsoka would know about Anakin's fate.
Filoni also collaborated with executive producer Simon Kinberg and season one executive producer Greg Weisman on developing Ahsoka's role as a Rebel agent.
The show's writers were excited for Ahsoka's return in the second season, and Filoni was anxious about Rebels instead becoming "The Ahsoka Tano Show".
Consequently, Filoni required that Ahsoka play a role in service of Rebels' main characters, Ezra Bridger and Kanan Jarrus; he saw Ahsoka's new role as similar to the one played by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars.
Although Ahsoka is more mature in Rebels, Filoni wanted "aspects of that kid who was there to shine through".
He initially envisioned Ahsoka as a more "passive player" not engaged in combat, but later decided it was more appropriate to see Ahsoka as a warrior during a turbulent time.
Ahsoka's presence was necessary to allow Darth Vader to encounter the show's lead characters without the latter being destroyed; Ahsoka can stand toe-to-toe with Vader.
Filoni cites fans' passion for the character as one reason for Ahsoka's prominence in Clone Wars and Rebels.

===
Voice acting ===
Eckstein said Filoni wanted her to bring some of her own personality into the Ahsoka character; he told her that her actions and speech between audition takes had a bigger impact on her getting the role than the actual audition.
Once production on The Clone Wars began, it took about six months for Eckstein and the writers to understand Ahsoka; consequently, much of the dialogue for the first half of season one was re-recorded to depict the character better.
Eckstein also credits the casting of Matt Lanter as Anakin, which occurred halfway through the first season, with helping solidify the Ahsoka character.
Eckstein reprised the role of Ahsoka for Rebels, although she did not do all of Fulcrum's voice work.
She learned about Ahsoka's return about a year before the first season's finale aired and said it was hard to keep it a secret.
Eckstein said Ahsoka developed a quiet confidence and quiet strength
the younger character doesn't possess, but sometimes she played Ahsoka too seriously; she pointed out that "snippiness" and determination are still part of Ahsoka's personality.
Eckstein pitched her voice down a bit but, because she and Ahsoka were now much closer in age, generally spoke like herself.
Not knowing Ahsoka's experiences between The Clone Wars and Rebels at times presented challenges for Eckstein's performance.
Filoni avoids giving the actors plot details that might inappropriately affect their performance; for example, he did not tell Eckstein whether Ahsoka survives her duel with Darth Vader lest Eckstein telegraph something in her performance that the character would not know.

===
Appearance ===
Ahsoka's design evolved over three years before her introduction in the Clone Wars film.
Her appearance was inspired by San in Princess Mononoke.
Ahsoka initially appears in what Wired called a "tube-top-and-miniskirt costume.
"
In the third season, Ahsoka and other characters received new costumes.
Filoni said the changes were meant to bring the show's aesthetic closer to that of Revenge of the Sith and were made possible by improved animation techniques.
For the seventh and final season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka's design was once again tweaked due to improvements in animation technology.
Her costume was also changed to a more grayish-blue color, similar to her appearance Star Wars Rebels, which aired prior to the season.
Ahsoka often uses a reverse lightsaber grip, similar to that of the Japanese film character Zatoichi.
Along with the costume change in the third season of Clone Wars, Ahsoka also received a second lightsaber.
In the seventh and final season, she received new blue lightsabers.
Ahsoka's armor in Rebels is based on a "pseudo-samurai look" influenced by photographs of samurai women.
The armor is meant to appear as if she found it in an ancient Jedi temple, and her lightsabers' colorless blades indicate she is neither a Jedi nor a Sith.
Filoni said the white lightsabers appear much better than he anticipated.
Her facial markings were changed to show that she has aged.
It was "new ground" for the production team to shift Ahsoka's animation style to reflect her older age.

== Depiction ==


===
Film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Ahsoka Tano was introduced the 2008 Clone Wars animated film (serving as a pilot for the television series of the same name) as a 14-year-old Padawan apprentice assigned to Anakin Skywalker.
Yoda assigns her to Anakin to teach him a greater sense of responsibility, and Anakin is initially frustrated by this decision.
Their early interactions are "playfully contentious", with Anakin calling her "Snips" for her "snippy" attitude and Ahsoka calling him "Skyguy" as a pun on his surname.
After earning Anakin's respect on a dangerous mission, Ahsoka joins him on a quest to rescue Jabba the Hutt's infant son.
Her impetuous nature both annoys and endears her to her master, and, by the end of the film, Anakin reveals a newfound affection for his padawan.

====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Ahsoka Tano makes a vocal cameo in The Rise of Skywalker as one of the past Jedi who help Rey in her battle against the resurrected Darth Sidious.
Ashley Eckstein returned to voice the character.

===
Television ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ====
Ahsoka is a lead character in six of the seven seasons of The Clone Wars.
She is a padawan-commander of the 501st Legion in the Grand Army of the Republic and continues to learn the ways of the Jedi as Anakin's apprentice.
The two develop a mutual fondness, at times taking great risks to protect or save one another.
Some of Anakin's actions taken out of concern for Ahsoka expose his darker tendencies, such as his torture of prisoners who may know her location when she goes missing.
Ahsoka also finds mentorship from Captain Rex, a clone trooper with whom she and Anakin serve throughout the war.
During the final arc of season five, Ahsoka is framed and imprisoned for a deadly explosion and a subsequent murder, both of which were committed by her friend Barriss Offee.
Although eventually exonerated, she becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and leaves the Jedi Order in the season finale.
Anakin is greatly affected by this ordeal and this begins to shake his trust in the Jedi Council.

Filoni said an initial finale concept for The Clone Wars would have had Rex escape Order 66, and his and Ahsoka's presence elsewhere would have explained both characters' absence from Revenge of the Sith.
Ahsoka returns in the seventh and final season of The Clone Wars, which aired in 2020 on Disney+.
She is the focus of two of the three story arcs featured in the season.
The second one, set during the events of Revenge of the Sith, sees her briefly reuniting with Anakin and acting as an advisor to Rex (promoted to Commander) in the 332nd Company (split from the 501st Legion) during the Siege of Mandalore to capture the former Sith Lord Maul.
When she confronts Maul, he reveals that Darth Sidious intends to make Anakin his new apprentice and offers to join forces to prevent this, but she does not believe him and fights him.
Ahsoka defeats and captures Maul, but as she is preparing to take him to Coruscant, she senses her former master in trouble, though not actually aware that he has fallen to the dark side and helped kill Mace Windu.
Order 66 is issued, causing Ahsoka's clone troopers, including Rex, to turn on her.
She escapes and manages to remove Rex's chip controlling his brain, while also freeing Maul to create a distraction.
When the Venator-class Star Destroyer Tribunal they are on crashes on a small moon, Ahsoka and Rex survive and bury all the deceased clone troopers, along with the former's lightsaber, before parting ways.
The final scene of the series depicts Darth Vader leading a search party on the moon and walking up to the remains of the ship.
He notices Ahsoka's blade on the ground, picks it up, and ignites it, before leaving with the saber in silence.

====
Rebels (2014–2018) ====
Ahsoka is a secretive rebel agent in the first season of Star Wars Rebels, which takes place 14 years after The Clone Wars concludes.
Operating under the codename "Fulcrum", she provides the rebel crew of the Ghost with intelligence and supplies.
Until her identity is revealed in the season finale, she disguises her appearance by using an altered voice and appearing as a hooded hologram.

She becomes a recurring character in the second season, continuing to help lead a group of rebel forces and working with the Ghost's crew.
Having assumed that Anakin died like most other Jedi at the end of the Clone Wars, she is overwhelmed to recognize her mentor under "a layer of hate" in Darth Vader.
Later in the season, a vision of Anakin blames her for leaving him and allowing him to fall to the dark side.
In the season finale, Ahsoka duels with Darth Vader inside a Sith temple on Malachor-V allowing her friends from the Ghost to escape Vader and the temple's destruction.
As the episode concludes, Darth Vader is shown injured and leaving the temple, watched by a green and white owl.
The owl, previously a companion to Ahsoka in the show and an avatar of the Daughter of Mortis, then flies back into the temple to witness
Ahsoka seemingly walking deeper inside its walls.
Filoni said Ahsoka's fate is ambiguous and "a bit open-ended" though Eckstein believed the character to still be alive.
In the fourth-season episode, "A World Between Worlds", Ahsoka's fate is finally revealed.
Ezra Bridger, having ended up in the realm "between worlds and time" within the Jedi temple on Lothal and guided by Ahsoka's convoy Morai, pulls her out of the moment before Vader could deliver the deathblow and thus altered her fate.
Ahsoka is updated on what occurred to the Ghost crew while convincing Ezra to not prevent Kanan's fate as he would risk losing his own life.
Palpatine then makes his presence known as he attempts to force Ezra into bringing him into the realm with Sith sorcery.
Ahsoka helps Ezra escape while returning (with Morai) to her timeline moments after the Sith temple collapsed, vowing to find Ezra and the crew again.
Ahsoka makes a return appearance in the epilogue of the series finale "Family Reunion – and Farewell", returning to Lothal following the events of the Battle of Endor to join Sabine Wren in her quest to find Ezra, who disappeared during Lothal's liberation.

====
The Mandalorian (2020) ====
Rosario Dawson expressed interest in playing Ahsoka Tano in early 2017, with some fan support.
In March 2020, Dawson was reported to be appearing as the character in the second season of The Mandalorian.
The next month, Dawson said the casting was yet to be confirmed.
In October, the German Disney+ Instagram account published a story naming Dawson as part of the then-upcoming season's cast.
Ahsoka made an appearance in "Chapter 13:
The Jedi", the fifth of the season, released on
Disney+
on November 27, 2020.
During her search for Grand Admiral Thrawn, she attempts to liberate the city of Calidan on Corvus from Imperial occupation, and encounters the titular character, who was told to seek her out by Bo-Katan Kryze so that she could train "The Child".
Communing with him through the Force, she learns that the child's name is Grogu and that he was raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant, before being rescued during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety, which is why he suppresses his Force powers.
Sensing great fear in Grogu, and a deep connection with the Mandalorian, Ahsoka refuses to take him as an apprentice, fearing that he could follow the same dark path as her former master.
After the Mandalorian helps her liberate Calidan, Ahsoka tells him to take Grogu to the Jedi Temple on Tython, where he might be able to reach out to another Jedi through the Force.

====
Ahsoka ====
In December 2020, Lucasfilm announced Ahsoka would be getting her own limited series on Disney+, titled Ahsoka.
Developed by Jon Favreau and Dave Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Dawson reprises her role as Ahsoka Tano.
===
Other media ===
Filoni said he does not want Ahsoka thought of as an animated character, but rather as a Star Wars character who can exist "in all forms of media".
Ahsoka appears in the Star Wars Forces of Destiny series, in the comic Touching Darkness, and as a collectable, playable character in the video game Disney Infinity 3.0.
At Star Wars Celebration Europe 2016, Filoni, Eckstein, and Lucasfilm Story Group member Pablo Hidalgo held a panel about Ahsoka's "Untold Tales" that occur between The Clone Wars and Rebels.
Ahsoka makes a brief cameo as a teacher in a nursery school in The Simpsons crossover short The Force Awakens from Its Nap.
====
Ahsoka (2016) ====
Star Wars:
Ahsoka is a young-adult novel by E. K. Johnston published in October 2016.
It is set between the events of The Clone Wars and Rebels, and makes several references to Ahsoka's "Untold Tales".
Filoni was heavily involved in developing the novel, and the cover art by Jason P. Wojtowicz is based on a sketch Filoni created several years prior.
Eckstein narrates the audiobook version.
The novel was on the New York Times best sellers list and in the category of young adult hardcovers it reached number one shortly after release.
Some details contained in the book are contradicted in the seventh season of The Clone Wars.

A year after the events of Revenge of the Sith, Ahsoka gains work as a mechanic and freighter pilot with the powerful Fardi clan on the planet Thabeska.
She is forced to go into hiding after exposing her Force powers while trying to save the life of four-year old Hedala Fardi, the youngest Fardi daughter.
Ahsoka settles down on the agrarian moon of Raada, where she finds work as a mechanic and befriends several local farmers, including the teenage sisters Kaeden and Miara Larte, and their guardian Vartan.
The Galactic Empire subsequently establishes a presence on Raada and forces the farmers to plant new crops, which leach the moon's soils.
Ahsoka becomes the leader of a resistance movement.
However, the planned uprising goes awry and Ahsoka exposes her Force powers during a skirmish with Imperial forces.
In response, the Empire dispatches a Jedi-hunting Inquisitor known as the Sixth Brother to hunt Ahsoka.

Having attracted the attention of the Empire, Ahsoka is forced to leave Raada.
Alderaanian Senator Bail Organa takes an interest in Imperial reports about Ahsoka and decides to find her.
Returning to the Fardis, Ahsoka resumes work as a pilot and mechanic.
She learns that a "shadow" (who turns out to be the Sixth Brother) has been stalking the Force-sensitive Hedala.
With the Empire tightening its grip on Thabeska, the Fardi patriarch advises Ahsoka to leave.
Ahsoka's ship is captured by two pilots in the service of Organa.
Mistaking the pilots for threats, Ahsoka knocks them unconscious.
She encounters R2-D2 and convinces him to smuggle her aboard Organa's corvette.
Ahsoka forges an alliance with Organa in return for his help in protecting Force-sensitive children from the Empire.
Returning to Raada, she finds Miara and learns that the Sixth Brother captured her older sister Kaeden.
Following a lightsaber duel, Ahsoka defeats and kills the Sixth Brother, and takes his Kyber crystals to forge her new twin lightsabers.
After freeing Kaeden, Ahsoka organizes an evacuation of Raada's population with Organa's help.
Ahsoka then decides to join Organa's rebellion while the Larte sisters and the other refugees settle down on Alderaan.
Meanwhile, the Empire dispatches the Grand Inquisitor, a perennial antagonist from Star Wars Rebels, to hunt down Ahsoka.

==
Critical response ==
After her introduction, some critics called Ahsoka annoying and predicted the character would die before The Clone Wars series ended because she does not appear in Revenge of the Sith.
The Los Angeles Times called Ahsoka a "carefully calculated-to-be-cute" character in The Clone Wars film.
Wired criticized Ahsoka's "half-naked" appearance in The Clone Wars' first two seasons, calling her third-season costume change "more appropriate".
Blastr said Ahsoka's initial immaturity gives the character room to grow, saying she becomes "a well-rounded and complex character in every sense".
Ahsoka's youth aided her in being a point-of-view character for younger viewers.
io9 called Ahsoka's development arc one of the best aspects of The Clone Wars, highlighting the character's role in exploring the nuances of war and the flaws of the Jedi Order.
According to Tech Times, Ahsoka's maturation and development mirror the show's, and the producers chose wisely in making Ahsoka the audience's "entry point" to The Clone Wars.
Chris Taylor called Ahsoka's decision to leave the Jedi Order "the show's most shocking cliffhanger".
Ashley Eckstein was nominated for the 2012 and 2013
"Best Female Lead Vocal Performance in a Television Series - Action/Drama" awards from Behind the Voice Actors.
The Mary Sue said Ahsoka's relationship with Anakin is critical in understanding his development between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, and the publication called Ahsoka a foil for Anakin's growth.
Blastr commented that Anakin's interactions with Ahsoka help show that he is a powerful Jedi and war hero.
Blastr also hypothesized that Anakin's sense of failure when Ahsoka leaves the Jedi contributes to his fall to the dark side; io9 posited that Anakin might have succeeded in reforming the Jedi if Ahsoka had stayed with him.
io9 said Ahsoka, more than Anakin, articulates moral guidance in The Clone Wars.
Blastr identified Ahsoka as one of the most important characters in Star Wars, especially for young girls who, until that point, had not seen a potent female Jedi depicted on screen.
Erika Travis of California Baptist University said Ahsoka is "compassionate and feminine, without being overtly sexualized".
Mara Wood called Ahsoka a feminist icon, adding that Ahsoka is one of several characters that make The Clone Wars superior to the original and prequel trilogies in depicting strong women.
Wood added that Ahsoka probably shows the most growth of any woman in the Star Wars canon.

==
Relationships ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Ahsoka Tano in the StarWars.com Databank
Ahsoka Tano on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Solar System's planets, and its most likely dwarf planets, are known to be orbited by at least 218 natural satellites, or moons.
19 of them are large enough to be gravitationally rounded; of these, all are covered by a crust of ice except for Earth's Moon and Io.
Several of the largest ones are in hydrostatic equilibrium and would therefore be considered dwarf planets or planets if they were in direct orbit around the Sun and not in their current states (orbiting planets or dwarf planets).

Moons are classed in two separate categories according to their orbits: regular moons, which have prograde orbits (they orbit in the direction of their planets' rotation) and lie close to the plane of their equators, and irregular moons, whose orbits can be pro- or retrograde (against the direction of their planets' rotation) and often lie at extreme angles to their planets' equators.
Irregular moons are probably minor planets that have been captured from surrounding space.
Most irregular moons are less than 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) in diameter.

The earliest published discovery of a moon other than the Earth's was by Galileo Galilei, who discovered the four Galilean moons orbiting Jupiter in 1610.
Over the following three centuries only a few more moons were discovered.
Missions to other planets in the 1970s, most notably the Voyager 1 and 2 missions, saw a surge in the number of moons detected, and observations since the year 2000, using mostly large, ground-based optical telescopes, have discovered many more, all of which are irregular.

== Moons by primary ==
Mercury, the smallest and innermost planet, has no moons, or at least none that can be detected to a diameter of 1.6 km (1.0 mi).
For a very short time in 1974, Mercury was thought to have a moon.

Venus also has no moons, though reports of a moon around Venus have circulated since the 17th century.

Earth has one Moon, the largest moon of any rocky planet in the Solar System.
Earth also has at least two co-orbitals: the asteroids 3753 Cruithne and 2002
AA29; however, since they do not orbit Earth, they are not considered moons.
(
See Other moons of Earth and Quasi-satellite.)

Mars has two known moons, Phobos and Deimos ("fear" and "dread", after attendants of Ares, the Greek god of war, equivalent to the Roman Mars).
Searches for more satellites have been unsuccessful, putting the maximum radius of any other satellites at 90 m (100 yd).Jupiter has 79 moons with known orbits, of which 72 have received permanent designations; of these, 57 have been named.
Its eight regular moons are grouped into the planet-sized Galilean moons and the far smaller Amalthea group.
They are named after lovers of Zeus, the Greek equivalent of Jupiter.
Its 71 known irregular moons are organized into two categories: prograde and retrograde.
The prograde satellites consist of the Himalia group and three others in groups of one.
The retrograde moons are grouped into the Carme, Ananke and Pasiphae groups.

Saturn has 82 moons with known orbits; 53 of them have names.
Most of them are quite small.
Seven moons are large enough to be in hydrostatic equilibrium, including Titan, the second largest moon in the Solar System.
Including these large moons, 24 of Saturn's moons are regular, and traditionally named after Titans or other figures associated with the mythological Saturn.
The remaining 58, all small, are irregular, and classified by their orbital characteristics into Inuit, Norse, and Gallic groups, and their names are chosen from the corresponding mythologies.
The rings of Saturn are made up of icy objects ranging in size from one centimetre to hundreds of metres, each of which is on its own orbit about the planet.
Thus a precise number of Saturnian moons cannot be given, as there is no objective boundary between the countless small anonymous objects that form Saturn's ring system and the larger objects that have been named as moons.
At least 150 "moonlets" embedded in the rings have been detected by the disturbance they create in the surrounding ring material, though this is thought to be only a small sample of the total population of such objects.

Uranus has 27 moons, five of which are massive enough to have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium.
There are 13 moons that orbit within Uranus's ring system, and another nine outer irregular moons.
Unlike most planetary moons, which are named from antiquity, all the moons of Uranus are named after characters from the works of Shakespeare and Alexander Pope's work
The Rape of the Lock.

Neptune has 14 moons; the largest, Triton, accounts for more than 99.5 percent of all the mass orbiting the planet.
Triton is large enough to have achieved hydrostatic equilibrium, but, uniquely for a large moon, has a retrograde orbit, suggesting it was a dwarf planet that was captured.
Neptune also has seven known inner regular satellites, and six outer irregular satellites.

Pluto, a dwarf planet, has five moons.
Its largest moon Charon, named after the ferryman who took souls across the River Styx, is more than half as large as Pluto itself, and large enough to orbit a point outside Pluto's surface.
In effect, each orbits the other, forming a binary system informally referred to as a double-dwarf-planet.
Pluto's four other moons, Nix, Hydra, Kerberos and Styx are far smaller and orbit the Pluto–Charon system.
Among the other dwarf planets, Ceres has no known moons.
It is 90 percent certain that Ceres has no moons larger than 1 km in size, assuming that they would have the same albedo as Ceres itself.
Eris has one large known moon, Dysnomia.
Accurately determining its size is difficult: one indicative estimate of its radius is 350±57.5 km,Two objects were named as dwarf planets, under the expectation that they would prove to be so (though this remains uncertain).
Haumea has two moons, Hiʻiaka and Namaka, of radii ~195 and ~100 km, respectively.
Makemake has one moon, discovered in April 2016.

A number of other objects in the Kuiper belt and scattered disk may turn out to be dwarf planets.
90482
Orcus was found to have a natural satellite, later named Vanth, in 2005.
50000
Quaoar, 225088 Gonggong and 120347 Salacia all since been discovered to have moons.

As of August 2020, 309 asteroid moons and 119 trans-Neptunian moons (including those of Pluto and Haumea) had been discovered.

Due to Earth's varying distance from these planets (as well as their distance to the Sun), the limits at which we are able to detect new moons is very inconsistent.
As the below graph demonstrates, the absolute magnitude (total inherent brightness, abbreviated H) of moons we have detected around planets peaks at H = 17 for Jupiter, H = 16 for Saturn, H = 13 for Uranus, and H = 11 for Neptune.
Smaller moons may (and most likely do) exist around each of these planets, but are currently undetectable from Earth.
Although spacecraft have visited all of these planets, Earth-based telescopes continue to outperform them in moon-detection ability.

==
List ==
This is a list of the recognized moons of the planets and of the largest potential dwarf planets of the Solar System, ordered by their official Roman numeral designations.
The 19 moons that are large enough to have been rounded by their own gravity are listed in bold.
The seven largest moons, which are larger than any of the known dwarf planets, are listed in bold and italic.
Sidereal period differs from semi-major axis because a moon's speed depends both on the mass of its primary and its distance from it.

== See also ==
List of black holes
List of dwarf planets
List of galaxies
List of IAU designated constellations
List of largest cosmic structures
List of multiplanetary systems
List of Solar System objects by size
List of Solar System objects most distant from the Sun
Lists of astronomical objects
Lists of black holes
Lists of exoplanets
Lists of galaxies
Lists of stars
Lists of stars by constellation


==
References ==
 Media related to Natural satellites at Wikimedia Commons
Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game based on the Lego Star Wars line of toys.
It is a combination of the game Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and its sequel Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, which spans the first six episodes of the Star Wars saga.
The game was announced by LucasArts on 25 May 2007 at Celebration IV and was released for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, and Nintendo DS on 6 November 2007 in North America.
The compilation title was released for the PC on 13 October 2009 in the US.
The Mac OS X version of the game was released on 12 November 2010 by Feral Interactive.
A version of the game for iOS was released on 11 December 2013, and for Android on 1 January 2015.

==
Gameplay ==
The mission for the game is to successfully progress through the entire story while collecting Gold Bricks.
The Complete Saga spans the events that take place from the Trade Federation negotiations above Naboo in Star Wars
Episode
I - The Phantom Menace to the Rebel attack on the second Death Star above Endor in Return of the Jedi.

Like in Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, the hub world takes place in the Mos Eisley Cantina.
The Cantina has doors that allows the player to enter the levels for Episodes I-VI, the bonus levels, the Bounty Hunter missions, and the Arcade games.
The Cantina features a character customizer, a key feature from Lego Star Wars II.

In the PC, Wii, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game
there are 160 gold bricks to collect; 120 of these are for the main levels.
There are three for each of the levels.
One is for completing the level in story mode, the second is for achieving "True Jedi" status by collecting a certain amount of studs/coins, and the third is by collecting 10 LEGO "minikit" canisters, which are hidden across the level.
For iOS, there are 200 Gold Bricks overall with an additional gold brick available for each level with the completion of a challenge mode where the player must find the 10 hidden blue Minikits in 20 minutes.
The iOS version also offers 12 gold bricks by completing the arcade games in the lobby.

There are 20 gold bricks for completing the Bounty Hunter missions, which involve capturing key figures of the Old Republic and Rebellion for Jabba the Hutt.
There are 6 further gold bricks for completing the bonus missions (10 in the iOS version) and another 14 available to purchase at the Cantina (8 in the iOS version).

Overall, there are 36 story levels, 20 bounty hunter missions, and 6 bonus levels (two Lego City levels, two story levels (Anakin's Flight and A New Hope, the latter of which was a special unlockable level found in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game), and the original Mos Espa Pod Race and Gunship Cavalry levels).

Most of the story levels are the same as those found in their respective original games.
This game incorporates two previously scrapped levels:
"Anakin's Flight" and "Bounty Hunter Pursuit," which at one time were intended to appear in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game but were cut during development. "
Anakin's Flight" is based on the Naboo space battle against the droid control ship seen in The Phantom Menace.
It was originally envisioned as a rail-shooter level, but was changed to the free-roam style used in almost all vehicles levels in the game.
"
Bounty Hunter Pursuit," focuses on Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker pursuing bounty hunter Zam Wesell across Coruscant from Attack of the Clones.
It was also made into a free-roam level, but unlike "Anakin's Flight" was incorporated into Episode II.
(
In Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, there were only five story levels for Attack of the Clones rather than the standard of six levels per episode for all other episodes).

The "Mos Espa Podrace" and "Gunship Cavalry" story levels have been redesigned, although the versions from their respective original games are present as bonus levels.
"
Battle Over Coruscant," though, remains the same, with the change that players can change vehicles in Free Play.
New additions to The Complete Saga include a 2-player Battle Arena mode called "Arcade Mode", new Minikit vehicle bonus missions, the red power bricks from Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy returning and being incorporated into the prequel trilogy levels, and 10 additional bounty hunter missions add new challenges to the Prequel trilogy portions originally seen in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game.

The Episodes
I, II, and III levels have been updated so that characters can build and ride vehicles, wear helmets and gain access to bounty hunter and Stormtrooper areas.
Prequel trilogy characters now have the ability to dodge blaster fire and have their own special melee attack (for example, Chewbacca rips off arms).
New Force moves were added, Force Lightning and Force Choke.
New characters have also been added, bringing the total up to 128.
Indiana Jones is an unlockable playable character to foreshadow and promote Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures.

==
Plot ==
The plot is based on the first six Star Wars films, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, Star Wars:
Episode IV –
A New Hope,
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back, and Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi with no dialogue and 
added slapstick comedy.
==
Development ==
Traveller's Tales created The Complete Saga in response to the success of the original game and its sequel with LucasArts publishing the game.
They combined the two games while also updating graphics, as well as adding new levels, characters, and new costume elements for customizable characters.

== Reception ==
The game received generally positive reviews.
On aggregate review website Metacritic, the game attained overall scores of 80 out of 100 on all platforms.
In April 2009, the game was the fourth-highest selling on the Wii, and ninth for the DS.

By 2 May 2009, the game's worldwide sales total exceeded 3.4 million.
By June 2010, the game had achieved an ELSPA Gold sales award, indicating sales of 200,000 in the United Kingdom.
As of February 2017, Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga is the best-selling Star Wars video game of all-time, with sales of 15.29 million.
It was the best-selling Lego video game of all-time until being surpassed by Lego Marvel Super Heroes in 2017.Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition 2009 ranked The Complete Saga as the 23rd greatest video game of all time.
The game was nominated for Favorite Video Game at the 2012 Kids' Choice Awards, but lost to Just Dance 3.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Daisy Jazz Isobel Ridley (born 10 April 1992) is an English actress who rose to international prominence through playing the role of Rey in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy
: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

She has also featured as the title character of the romantic drama Ophelia (2018), appeared in the mystery film Murder on the Orient Express (2017), and lent her voice to the animated Peter Rabbit (2018).

==
Early life ==
Daisy Jazz Isobel Ridley was born on 10 April 1992 in the London borough of Westminster, and grew up in Maida Vale.
She is the youngest of three daughters born to Louise Fawkner-Corbett, a banker, and Christopher Ridley, a photographer.
She has two older sisters, Kika Rose and Poppy Sophia, as well as two older half-sisters.
Her mother's family, the Fawkner-Corbetts, were landed gentry with a military and medical background.
Her paternal great-uncle, Arnold Ridley, also served in the military, and separately forged a career as a playwright and actor (notably playing Private Godfrey in the sitcom Dad's Army); his brother, Daisy's grandfather, John Harry Dunn Ridley, OBE, was head of the Engineering Secretariat at the BBC from 1950 to 1965.Ridley has stated that while growing up, her favourite film was Matilda (1996), an adaptation of Roald Dahl's children's story, naming the title character (played by Mara Wilson in the film) as a role model.
While not a particularly strong Star Wars fan as a youth, she dedicatedly followed the Harry Potter series.
Ridley won a scholarship to Tring Park School for the Performing Arts in Hertfordshire, which she attended from ages nine to 18.
She then began reading classical civilisation at Birkbeck, University of London, before dropping out to focus on her acting career.
Prior to being cast in Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, Ridley worked as a barmaid in two different pubs in London for nearly two years.
In 2016, she began studying for a Bachelor of Arts in social science through online courses with the Open University.

==
Career ==


=== 2013–2015: Early roles and Star Wars breakthrough
===
Ridley began her career with minor roles in the television programmes Youngers, Toast of London, Silent Witness, Mr Selfridge, and Casualty.
She appeared in the short film Blue Season, which was entered into the Sci-Fi-London 48-Hour Film Challenge.
Ridley played the lead in film three of Lifesaver, an interactive film which was nominated for a BAFTA Award.
She also appeared in the music video for Wiley's song "Lights On", playing the character of Kim.
Ridley made her film debut in the 2015 British independent horror film Scrawl, after her scenes from the British comedy film The Inbetweeners 2 were removed in the final cut.

In April 2014, the casting of Ridley as Rey, one of the lead characters in The Force Awakens, was announced.
She was cast for the film in February 2014.
At the time of her casting she was, according to Rolling Stone, a "total unknown."
Her choice by director J. J. Abrams was seen as a repeat of George Lucas' move of casting relatively unknown actors for the lead roles in the first Star Wars film in 1977.Ridley began filming her scenes in May 2014 at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, and prior to the film's release in December 2015, she appeared at the launch of a set of Star Wars postage stamps issued by the UK postal service Royal Mail, with her character Rey featuring on a stamp along with the droid BB-8.
With international revenues of over $2 billion, The Force Awakens was a major box-office hit and the highest-grossing film of 2015.
Her performance received critical acclaim, with Richard Roeper describing her portrayal as "a breakout performance" and adding "Ford has a terrific father figure chemistry [shared] with Ridley and [John] Boyega".
=== 2016–present:
Star Wars sequel trilogy and other projects ===
Ridley became executive producer of the documentary The Eagle Huntress in January 2016, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on 24 January 2016; she also recorded narration for the film's wide release.
Ridley was one of several actors featured on Barbra Streisand's 2016 album Encore:
Movie Partners Sing Broadway.
Along with Anne Hathaway, Ridley and Streisand perform the song "At the Ballet" from A Chorus Line, with Ridley performing the role of Bebe, one of a trio of dancers hoping to be cast in a forthcoming show.

In 2017, Ridley portrayed Mary Debenham in Murder on the Orient Express, an adaptation of Agatha Christie's detective novel of the same name.
Directed by and starring Kenneth Branagh, production began in London in November 2016.
She also reprised her role as Rey, opposite Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi, which was released in December 2017.In January 2018, Ridley starred in the titular role in Ophelia, a reimagining of the Hamlet tale, alongside Naomi Watts and Clive Owen.
The project was filmed from April to July 2017 and debuted at the 2018 Sundance Film Festival.
In February 2018, Ridley voiced the role of Cottontail in Peter Rabbit, an adaptation of the children's stories of the same name by Beatrix Potter.
In December 2019, Ridley appeared as Rey in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, the last film in the sequel trilogy.
She is not expected to reprise her role again after this film, and is quoted as saying, "I don't think anything could top [The Rise of Skywalker] for this character."
However, she does show interest in returning as the character if needed, saying "[...] never say never.
I’m always open to a revisit.
But also the beautiful thing is it’s this wonderful, huge universe with all of these stories that have yet to be told.
I think there’s a lot of cool things to be made before any potential revisit."
She also reflected on her co-star Boyega's opinion that if more films were made without her involvement, she would feel left out.
In 2021, Ridley co-starred in the film Chaos Walking, an adaption of the young-adult novel by Patrick Ness.
She played Viola Eade, opposite Tom Holland who played Todd Hewitt.
The film was released on March 5, 2021.
The film had been delayed occasionally due to poor test screenings that followed the film's reshoots, and later due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

====
Upcoming projects ====
Ridley's upcoming films in pre-production are The Marsh King's Daughter, Women In The Castle, Young Woman and the Sea, and The Inventor.
In addition to acting, she will lend her voice for the upcoming indie game 12 Minutes, alongside James McAvoy and Willem Dafoe for Annapurna Interactive.
Her additional films in development include Daddio, Kolma, A Woman of No Importance, Piece of Mind, Super-Normal, The Lost Wife, and The Ice Beneath Her.

==
Personal life ==
Ridley resides in Primrose Hill, London.
Since 2017, she has been in a relationship with actor Tom Bateman, whom she met on the set of Murder on the Orient Express.
In 2016, Ridley revealed she had been diagnosed with endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome at age 15, requiring her to undergo multiple laparoscopic surgery procedures.
She states that her endometriosis left her feeling low in self-confidence due to acne that followed.
Following the 2016 Teen Choice Awards, which paid tribute to victims of gun violence, Ridley posted on both Instagram and Facebook an anti-gun violence message.
Her post prompted backlash from the public, with critics accusing the actress of hypocrisy in reference to the violence depicted in Star Wars.
Ridley has since quit social media in response to the harassment, though she briefly returned to Instagram, claiming the reason behind the deletion was because she had "a busy few months ahead [and] so wanted less distractions".
She reiterated this statement in 2017, saying that social media is "highly unhealthy for people's mental health," including hers.
Ridley further commented on the topic in a 2019 interview, vowing never to return to social media.
She stated:

"I honestly think now with social media and stuff...
it's great to have freedom of expression, but I do feel like people think opinions have so much weight...
I don't really think bad vibes should have the sun shone on them.
[...]
It's dangerous.
[...]
It's great in that respect for people who are in serious and dire situations to be able to be communicating, but for the most part I think — no, no, no.
"Ridley is a vegan.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Theatre ===


===
Music videos ===


===
Video games ===


===
Theme park attractions ===


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Daisy Ridley at IMDb
The Empire Strikes Back is a science-fiction novel written by Donald F. Glut and first published on April 12, 1980 by Del Rey.
It is based on the script of the film of the same name.
Along with the film, it introduces new characters, most notably Lando Calrissian and Boba Fett (though Fett had been seen in the earlier low-canon Star Wars Holiday Special, which was made completely apocryphal in 2014).

Glut's novelization was originally released in two forms; a standard edition and a special Young Readers' Edition that was condensed into 150 pages.
Initial printings of both versions contained 8 pages of color photographs in the middle of the book.

==
Plot ==
Despite the destruction of the Death Star in the 1976 novel Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, the Galactic Empire stills retains an iron grip on the galaxy.
Upon discovering the Rebel Alliance's secret base, the Empire strikes with massive force, sending the rebels scrambling across the galaxy.
Han Solo, Princess Leia, Chewbacca ("Chewie") and C-3PO are slowed down from escaping with the rest of the group by collapsing ice on Hoth.
Throughout the story, they remain within The Empire's reach.
Luke Skywalker and R2-D2 flee to Dagobah, but not to regroup with the others.
Instead, Luke seeks Yoda in order to be trained as a Jedi Knight.
His development of Force sensitivity during his training gives him a sensation of the danger shadowing his friends.
Subsequently, Luke's friends are captured in Cloud City.
Han is frozen in carbonite and taken to Jabba the Hutt.
Luke leaves Dagobah to save his friends.
But it is a trap, as the unprepared Luke is drawn into an unsuccessful confrontation with the Imperial Sith Lord Darth Vader.
He is left with a missing hand, near-death and reeling from the shocking revelation that Vader is his father.
However, he is rescued by the Millennium Falcon.
As in the film, the ending sees Luke, Leia, Chewie, 3PO and R2-D2 reunited, with Luke and Lando finalizing their plan to rescue Han Solo from Jabba's captivity.

==
Differences from the film ==
The book has some differences from the film, such as:
Yoda has blue skin in the novel, while in all other appearances his skin is greenish.

Luke Skywalker's training with Yoda is given more detail than in the film.

The Hoth battle is extended somewhat, such as when General Veers' AT-AT is destroyed by a Snowspeeder shortly after blowing up the rebels' shield generator.

Darth Vader's lightsaber blade is blue in the novel, whereas in the films it is red.

When Luke is attacked by Stormtroopers in Cloud City, he returns fire with his blaster, unlike in the film, where he does not fire a single shot.

In the Battle of Hoth, Dack can not get his harness done, as opposed to 'setting his approach vector'.

==
Sequel ==
The book was followed in 1983 by Return of the Jedi, written by James Kahn.
It is the third and final novel adaptation of the Star Wars classic trilogy.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Book summary on Ringshadow
The Empire Strikes Back
(novel) on Wookieepedia
Book review at goodreads.
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is an action-adventure game developed by Respawn Entertainment and published by Electronic Arts.
It was released for Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on November 15, 2019 and for Stadia on November 24, 2020.
The game is also planned to release for PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X and Series S in Q2/Q3 2021.
The story, set in the Star Wars universe five years after Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, follows Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis, who becomes a target of the Galactic Empire and is hunted throughout the galaxy by two Inquisitors while attempting to complete his training, escape his troubled past, and rebuild the fallen Jedi Order.

The game was announced during E3 2018, with a more detailed reveal during the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019.
The game received generally favorable reviews from critics and sold more than ten million copies by the end of March 2020.

==
Gameplay ==
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is an action-adventure video game played from a third-person perspective.
It also adopted the "Metroidvania" style of exploration and progression.
Players control Cal Kestis and have access to a lightsaber and the Force, which are used in both combat and puzzle scenarios.
Enemy types range from Imperial stormtroopers, droids, and Purge Troopers, who have been trained specifically to battle Jedi, to wild beasts and skilled Zabrak warriors that are native to each planet
Cal explores.
The game's bosses include Inquisitors, who also wield lightsabers and the Force, bounty hunters hired to hunt down Cal, large vehicles such as AT-STs, and wild beasts like the Oggdo Bogdo and the Gorgara.

The options menu documents the story as well as characters the player meets, along with a guide of how to defeat enemies.

The player acquires abilities at certain points in the story, and each ability allows access to previously inaccessible areas.
Once these abilities are unlocked, the player can upgrade them through a skill tree.
The game can only be saved at checkpoints, which appear as "meditation circles".
At these meditation circles, the player can "rest", which replenishes his health, Force energy, and healing items, but causes all enemies to respawn.
The game's collectibles include different outfits for Cal to wear, lightsaber pieces that can be used to customize the player's lightsaber, and alternate color schemes for Cal's ship, the Stinger Mantis (which is used to travel between planets), and droid companion BD-1 (who is used to access these collectibles, as well as complete certain puzzles), with all of these items being cosmetic and not affecting gameplay.

With the addition of a Star Wars Day 2020 update, players can access the Meditation Arena through the meditation circles.
Here, they can complete combat challenges, where they fight multiple waves of enemies, set in arenas based on certain locations from the story mode; completing these challenges awards the player with one to three stars, depending on whether the player abided by restrictions on the character's health (i.e. never recovered health or took any damage), which can be used to unlock additional skins for BD-1.
The Meditation Arena also includes a battle grid, where the player can face off against their own custom enemy wave, while being able to grant themselves invincibility, unlimited Force, and other cheats.

==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting and characters ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order takes place five years after the events of Revenge of the Sith.
The game follows Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis (Cameron Monaghan) as he is being hunted by the Second Sister (Elizabeth Grullón) and her partner, the Ninth Sister (Misty Lee), both trained by the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Scott Lawrence) as part of the Imperial Inquisitors program.
Supporting characters include: Cal's friend and scrapping partner Prauf (JB Blanc); former Jedi Knight-turned-mercenary Cere Junda (Debra Wilson); Greez Dritus (Daniel Roebuck), owner and pilot of the Stinger Mantis and Cere's friend; BD-1 (Ben Burtt), a small droid which befriends and accompanies Cal; Jedi Master Eno Cordova (Tony Amendola), who appears in hologram messages; Partisan leader Saw Gerrera (Forest Whitaker); Merrin (Tina Ivlev), one of the last surviving members of the Nightsister clan of Dathomir; and Dark Jedi Taron Malicos
(Liam McIntyre).
Cal's former Jedi Master, Jaro Tapal (Travis Willingham), and numerous clone troopers (Dee Bradley Baker) appear in flashbacks.

===
Plot ===
Five years after the Great Jedi Purge and the Galactic Republic's conversion into the Galactic Empire, former Jedi Padawan Cal Kestis is hiding on the planet Bracca, where he works as a scrapper salvaging ships from the Clone Wars, and is hiding his Force abilities.
After Cal is recorded by an Imperial Probe droid while using the Force to save his friend Prauf, two Inquisitors known as the Second Sister and the Ninth Sister are sent to investigate.
After the Second Sister kills Prauf for speaking up against the Empire, Cal makes his escape, briefly engaging in a duel with the Second Sister before he is rescued by former Jedi Knight Cere Junda and her partner pilot Greez Dritus in their ship, the Stinger Mantis.

Cere takes Cal to the planet Bogano in the hopes he can access an ancient vault.
En route to the vault, Cal befriends a small droid named BD-1, who shows him a message from former Jedi Master Eno Cordova, revealing that the vault was built by an ancient civilization called the Zeffo and that a Jedi Holocron containing a list of Force-sensitive children has been hidden inside by Cordova.
Cere believes the list could help rebuild the Jedi Order, but the only way to access the vault is by following Cordova's path.
Cal heads to the Zeffo homeworld and explores an ancient temple, finding a clue pointing to Cordova's friend, the Wookiee chieftain Tarfful.
On the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk, Cal encounters notorious insurgent Saw Gerrera, whom he helps free several Wookiees enslaved by the Empire.

Unable to find Tarfful
, Cal returns to Zeffo to find more clues regarding the vault but is ambushed by the Second Sister, who reveals herself as Trilla Suduri, Cere's former Padawan.
She explains that she was captured by the Empire after Cere betrayed her hidden location under torture, and warns Cal that Cere will inevitably betray him once they find the Holocron.
Eventually, Cal learns he requires a Zeffo artifact called Astrium to unlock the vault, before being captured by a Haxion Brood bounty hunter and forced to fight in a gladiatorial arena owned by Haxion boss Sorc Tormo.
After Cere and Greez rescue him, Cal returns to Kashyyyk to meet with Tarfful, who instructs him to investigate the top of the Origin Tree.
At the top of the tree, he finds another recording of Cordova saying that an Astrium can be found in a Zeffo tomb on Dathomir before being attacked by the Ninth Sister, whom he defeats.

On Dathomir, Cal's progress is impeded by Nightsister Merrin, who blames the Jedi for the massacre of her people during the Clone Wars, and attempts to keep him away using an army of revenants.
After experiencing a flashback of his former master, Jaro Tapal, sacrificing himself to protect him during Order 66, the kyber crystal of Cal's lightsaber is destroyed.
He meets former Jedi Taron Malicos, who crash-landed on Dathomir during the Purge and has been seeking to learn the magic of the Nightsisters, over time growing insane and succumbing to the dark side of the Force.
Cal refuses Malicos's offer to teach him this dark power and flees after Merrin attacks them both.
Aboard the Stinger Mantis, Cere admits she cut her connection to the Force after briefly falling to the dark side upon learning Trilla became an Inquisitor.
After traveling to Ilum to rebuild his lightsaber, Cal returns to Dathomir, where he retrieves the Astrium and overcomes his guilt for his part in Jaro's death.
He defeats Malicos with the unexpected aid of Merrin, who agrees to join the Stinger Mantis crew.

Back on Bogano, Cal unlocks the vault, but Trilla attacks him and steals the Holocron.
After Cere reassumes her status as a Jedi and grants Cal the rank of Jedi Knight, the pair infiltrate the Fortress Inquisitorius on Mustafar's oceanic moon Nur.
After battling his way through the fortress, Cal defeats Trilla and retrieves the Holocron.
Cere then attempts to reconcile with her former student, but Darth Vader appears and kills Trilla for her failure, nearly killing Cere and BD-1.
Unable to defeat Vader, the three barely escape from his grasp with help from Merrin.
Back on the Stinger Mantis, Cal, having realized that gathering the children would make it easier for the Empire to target them, destroys the Holocron, believing it to be better for those children to discover their own destinies.
Their mission complete, Cal asks his crew where they should head next.

==
Development ==
Following his exit from Santa Monica Studio, Stig Asmussen joined Respawn Entertainment in 2014 as the studio's game director, leading the studio's second development team.
The project was later revealed to be a third-person action-adventure game set in the Star Wars universe in May 2016.
Aaron Contreras, a narrative designer on Mafia III, led the game's narrative team, which included Chris Avellone and four other writers.
The studio collaborated with Lucasfilm to create new characters and locations.
The game was created with Unreal Engine 4.
Drawing inspiration from The Legend of Zelda:
The Wind Waker and the Dark Souls series, Asmussen has said the team's goals for the game design include creating a deep combat system and incorporating aspects of Metroidvania map design.
Lightsaber combat does not feature dismemberment of human enemies; this was attributed to guidelines imposed by Disney/Lucasfilm.
On June 8, 2019, it was announced that Gordy Haab and Stephen Barton would be composing the score for the game.
The former had previously composed the scores to Star Wars: The Old Republic and Star Wars:
Battlefront while the latter had collaborated with the studio on the Titanfall series and Apex Legends.
The score was recorded at Abbey Road Studios with the London Symphony Orchestra and the Bach Choir of London.
Mongolian folk metal band
The Hu wrote and recorded a song, "Sugaan Essena", which featured prominently in the game.
The song lyrics were written in Mongolian, then translated into a fictional Star Wars language.

==
Release ==
Publisher Electronic Arts announced the game at E3 2018.
At E3 2019, Electronic Arts showcased a 15-minute demo of the game.
Around two weeks after this on June 25, 2019, the studio showed an extended 25-minute version of the original demo.
It was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One on November 15, 2019, a month before the theatrical release of Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
A Stadia version was released November 24, 2020 to positive reception in regards to performance over cloud gaming.
The game was released in two editions; a Standard Edition, and a Deluxe Edition.
The latter of which featured exclusive skins for BD-1 and the Mantis, a Digital Artbook and a "Director's Cut" behind the scenes videos.
Exclusive cosmetics were also available by pre-ordering the game, and by having an active EA Access membership.
One of these cosmetics that were available through pre-ordering the game, the orange lightsaber crystal, was later made available through an update to all players.
A free update was released on May 4, 2020, to coincide with Star Wars Day.
It introduces combat challenges named "meditation training", New Game Plus, and new cosmetics for BD-1
and Cal.
On January 12, 2021, a free update was released that improved performance when running the game with backwards compatibility on PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S, with a further native port for those consoles set to release later in 2021.

===
Tie-in media and merchandise ===
A tie-in comic series published by Marvel Comics,
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order – Dark Temple, was announced on June 11, 2019 for release in September 2019.
Dark Horse Comics also published a reference book, The Art of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order on November 20, 2019.Hasbro also produced three figures in the Star Wars:
The Black Series range for Cal Kestis (and BD-1), the Second Sister and the Purge Stormtrooper, with this selection of designs also being adapted by Funko into Funko Pop!
figures.

== Reception ==


===
Critical ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order received "generally favorable reviews", according to review aggregator Metacritic.
IGN's Dan Stapleton gave the game 9/10, saying "Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order makes up for a lot of lost time with a fantastic single-player action-adventure that marks the return of the playable Jedi."
And "It’s a genre remix that samples the combat and exploration of a lightened-up Dark Souls and the action and energy of Uncharted..."
===
Sales ===
The PlayStation 4 version of Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order sold 26,761 copies within its first week on sale in Japan, which made it the fifth bestselling retail game of the week.
In the UK, it was the second bestselling retail game during its first week on sale, with 66% of sales being for the PlayStation 4 version and the remaining 34% for the Xbox One version.
It was also the fourth biggest physical release of 2019.Publisher Electronic Arts confirmed that Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order had the fastest-selling digital launch for any Star Wars game within its first two weeks on sale.
The game sold more than 8 million copies by the end of January 2020, exceeding EA's expectations.
More than 10 million units were sold by March 31, 2020.
===
Awards ===


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official site
Changes in Star Wars re-releases vary from minor differences in color timing, audio mixing, and take choices to major insertions of new visual effects, additions of characters and dialogue, scene expansions, and replacement of original cast members with newer ones.
Though changes were also made to the prequel trilogy, the original trilogy saw the most alteration.
Dissatisfied with the original theatrical cuts of the original Star Wars film, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi, creator George Lucas altered the films in ways that were ostensibly not initially possible, primarily due to limitations of time, budget, and technology.

The first substantial changes were made in 1997 with the release of a Special Edition remaster in commemoration of the franchise's twentieth anniversary.
These changes were largely made as visual effects tests for the forthcoming prequel films, demonstrating the possibilities of computer-generated imagery (CGI).
Additional notable changes were made when the original trilogy was released on DVD in 2004, in an attempt to create more consistency with the prequel trilogy.
More changes were made to the films for their Blu-ray release in 2011 and for their 4K Ultra HD release in 2019.

Although some critics felt that many smaller changes were improvements, innocuous, or understandable, most larger changes were received negatively by fans and critics—particularly those made to A New Hope and Return of the Jedi.
Major changes to the former film include the addition of a deleted scene featuring a CGI Jabba the Hutt; those to the latter include the incorporation of a new, larger musical number featuring the Max Rebo Band and changes to the denouement—including different music, the addition of a new montage, and the alteration of Anakin Skywalker's Force spirit.

==
Release history ==
1977:
In May, Star Wars was theatrically released.
Three different audio versions (a Dolby Stereo mix, a six-channel mix for 70 mm screenings, and a mono mix print) were created, with significant differences.
Later that year, among others, a silent, English-subtitled Super 8 reel version of the film was released by Ken Films.

1980:
In May, The Empire Strikes Back was theatrically released.
After its initial opening, but before its wide release, George Lucas extended the end sequence.
A 70 mm print of the film differed from the more widely distributed 35 mm print in takes of dialogue, visual and sound effects, shot choices, and transitions between shots; none of these changes appeared in later releases, with exception of one dialogue change.

1981:
In April, Star Wars was re-released, with the addition of the subtitles "Episode IV" and "A New Hope".
1983:
In May, Return of the Jedi was theatrically released.

1985:
The original Star Wars film was re-released on VHS, LaserDisc, and Capacitance Electronic Disc (CED) with an improved audio mix.
The LaserDisc and CED sped the film up by 3% to fit onto a single disc.

1993
: The original trilogy was released on LaserDisc as "The Definitive Collection".
With the exception of a new THX audio mix, scratch and dirt removal, and color balance changes, it matched the original theatrical releases.

1995
: The original trilogy was re-released on VHS with THX audio, advertised as the final release of the theatrical versions.

1997
: The "Special Edition" of the original trilogy was released theatrically from January through March for the 20th anniversary of Star Wars.
This release featured the first significant changes, which were intended to prove that Industrial Light & Magic could effectively produce CGI visual effects for the prequel trilogy.

1999:
In May, Episode I – The Phantom Menace was theatrically released.

2001: In November, The Phantom Menace was released on DVD, which features a slightly extended cut from the theatrical release.

2002:
In May, Episode II – Attack of the Clones was theatrically released.
A version made for digital-projection theaters included a few special effects which were not ready for the initial wide release; the DVD features the digital version with some extended lines of dialogue.

2004: In September, the original trilogy was released on DVD.
Further significant alterations were made, including replacing Latin script text with Aurebesh.

2005:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith was theatrically released.
The DVD release features a minor editing change.

2006: In September, Limited Edition DVDs of the 2004 versions of the original trilogy were re-issued; these contain the original unaltered versions on bonus discs.
These match the 1993 LaserDisc release, but remove the subtitles Episode IV – A New Hope.

2011: The original and prequel trilogy were released on Blu-ray.
Alterations were made to all six films.

2015
: The original and prequel films were released digitally to streaming services.
They are identical to their Blu-ray release, except for changes to the opening logos and fanfares.
The U.S. Library of Congress made the original release of Star Wars available to watch in person.

2019:
The original and prequel films, along with The Force Awakens and Rogue One, were released in 4K resolution on Disney's streaming service, Disney+.
Color, compositing, and minor effects adjustments were made to all three films of the original trilogy.

==
Significant changes ==


===
Star Wars ===


====
Title change ====
The first film was released in 1977 under the title Star Wars.
The subtitle Episode IV –
A New Hope was retroactively added to the opening crawl in a subsequent release.
Lucasfilm dates the addition to the theatrical re-release on April 10, 1981.
This change was made to bring the original film in line with the titling of its sequel
, Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980).

====
Tatooine ====
Some scenes on Tatooine were modified for the 1997 Special Edition, most notably an alteration to the Greedo scene and the restoration of a deleted scene featuring Jabba the Hutt.
Other modifications include new and modified shots of stormtroopers and dewbacks to have the creatures move using CGI, a CGI replacement of the Jawa sandcrawler, a different sound effect for Obi-Wan Kenobi making a krayt dragon call to scare off the Tusken Raiders, the addition of rocks in front of the cave
R2-D2 hides in, the replacement of an external shot of Obi-Wan's hut with a new angle showing Luke Skywalker's parked landspeeder, and color and continuity changes involving the binary sunset.
The shadow of the landspeeder was redone in one shot, and creatures, robots, and ships were added to Mos Eisley, including elements created for the Shadows of the Empire multimedia campaign.
A shot of the Millennium Falcon fighting its way out of Mos Eisley was also added.

=====
Greedo scene =====
Han Solo (Harrison Ford) is cornered in the Mos Eisley cantina by the Rodian bounty hunter Greedo (Paul Blake), and Han shoots under the table to kill Greedo.
The 1997 Special Edition release of the film alters the scene so that Greedo shoots first and misses (with Han's head digitally altered to move away from the laser blast).
The scene was altered again for the 2004 DVD release of the film so that Han and Greedo shoot simultaneously; this was shortened by several frames for the 2011 Blu-ray.
The scene was further modified for the 2019 4K Ultra HD release with the addition of a close-up shot of Greedo speaking (without subtitles), the removal of a reverse shot of Greedo, and a re-rendering of the visual effects.

According to Paul Blake, the scene was originally created as a result of Lucas having to cut a special-effects-heavy scene introducing Jabba the Hutt due to budget and schedule concerns.
The original version of the Greedo scene is considered iconic, while the altered version is one of the most controversial changes to the film.
Fans have coined the phrase "Han shot first" to protest the change, which according to Polygon alters Han's moral ambiguity and his fundamental character.
Lucas has stated that he always intended for Greedo to shoot first.
In 2015, a replica of an early script for Star Wars was discovered in the archives of the University of New Brunswick library.
In the script, dated March 15, 1976, Han shoots first.
Blake said in a 2016 interview: "Of course, it said it all in the original script, we played in the scene in English and at the end of the scene, it reads, 'Han shoots the alien.'
It's all it says and that's what happened."
=====
Jabba the Hutt =====
The original script for Star Wars included a scene between Jabba the Hutt (who was designed in concept art drawings similarly to his appearance in Return of the Jedi and often traveling on a sedan chair) and Han Solo, set in Mos Eisley's Docking Bay 94.

The scene was filmed with Harrison Ford as Solo and Declan Mulholland, a large man, wearing a furry vest as a stand-in for Jabba.
Lucas intended to replace Mulholland in post-production with a stop-motion character.
Due to time limitations and budget constraints, the scene was cut.
In the 1997 Special Edition, the scene was reinserted with a CGI Jabba replacing Mulholland.
In the original footage, Ford walked too close to Mulholland; as a workaround, Han was digitally moved to appear as if he steps on Jabba's tail, causing the Hutt to squeal.
Several Rodians (at least one of whom looks exactly like Greedo) appear in the background of the scene.
Boba Fett also appears at the end of the scene, and seems to break the fourth wall.
The insertion of this scene into the film was criticized for being superfluous to the previous cantina scene with Greedo, slowing down the pacing, and failing to move the plot forward.
The 1997 CGI Jabba has been described as "atrocious", and was replaced for the 2004 DVD release, making the character more realistic and similar to his depiction in Return of the Jedi.
On the audio commentary for this release, Lucas reflected that while he did not mind cutting the scene when he was not sure
if he would make sequels, he subsequently wanted it to be included as it introduces a character important to Han's story arc.

====
Luke's lightsaber ====
During the training scene aboard the Millennium Falcon, Luke's lightsaber—which in some releases had erroneously appeared green—was corrected to blue for the 2019 4K Ultra HD release.

====
Death Star ====
For the Special Edition, a scene of Han chasing a squad of stormtroopers on the Death Star was altered to replace a couple of stormtroopers at the end of the corrider with almost a hundred.
Den of Geek criticized the change as being "too much" and opined that "it's hard to believe that Han would even bother turning round to shoot at them when there were so many.
"In
the original version of Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel, Obi-Wan's saber appeared to "short out" when foreshortened toward the camera (a result of the in-camera effects failing to account for this viewing angle).
A glow was added in 2004, and a fully finished blade was added to these shots in 2019.
Also in the 2019 version, Obi-Wan's lightsaber was adjusted to appear consistently blue, and the flash effects of the lightsabers clashing was redone.

====
Yavin 4 ====
The Special Edition of A New Hope incorporated a deleted scene on Yavin 4, in which Luke is briefly reunited with his childhood friend Biggs Darklighter.
This was felt by some to strengthen the relationship of the characters during the climactic Death Star attack run.
A 180° turn of CGI X-wing fighters flying from Yavin 4 towards the Death Star was added to the 1997 Special Edition.
Wired points out that this erroneously shows that the moon is "very clearly in range of the Death Star from the very beginning of the battle."
Additionally, engine sounds were added to the battle scene which make parts of the musical score difficult to hear.

===
The Empire Strikes Back ===


====
Hoth ====
Close-up shots of the wampa that captures Luke on Hoth were inserted.

====
The Emperor's hologram ====
Clive Revill originally provided the Emperor's voice in The Empire Strikes Back, while actress Marjorie Eaton portrayed him physically, wearing a mask.
Ultimately the actress and voice actor were replaced by Ian McDiarmid, who portrayed the character in later films, for the 2004 DVD edition and subsequent releases.
The dialogue was changed with this alteration, making Vader seem to be unaware of Luke's paternity despite knowing his last name.
Wired criticized the change, arguing that the altered dialogue "reads as ignorant within the context of the rest of the film," and that Palpatine "looks more like he did 20 years before in the timeline than he does a year later in Return of the Jedi and again reminds you of poorer movies in the middle of this excellent one."
Polygon regarded the actor replacement itself as relatively innocuous.
====
Boba Fett ====
Boba Fett's dialogue in the film was originally recorded by Jason Wingreen.
Subsequently, Attack of the Clones revealed Boba to be a clone of Jango Fett, played by Temuera Morrison.
To reflect this, Morrison re-recorded Boba's lines for the 2004 DVD release of the film.
In the shot when the Millennium Falcon detaches from the Star Destroyer, Boba Fett's ship, the Slave I, was replaced with a version following the Falcon more closely.

====
Cloud City ====
New establishing shots were added to Cloud City, which create some inconsistencies with later shots.
Another shot has a railing added to it, which does not reflect properly.
New shots of Cloud City's citizens reacting to Lando Calrissian's evacuation orders were added.
In the 1997 Special Edition, the audio of Emperor Palpatine falling down the shaft in Return of the Jedi was played when Luke Skywalker falls down the chute; this was removed in later releases.

====
Ending ====
Following the initial limited theatrical release, Lucas added three exterior shots to the denouement to clarify that Lando and Chewbacca are on the Falcon, not the Rebel frigate that Luke, Leia, and the droids are on.
In the 1997 Special Edition, a line of Vader's dialogue was replaced and a shot of his shuttle landing in his Star Destroyer (using stock footage of the second Death Star from Return of the Jedi) was inserted into the sequence in which Luke uses the Force to contact Leia.
Wired calls this "
Yet another addition that answers a question no one had."
===
Return of the Jedi ===


====
Jabba's palace ====
In the Special Edition, an establishing shot of a bantha herd was inserted, and a CGI beak and extra tentacles were added to the sarlacc.
The 2011 Blu-ray extended the front door of Jabba's palace, making the door appear three times longer from the outside than it does on the inside.

The scene in which Jabba feeds the dancer Oola to his rancor opens with a performance by the Max Rebo Band and its lead singer, Sy Snootles.
In the original theatrical release, the song is "Lapti Nek", sung in the fictional language Huttese.
The Special Edition changed the performance to the new song "Jedi Rocks", which mostly received negative criticism.
The puppet used for Snootles was also replaced with CGI.
According to Special Edition producer Rick McCallum, this change was made because Lucas could not originally achieve the "large musical number" he envisioned because characters could not move in certain ways; Snootles could not open her mouth to lip sync correctly, and her eyes did not move.
The Special Edition increased the size of the Max Rebo Band from three members to twelve.
Additional footage was filmed of Boba Fett flirting with one of the dancers.

In the theatrical release of the film, Oola's death is filmed from outside the rancor pit: she falls into the pit, and her scream is heard from off-screen.
In the 1997 Special Edition, extra shots were inserted depicting her in the pit, including shots where she looks up to the crowd, the pit door being raised, and a shot of her terror.
The rancor and Oola as she screams remain off-screen.
Femi Taylor, who played Oola, impressed critics with her ability to reprise the role over a decade later without visible difference.
James Whitbrook at io9 praised the additions to the scene, writing that it teased the rancor well while still keeping the monster a surprise for Luke's later battle with it.
Conversely, Den of Geek UK criticized the additions as unnecessary and felt that they made the audience familiar with the pit, weakening Luke's scene.

====
Climax on the second Death Star ====
At the climax of the film, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning, prompting Darth Vader to throw the Emperor down a chasm.
In the original version of the scene, Vader has no dialogue.
In the 2011 Blu-ray and later releases, Vader mutters "No" and then yells a drawn-out "No!",
creating a parallel with his near-identical cry at the end of Revenge of the Sith.
This addition was described as being unnecessary at best, and at worst being clumsy, sounding terrible, and seeming to mock the scene in the prequel.
A Polygon writer argues that the change displays a distrust in the audience's ability to interpret Vader's emotions and further that it made the emotional scene "laughable".

In the scene where Anakin Skywalker is unmasked, the 2004 DVD release digitally removed his eyebrows to reflect Anakin burning on Mustafar at the end of Revenge of the Sith.
Actor Sebastian Shaw's brown eyes were also digitally changed to blue to match Hayden Christensen's eye color.

====
Victory celebration ====
The film ends with a scene of the Rebel Alliance and a village of Ewoks on Endor celebrating the death of the Emperor and victory over the Empire.
The original theatrical release of the film featured the song "Ewok Celebration", also known as "Yub Nub", playing over the celebration.
The 1997 Special Edition release of the film replaced "Ewok Celebration" with score composed by John Williams titled "Victory Celebration", and the scene was lengthened to include shots of celebration on the planets
Coruscant, Bespin, and Tatooine.
The 2004 DVD release further added a shot set on Naboo, in which a Gungan is given a line of dialogue, and added the Senate building and Jedi Temple to Coruscant.

====
Anakin's Force ghost ====
At the end of the film, Darth Vader is redeemed by killing the Emperor to save Luke Skywalker's life, then dies of his injuries shortly after, and appears to Luke as Anakin Skywalker alongside the Force spirits of Yoda and Obi-Wan Kenobi.
In the 1983 theatrical release, Sebastian Shaw plays this Force ghost in addition to an unmasked Vader.
Hayden Christensen later played Anakin in the prequel trilogy films Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
To reflect this, the 2004 DVD release of Return of the Jedi replaced Shaw's appearance as the Force ghost with Christensen, which was considered controversial by some.
Den of Geek rated it as the worst change to the original trilogy.
The Digital Bits notes that the 2019 4K restoration made it more obvious where Anakin's head was replaced.
===
The Phantom Menace ===
The DVD released in 2001 features a slightly extended cut of the podrace sequence, as well as a brief scene on Coruscant focusing on Anakin and Jar Jar Binks.

====
Podrace sequence ====
The extended podrace includes a longer introduction of the racers and the second lap of the race, both of which ScreenRant says do not contribute to the story, and potentially negatively affect the film's pacing.
Additionally, Watto cheering for Anakin's rival Sebulba was removed for home media releases.

====
CGI Yoda ====
In the original version of The Phantom Menace, a puppet was used to portray Yoda except for two scenes near the end of the film.
This was changed for the 2011 Blu-ray release, with the puppet being replaced with a CGI model, similar to those used for the film's sequels Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.

===
Attack of the Clones ===
A few special effects which were not ready for the initial wide release were completed for release in digital-projection theaters.
The DVD features the digital version with some extended lines of dialogue.
The 2011 Blu-ray features a small editing change to the Coruscant speeder chase, adds a voiceover to Anakin's vision of Shmi, and changes the order of shots depicting Count Dooku's escape.

===
Revenge of the Sith ===
The theatrical release had a diagonal wipe from Obi-Wan leaving Mustafar to Anakin using his hand to crawl from the lava.
The DVD changed this to a direct cut, which was reverted on the 2011 Blu-ray.
The latter release also has additional clone trooper dialogue as they land on Utapau, and added moss to the treehouse on Kashyyyk.
The version released on Disney+ has the reprise of "The Throne Room" music from A New Hope in the end credits removed, making the end credits shorter.

== Reception ==
In 2015, Lance Ulanoff of Mashable viewed the original theatrical print of Star Wars submitted to the Library of Congress, and noted merit to Lucas's belief that technology did not allow him to achieve his vision, citing a visible marquee around Leia's ship "so jarring that it temporarily pulls me out of the film" because the original print is "lack[ing] the seamless quality
[he has] come to expect from sci-fi and fantasy".
Despite this, Ulanoff wrote that he "hate[s]
each and every one" of the later added CGI effects.
In 2017, a writer argued that the Special Edition changes to the original Star Wars "stripped the film of every aspect that it had won its Academy Awards for", including those for Best Visual Effects, Best Production Design, and Best Original Score.
A Polygon article asserts that "there was a solid logic behind" a number of minor changes, such as adding windows to Cloud City or sparks to Jango Fett's jetpack, saying these "angered, to a close approximation, nobody".

==
Legacy ==
Asked why he was opposed to releasing the original versions of the films alongside the modified versions, Lucas stated in 2004: "To me, [the original movie] doesn't really exist anymore.
...
I'm sorry you saw half a completed film and fell in love with it.
But I want it to be the way I want it to be.
"
In addition to a number of extant continuity errors throughout the films, a CGI character omission in The Phantom Menace has never been corrected—despite special effects supervisor John Knoll calling attention to it in the film's 2001 DVD commentary.
ScreenRant says this "highlights how George Lucas' motivations for tweaking the Star Wars movies are more about improving and updating than removing imperfections.
"In 2019
, Kathleen Kennedy, president of Lucasfilm since the 2012 acquisition of the company by Disney, stated that she would not make alterations to Lucas's original trilogy, because "those will always remain his."
While promoting The Rise of Skywalker, director J. J. Abrams expressed his hopes that the original versions of the trilogy would be officially released, but said that the powers that be had told him "that that's not necessarily possible".
On whether he thought the sequel trilogy should be altered at some point, Abrams stated, "I respect anyone who feels like they want to go back and adjust and add; I get that.
But I also feel like it's not the way I think about projects ...
I feel like [when] you're done with a thing, ... that's what it is."
Contrarily, some media outlets have called for the climax of The Rise of Skywalker to be altered to show the Force spirits who aid Rey, instead of a mostly blank screen.
Fan pleas for a director's cut of the film trended on social media following the release of Zack Snyder's Justice League.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Kaminski, Michael (2009). "
Saving Star Wars: The Special Edition Restoration Process and its Changing Physicality".
The Secret History of Star Wars.

Miller, Leon (October 8, 2019). "
Star Wars: 5 Special Edition Changes That Should Be Reversed (& 5
We'd Keep)".
ScreenRant.

List of changes in Star Wars re-releases on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Online archive of Star Wars coverage at American Cinematographer, including interviews regarding the 1997 Special Edition
The Mandalorian is an American space Western television series created by Jon Favreau for the streaming service Disney+.
It is the first live-action series in the Star Wars franchise, beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983).
It stars Pedro Pascal as the title character, a lone bounty hunter who goes on the run after being hired to retrieve "The Child".

Star Wars creator George Lucas had begun developing a live-action Star Wars television series by 2009, but this project was deemed too expensive to produce.
He sold Lucasfilm to Disney in October 2012.
Subsequently, work on a new Star Wars series began for Disney+.
Favreau signed on in March 2018, serving as writer and showrunner.
He executive produces alongside Dave Filoni, Kathleen Kennedy, and Colin Wilson.
The series' title was announced in October 2018, with filming starting at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic developed the StageCraft technology for the series, using virtual sets and a 360-degree video wall to create the series' environments.
This has since been adopted by other film and television productions.

The Mandalorian premiered with the launch of Disney+
on November 12, 2019.
The eight-episode first season was met with positive reviews, was nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the 72nd Primetime Emmy Awards, and won seven Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards.
A second season premiered on October 30, 2020, and a third season is in pre-production.
Three spin-off series will expand on the series' timeline:
The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

==
Premise ==
Beginning five years after the events of Return of the Jedi (1983) and the fall of the Galactic Empire, The Mandalorian follows Din Djarin, a lone Mandalorian bounty hunter in the outer reaches of the galaxy.
He is hired by remnant Imperial forces to retrieve the child Grogu, but instead goes on the run to protect the infant.
While looking to reunite Grogu with his kind, they are pursued by Moff Gideon, who wants to use Grogu's connection to the Force.

== Cast and characters ==
Pedro Pascal stars as Din Djarin, the series' title character and a lone bounty hunter.
Pascal compared the character to Clint Eastwood, with advanced combat skills and of "questionable moral character".
The character's real name is not given until "Chapter 8: Redemption", but Pascal accidentally revealed it early in November 2019.
His bounty in "Chapter 1: The Mandalorian" is "The Child"—colloquially known as "Baby Yoda" by audience members—an infant of the same species as Star Wars character Yoda.
He is created with animatronics and puppetry, augmented with visual effects.
He becomes the Mandalorian's ward, and his name is revealed to be Grogu in "Chapter 13
: The Jedi".
The first season features several recurring co-stars, including Carl Weathers as Greef Karga, leader of a bounty hunter guild; Werner Herzog as "The Client", an enigmatic man; Omid Abtahi as Dr. Pershing, a scientist working for the client; Nick Nolte as the voice of Kuiil, an Ugnaught moisture farmer who helps the Mandalorian; Taika Waititi as the voice of IG-11, a bounty hunter droid; Gina Carano as Cara Dune, a former Rebel shock trooper-turned-mercenary; Giancarlo Esposito as Moff Gideon, a former officer of the Imperial Security Bureau; and Emily Swallow as "The Armorer", a Mandalorian who forges armor and equipment from beskar steel.
Esposito, Carano, Weathers, and Abtahi return for the second season.
Several actors appear as characters from previous Star Wars media, including Timothy Olyphant as Cobb Vanth, Temuera Morrison as Boba Fett, Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze, Rosario Dawson as Ahsoka Tano, and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker.
Other recurring co-stars for the second season include Amy Sedaris as Peli Motto, reprising her role from the first season; Misty Rosas, who was the on-set performer for Kuiil in the first season, as the Frog Lady; Mercedes Varnado as Koska Reeves; and Ming-Na Wen as Fennec Shand, also reprising her role from the first season.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2019) ===


===
Season 2 (2020) ===


==
Production ==


===
Background ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas began development on a live-action Star Wars television series known as Underworld in early 2009.
More than 50 scripts were written for the series by 2012, but they were eventually deemed too expensive to produce.
In January 2013, ABC president Paul Lee stated that his network would be discussing potential live-action Star Wars television series with Lucasfilm after the latter had been sold by Lucas to ABC's parent company The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.
In November 2017, Disney CEO Bob Iger announced that Disney and Lucasfilm were developing a live-action Star Wars television series for the new streaming service Disney+.
===
Development ===
While working on The Lion King (2019), a photo-realistic remake of the 1994 animated film, in 2017, director Jon Favreau pitched an idea he had for a Star Wars television series to Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Kennedy suggested Favreau discuss the idea with Dave Filoni, executive producer on the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels.
Favreau and Filoni had met at the Skywalker Ranch when Favreau was working on Iron Man (2008) and Filoni was working on the first season of The Clone Wars, and Favreau subsequently voiced the Mandalorian character Pre Vizsla in The Clone Wars for Filoni.
When Favreau met with Filoni about his series idea, the latter drew a doodle of a baby of the same species as the Star Wars character Yoda which became "The Child".
Favreau wanted to explore the "scum and villainy" of the Star Wars universe following the events of the film Return of the Jedi (1983).
He began spending several hours at the end of each day developing the series while he was directing The Lion King.
Lucasfilm announced that Favreau would write and executive produce a new Star Wars series for Disney+ in March 2018.
Kennedy added that the series was an opportunity for a diverse group of writers and directors to be hired to create Star Wars stories, after the franchise's films had been criticized for being written and directed by only white men.
In May, Favreau stated that he had written scripts for four of the series' eight episodes before being officially hired for the project.
On October 3, Favreau announced that the series was titled The Mandalorian and revealed the premise for the show.
The following day, Lucasfilm announced that Filoni, Kennedy, and Colin Wilson would executive produce the series alongside Favreau, with Karen Gilchrist acting as co-executive producer.
The series premiere was set to be available with the launch of Disney+ in November 2019.
Star Pedro Pascal described the series as taking the space Western undertones from the Star Wars films "and infusing it with steroids".
In July 2019, Favreau confirmed that there would be a second season of the series and that he had begun writing it.
Iger announced in February 2020 that the second season would premiere that October.
By late April, Favreau had been writing a third season for "a while" and further development on the season was beginning.
In September, co-star Giancarlo Esposito said the second season would "start to lay the groundwork for the depth and breadth that's going to come in season 3 and season 4, where you’re really gonna start to get answers."
Favreau announced in December 2020 that the third season was in pre-production, and would begin filming in 2021 once the spin-off series
The Book of Boba Fett completed filming.
It was expected to begin filming on April 5, 2021.

===
Casting ===
In November 2018, Pedro Pascal was confirmed to be portraying the Mandalorian after being rumored to be cast in the role for some time.
Pascal initially thought he was being cast as the Star Wars character Boba Fett due to the visual similarities between that character and the Mandalorian, but the latter is actually a separate character named Din Djarin.
Favreau called Pascal "a classic movie star" who "had the presence and skill[s]" necessary to portray a character largely concealed under a helmet.
The Mandalorian is also portrayed by stunt doubles Brendan Wayne and Lateef Crowder.
Pascal worked with Favreau and Filoni to record the character's dialogue later.
In February 2021, Lucasfilm said Gina Carano, a recurring co-star during the first two seasons, was no longer employed by the company.
This came after Carano made a social media post comparing being a Republican in the United States to the treatment of Jewish people during the Holocaust, with Lucasfilm saying the post was "abhorrent and unacceptable".
Carano had been repeatedly warned about her social media posts by Lucasfilm executives who reportedly had been looking for a reason to fire her for two months.
The February 2021 posts were "the final straw", and the decision to fire the actress was made by Lucasfilm executives rather than Favreau.
The Walt Disney Company CEO Bob Chapek said Carano was fired because her posts did not align with the values of Disney, which he said were "universal" and not political.
The Hollywood Reporter reported that Carano's role of Cara Dune was not expected to be recast, though industry insiders felt that was still a possibility due to story and merchandising reasons.

===
Filming ===
The series is filmed at Manhattan Beach Studios in California.
Filoni directed the series' first episode, making his live-action directorial debut, with Rick Famuyiwa, Deborah Chow, Bryce Dallas Howard, and Taika Waititi also directing for the first season.
Filoni, Howard, and Famuyiwa returned for the second season, and were joined by Favreau (who was unable to direct during the first season due to his commitment to The Lion King), Peyton Reed, co-star Carl Weathers, and Robert Rodriguez.

===
New technology ===
Visual effects studio Industrial Light & Magic, a subsidiary of Lucasfilm, opened a new division in November 2018 called ILM TV, specifically intended for episodic and streaming television.
Based in London with support from ILM's San Francisco, Vancouver, and Singapore locations, one of the first projects for the new division was The Mandalorian.
While directing The Jungle Book (2016), Favreau had used large screens on set to create interactive lighting so when live action footage was combined with a digital environment in post-production the effect would be more realistic.
He found the process to be effective, but time-consuming.
When he began working on The Lion King, Favreau worked with visual effects vendor Moving Picture Company, technology developer Magnopus, and the game engine software Unity to develop a new virtual camera system that allowed him to film scenes in a virtual reality environment as if he was filming with physical cameras.
For The Lion King, the results of the virtual photography were then rendered by MPC as final animation for the film.
On The Mandalorian, Favreau wanted to use the virtual technology to aid live action photography and also develop the video wall system.
ILM partnered with video game developer Epic Games to create a new system named StageCraft based on Epic's game engine Unreal Engine.
StageCraft consists of large LED video screens on which digital environments can be rendered in real time for actors to perform in front of.
During pre-production, the virtual photography process developed for The Lion King was used to plan the series' filming and determine what environments would be needed on set.
The digital environments were then created by ILM and added to StageCraft ready for live action photography with the actors.
Some of these environments were based on location photography in countries such as Iceland and Chile, on which Favreau said, "The actors aren't brought on location.
The location is brought to the actors.
"
The environments were designed by the series' visual art department, led by Lucasfilm's creative director Doug Chiang and production designer Andrew L. Jones.
During filming, the digital environments were rendered on a video wall in real time, allowing the filmmakers and actors to see the environments.
ILM used a smaller version of the technology for Solo: A Star Wars Story (2018), but on The Mandalorian they utilized a 21-foot-tall (6.4 m) set that was 75 feet (23 m) in diameter, surrounded by a 360-degree semicircular LED video wall and ceiling.
The Manhattan Beach Studios set is referred to as a "volume", which is traditionally the name for motion capture  stages.
Favreau's initial intention was to use the video wall as a way to provide realistic interactive lighting for the actors, with a section of the screen behind the actors displaying a green screen so a higher quality version of the background could be added in post-production.
During filming tests with the technology, the team realized that the Unreal Engine could render visuals fast enough that they could have the background move in relation to the camera.
This allowed the system to maintain the appearance of parallax, where the environment would appear differently based on the angle it was being looked at just as a real 3D environment would.
This effect causes some distortion to the image on the video wall, but looks like a real environment when viewed through the camera.
The images rendered on the video wall in real time were often of a high enough quality to be used as final effects when filmed on set.
Physical elements were added to the volume to match the digital backgrounds, such as dirt on the floor to match dirt displayed on the video wall.
Interior spaces were also created, such as an office used by Imperial agents where the walls and ceiling were displayed on the video wall around a physical table.
The production had several physical sections of the Razor Crest, the Mandalorian's ship, that could be placed within the volume, such as having the front half of the ship physically built and the back half rendered digitally.
The environments could be manipulated in StageCraft on set as required, allowing the filmmakers to request changes to the environment and have them rendered on the video wall on the same day.
The production was able to change between environments within half an hour, or even faster if the physical elements within the volume were not visible and did not need to be changed.
One of the primary advantages of using the video wall technology was the realistic lighting, with the wall providing ambient light and accurate reflections on the actors.
This was especially important for the Mandalorian, who wears reflective armor.
Traditionally, on a production using green screen, the visual effects team would have to remove the green reflections from a reflective character or object in post-production, and then add new reflections that matched the digital environment.
Using StageCraft, the reflections in the Mandalorian's armor were already correct on set.
It also allowed for the series' cinematographers to light scenes in a way that would match the background, rather than lighting the set and hoping the digital background would match in post-production as they would have to do with green screen.
A technique used by the production to ensure the lighting from the video wall looked natural was to have the actors in shadow, with light from the environment behind them, often creating silhouettes.

===
Music ===
Composer Ludwig Göransson was recommended by several of his previous collaborators to Favreau, including directors Ryan Coogler and Anthony and Joe Russo, and musician Donald Glover.
Favreau knew that music would be important to the series due to the impact of John Williams' score on the Star Wars films, but also wanted the music of the series to be different from the films.
He wanted the series to sound "a little grittier, a little edgier and a little more tech-oriented".
Göransson first met with Favreau in November 2018, when Favreau showed the composer concept art for the series and discussed his inspirations for the story and tone, including Western and samurai films.
They also discussed how they felt when they first heard Williams' Star Wars music, and Göransson set out to recreate those feelings and "capture the soul of what Star Wars is" but in a new way.
Göransson was announced as composer for the series in December 2018.
The basis of the main theme was created from Göransson experimenting with a bass recorder, digitally manipulating it to make it more "futuristic".
Guitars, a piano, drums, and synthesizers are also featured in the main theme.
A 70-piece orchestra was used for the first season, combined with recordings of Göransson playing the main instruments which he augmented with synthesizers and other digital manipulation.
Walt Disney Records released a soundtrack album for each episode of the first season.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, orchestra players were recorded remotely or in smaller, distant groups for the second season.
Two albums were released for the second season, each covering four episodes of the season.

==
Themes ==


===
Parenting and fatherhood ===
One of the primary themes of The Mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the father–son relationship dynamic between the Din Djarin and the Child.
Ryan Britt of Fatherly wrote that this is unusual in Star Wars stories, and that past examples of parenting in the franchise have tended to be poor ones, from the murderous Darth Vader, father of Luke Skywalker, to the neglectful Galen Erso, father of Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016).
Britt wrote: "For years the Star Wars franchise avoided depicting a parent-child dynamic.
With Mando and Baby Yoda, that's finally changing."
The dynamic between Kuiil and IG-11 also reflect the childrearing theme in The Mandalorian.
The two have a relationship similar to that of a father and son, as demonstrated in the scene in which Kuiil teaches IG-11 how to operate and function after the droid is reprogrammed.
Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk argued that parenting has been the subject of past Star Wars stories, but almost always during later stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early stages such as the Child.
As examples, she cited Obi-Wan Kenobi serving as a mentor to the adolescent Anakin Skywalker, Princess Leia lamenting over her grown son Kylo Ren, or the absence of Rey's parents.
Britt argued strong parental examples in Star Wars are important because the franchise is so often associated with the childhoods of its fans.
The Mandalorian particularly highlights the challenges of being a single parent, and a working parent, as the Mandalorian struggles to continue his day job as a bounty hunter and mercenary while serving as the sole caretaker of the Child.
Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter described the show as "the adventures of a single dad looking for a job".
Several reviewers have compared the dynamic between the Child and the Mandalorian to Lone Wolf and Cub, a manga about a samurai warrior and his young son.
Favreau acknowledged Lone Wolf and Cub as an influence in an episode of Disney Gallery:
The Mandalorian.
The Mandalorian's parental role in the series makes him a softer and more relatable character; he changes in a positive way because of raising the Child, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
He risked his life and drastically changed his career as a bounty hunter to accept his responsibility as the Child's caretaker and guardian, marking a significant parental sacrifice.
When the Mandalorian seeks work to earn money, he is now doing so to provide not only for himself, but for the Child as well.
We see several examples of the Mandalorian parenting the Child throughout the series, such as when he stops the Child from pressing random buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, ultimately by holding him in his lap.
In another example, the Mandalorian establishes a car seat for the Child in the cockpit of his ship, so he can be seated safely and comfortably during their travels.
The relationship between the Mandalorian and the Child is an example of unexpected fatherhood.
The Mandalorian feels a connection and parental bond with the Child because of his own childhood, when he was orphaned upon the death of his parents and was adopted by the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling".
Nevertheless, fatherhood is not a role the Mandalorian initially seeks, and he makes repeated initial attempts to avoid this responsibility.
He first does so in "Chapter 3:
The Sin", when he first leaves the Child with the Client.
He does so again in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", when he plans to leave the Child with Omera, a protective mother on the planet Sorgan, who is willing to take the Child into her own family.
The Mandalorian does not fully commit to the role of fatherhood until the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption", when the Child himself is also adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling" and the Mandalorian is formally declared to be his father figure.
He nonetheless continues to search for what he feels may be a more appropriate guardian for the Child, as in the second season's fifth episode, "The Jedi", in which he seeks to leave him with Ahsoka Tano.
Several writers suggested the fact that the Mandalorian's face is concealed has a tabula rasa effect and his anonymity allows viewers to see and imagine themselves as parents.
Britt said this "allow(s) us to dream about what arsenal we might deploy to protect our children".
However, Singer said the show's setting in space make the challenges of child-rearing seem more exciting and exotic than they might otherwise be.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the series: "There is no shrill squawking from Baby Yoda, no tantrum, no spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a parent's psyche like a dentist's drill shredding a soft, pink nerve."
Likewise, Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk said the show ignores or does not address many parenting details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what the Child eats, when he goes to sleep, and whether he wears diapers.
She wrote: "The Mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so Mando gets to be a very particular image of fatherhood: the guy who doesn't have to sweat the small stuff."
VanAnderonk described this as a wish fulfillment fantasy for parents or prospective parents: "a vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all detail and specificity that all that's left are archetypes: the parent, the child".
The Child encounters a handful of other protector figures throughout the first season, including Omera, IG-11, and Peli Motto.
Some observers have criticized the series for the fact that the Mandalorian repeatedly leaves the Child alone or in the hands of relative strangers, as well as for making decisions that place the Child in danger.
One example is in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", when he allows a team of dangerous mercenaries to use his ship while the Child is on board, nearly resulting in the Child's death.
An interaction the Mandalorian has with Peli Motto in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" is one of the most overt discussions about the challenges of caring for the Child.
When the Mandalorian accidentally wakes the child, who had been sleeping in Peli's arms, she chides him: "Do you have any idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
"
She also condemns the Mandalorian for leaving the child alone on the ship, saying: "you have an awful lot to learn about raising a young one".
ScreenCrush writer Matt Singer argued the Mandalorian's parenting errors makes the show that much more appealing because making mistakes is a large part of being a parent.
Eileen Chase of Today echoed this: "He is not an ideal parent, just like the rest of us who have to balance parenting and work."
===
Good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
The nature of good and evil and the question of nature versus nurture is raised repeatedly throughout The Mandalorian, perhaps most overtly through by Kuiil's reprogramming of IG-11 from a bounty hunter to a nurse droid and protector.
Even after IG-11 is reprogrammed, the Mandalorian does not believe he has truly changed, because he believes droids have an essential nature and that IG-11's nature remains murderous and untrustworthy.
But in reprogramming IG-11, Kuiil nurtures him and helps him to change; Kuiil feels that in the process of learning how to function again, IG-11 gained a new personality.
Kuiil insists to the Mandalorian: "Droids are not good or bad — they are neutral reflections of those who program them."
Keith Phipps of Vulture wrote of IG-11 and the nature versus nurture theme: "He's not bad.
He's just programmed that way, and with care and change he can do a lot of good in the world.
"The
Kuiil and IG-11 scenes also demonstrate that the way in which the "child" character is raised makes a significant difference in whether the child becomes an asset or a threat to those around him.
The droid was a dangerous assassin before Kuiil reprogrammed him, but thanks to the Ugnaught's parenting, he becomes a protector and helper instead.
Some writers have likewise suggested the Child is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all children, he is impressionable and does not fully understand the events occurring around him.
He is learning about the world around him and needs guidance as he develops his abilities.
It will largely fall to the Mandalorian to provide this guidance, as when the Mandalorian stops him from strangling Cara Dune.
However, multiple writers have questioned whether the violent acts the Child has repeatedly witnessed throughout The Mandalorian are having a negative impact on his development, and that he is learning to become violent himself as a result.
Phipps wrote of this: "That look of wonder in the Child's eyes as IG-11 kills and kills again is hilarious, but also a little chilling."
One particular scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" led many reviewers and fans to question whether the Child may be demonstrating evil tendencies.
During a scene on the Mandalorian's spaceship, the Child observes as the Mandalorian and Cara Dune engage in a friendly arm wrestling match.
During the contest, the Child uses the Force to choke Cara, nearly strangling her before the Mandalorian intervened.
Throughout the Star Wars franchise, that ability has been most commonly associated with the Dark Side of the Force, particularly Darth Vader.
Sarah Bea Milner of Screen Rant wrote: "The moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
Some reviewers noted, however, that the Child likely mistakenly believed the Mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
Additionally, in the same episode, the Child uses Force healing to save Greef Karga, a power typically associated with the Light Side.
Nevertheless, some writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating the Child's capacity for evil because he is so adorable.
Fans speculated the Child could be presenting a false personality or using the Force to manipulate people into caring about him to help ensure his survival.
However, Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle suggested rather than building toward making the Child evil, the show could be suggesting the Mandalorian needs to find a way to raise the Child in a less violent environment.

==
Release ==
The Mandalorian premiered on the streaming service Disney+
on its United States launch day, November 12, 2019.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 93% approval rating with an average rating of 7.96/10 based on 36 reviews.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Action-packed and expertly-crafted—if at times a bit too withholding—The Mandalorian is a welcome addition to the Star Wars universe that benefits greatly from the cuteness of its cargo.
"
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 70 out of 100 for the season, based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
For the second season, Rotten Tomatoes reported a 94% approval rating with an average score of 8.54/10, based on 25 reviews.
The site's critical consensus reads: "
With fan favorites and fresh faces galore both in front of and behind the camera, The Mandalorian's sophomore season solidifies its place as one of Star Wars's most engaging and exciting sagas.
"
Metacritic assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on 14 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
===
Accolades ===


===
Industry impact ===
The Mandalorian was the first production to be filmed using real time rendering for realistic, parallax environments.
Favreau believed that the StageCraft technology developed for the series would have a significant impact on the production of films and television series moving forward.
He attributed the breakthroughs made with the technology to the support of Kathleen Kennedy, who was in charge of both Lucasfilm and ILM, as well as to his own drive for innovation, and to previous work done by George Lucas on new technology for the Star Wars films.
Favreau also acknowledged that much of the technology involved in StageCraft is not proprietary and is readily available to others, it just had not been combined in this way before.
Favreau invited other filmmakers and studios to visit the series' set and see how the new technology was being used, noting that Lucas and other filmmakers such as James Cameron had done the same when they had been working on innovative film projects.
Favreau added that the companies working on the series' new technologies—including ILM, Epic, and MPC—were being encouraged to share their work and develop the technology further beyond the requirements of the series.
Several actors working on the series, including Carl Weathers and Giancarlo Esposito, gave high praise to the technology and the way it allowed them to act within the environment rather than pretend in front of green screen.
After learning lessons about the technology during production on the first season of The Mandalorian, ILM was able to make several advancements beginning with the second season.
This included transitioning StageCraft to a fully in-house product utilizing ILM's own game engine, Helios, rather than Epic's Unreal Engine.
In February 2020, ILM announced that it was making its StageCraft technology available to all filmmakers and production studios as a complete end-to-end solution, and that December, it was announced that three additional StageCraft volumes–in Los Angeles, London, and Australia–were being built.

==
Spin-offs ==
In November 2019, Walt Disney Studios CCO Alan Horn said if the series was successful, a film featuring the Mandalorian could be developed.
The next month, Favreau said there was an opportunity to explore the series' characters in other Star Wars films or television series.
Bob Iger said in February 2020 that spin-offs of The Mandalorian were being considered, and there was potential to add more characters to the series with the intention of then giving them their own series.
Favreau said in October that as more characters are introduced in the series, "we are beginning to explore where we could go".
He felt Lucasfilm could be "more responsive" to audience reactions in determining potential spin-offs due to the faster production time for television series than films.
Favreau looked to his experience working in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, where smaller stories exist within the larger narrative, as a potential guide for spin-offs.
Additionally, both Favreau and Pascal were open to the idea of the Mandalorian appearing in a Star Wars film, but Favreau was in "no rush" to do this.
In December 2020, the spin-off series Rangers of the New Republic, Ahsoka, and The Book of Boba Fett were announced, with all three series developed by Favreau and Filoni, set within The Mandalorian's timeline, and planned to culminate in a "climactic story event".
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
A spin-off miniseries focused on Boba Fett was reported in November 2020.
It was officially announced as The Book of Boba Fett a month later, and was already in production by that point.
Favreau, Filoni, and Robert Rodriguez executive produce, with Morrison and Wen reprising their respective roles as Fett and Fennec Shand.
The series will debut in December 2021.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
A spin-off series titled Rangers of the New Republic was announced in December 2020.

===
Ahsoka ===
A limited series titled Ahsoka, featuring Dawson reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano, was revealed in December 2020 with Filoni writing and executive producing alongside Favreau.

==
Other media ==


===
Documentary series ===
A documentary series, Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian, features interviews with the cast and crew of The Mandalorian, behind-the-scenes footage, and roundtable conversations hosted by Favreau that explore the production of the series.
The first season premiered on Disney+
on May 4, 2020, Star Wars Day.
An hour-long special covering the second season was released on December 25, 2020.

===
Publishing ===
Lucasfilm announced a publishing campaign of tie-in books and comics for the series in June 2020.
The campaign was announced to included The Art of The Mandalorian (Season One) by Phil Szostak, an original adult novel written by Adam Christopher and published by Del Rey Books, a visual guide written by Pablo Hidalgo and published by DK, a junior novelization of the first season written by Joe Schreiber, and comic books inspired by the series to be published by Marvel Comics and IDW.
One month later, the novel by Adam Christopher was delayed from December 2020 to November 2021, before both it and the visual guide by Pablo Hidalgo were cancelled in March 2021.

===
Video games ===
In November 2020, Minecraft released a Star Wars-themed downloadable content, which included locations and characters from The Mandalorian.
Din Djarin and Grogu appear in Zero Point, Fortnite Battle Royale's Chapter 2 event.
Djarin's sniper rifle and jetpack were also available as playable items.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
The Mandalorian on Disney+
The Mandalorian at IMDb
The Mandalorian on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Mandalorian on StarWars.com
The Star Wars prequel trilogy, colloquially referred to as the prequels, is a series of epic space-opera films written and directed by George Lucas.
It was produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
The trilogy was released from 1999 to 2005 and is set before the original Star Wars trilogy (1977–83), making it the first act of the Skywalker saga, despite being the second released.
Lucas had planned a prequel trilogy (as well as a sequel trilogy) before the release of the original film, but halted major Star Wars films beyond the original trilogy by 1981.
With the subsequent advances of computer-generated imagery, Lucas revived plans for the prequels by the early 1990s.
The trilogy marked Lucas's return to directing after a 22-year hiatus following the original Star Wars in 1977.

The trilogy consists of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
The films follow the training of the powerful youth Anakin Skywalker (the father of the original trilogy protagonists Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa) as a Jedi under the tutelage of Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, his fall to the dark side of the Force and birth as Darth Vader.
The trilogy also depicts the corruption of the Galactic Republic, the annihilation of the Jedi Order, and the rise of the Empire under the secret Sith Lord and future Galactic Emperor Palpatine.
The first two films received mixed reviews, while the third's reception was more positive.

==
Background ==
According to original trilogy producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy and pressure from his wife to settle down, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.

However, technical advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequel trilogy would be "unbelievably expensive."
After viewing an early CGI test created by Industrial Light & Magic for Jurassic Park, Lucas said:

We did a test for Steven Spielberg; and when we put them up on the screen I had tears in my eyes.
It was like one of those moments in history, like the invention of the lightbulb or the first telephone call.
A major gap had been crossed and things were never going to be the same.

In 1992, Lucas acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy in the Lucasfilm Fan Club magazine, and announced this to Variety in late 1993.
Producer Rick McCallum reached out to Frank Darabont, who had previously written The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles and The Shawshank Redemption, for possible future writing duties.
He was considered until at least 1995, but as time went on, Lucas continued writing the screenplays himself.
Before Lucas chose to direct the prequels, Return of the Jedi director Richard Marquand expressed interest on directing one of the prequel films, up until his death in 1987.
The popularity of the franchise had been prolonged by the Star Wars Expanded Universe, so that it still had a large audience.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 'updated' the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new episodes.

== Films ==
Having been significantly anticipated by fans, Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999.
It sees the Jedi coming into contact with the young Anakin Skywalker and the corruption of the Galactic Senate by Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones was released on May 16, 2002.
The story jumps ahead 10 years and finds Anakin—now a Jedi apprentice of Obi-Wan Kenobi—pursuing a forbidden romance, as well as the outbreak of the Clone Wars.
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
It depicts Anakin's fall to the dark side of the Force and his rebirth as Darth Vader.

===
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace ===
32 years before the events of the original film, two Jedi Knights—Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi—discover that the corrupt Trade Federation has formed a blockade around the planet Naboo.
Naboo's senator Palpatine—who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious—has covertly engineered the blockade as a pretext to become Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic.
With the help of Naboo's queen, Padmé Amidala, Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escape the blockade.
They land on Tatooine to repair their starship, and meet a nine-year-old slave named Anakin Skywalker.
Believing him to be the prophesied "Chosen One", Qui-Gon takes Anakin to be trained as a Jedi.
The prequels were originally planned to fill in history tangential to the original trilogy, but Lucas realized that they could form the first half of one long story focusing on Anakin.
This would shape the film series into a self-contained saga.
In 1994, Lucas began writing the screenplay for the first prequel, initially titled Episode I: The Beginning.
Following the film's release, Lucas announced that he would be directing the next two.
===
Episode II –
Attack of the Clones ===
10 years later, an assassination attempt is made on Padmé Amidala, who is now serving as Naboo's senator.
Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi and his apprentice, Anakin, are assigned to protect her; Obi-Wan tracks the assassin, while Anakin and Padmé secretly fall in love.
Meanwhile, Chancellor Palpatine schemes to draw the galaxy into the Clone Wars between the Republic army of clone troopers led by the Jedi, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems led by Palpatine's Sith apprentice, Count Dooku.
The first draft of Episode II was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, to polish it.
Unsure of a title, Lucas had jokingly called the film "Jar Jar's Great Adventure".
In writing The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas initially considered that Lando Calrissian was a clone from a planet of clones which caused the Clone Wars mentioned in A New Hope.
He later came up with the concept of an army of clone shock troopers from a remote planet which attacked the Republic and were resisted by the Jedi.

===
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith ===
Three years into the Clone Wars, Anakin becomes disillusioned with the Jedi Council and begins to have visions of Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine convinces Anakin that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé's life.
Desperate, Anakin submits to Palpatine and assumes the Sith moniker Darth Vader.
Palpatine reveals himself as Darth Sidious to the Jedi and orders their extermination while declaring the former Republic an Empire.
Vader engages in a lightsaber duel with Obi-Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar, while Padmé dies after giving birth to twins.
Work on Episode III began before Episode II was released, with one scene shot during the earlier film's production.
Lucas originally told concept artists that the film would open with a montage of the Clone Wars, and included a scene of Palpatine revealing to Anakin that he had willed his conception through the Force.
Lucas reviewed and radically reorganized the plot, having Anakin execute Dooku in the first act to foreshadow his fall to the dark side.
After principal photography was completed in 2003, Lucas made more changes, rewriting Anakin's arc.
He would now primarily turn to the dark side in a quest to save Padmé, rather than just believing that the Jedi are plotting to take over the Republic.
The rewrite was accomplished both through editing principal footage, and filming new and revised scenes during pick-ups in 2004.

==
Themes ==
Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between the prequel and original trilogy, especially concerning the journey of Anakin Skywalker in the prequels and that of his son Luke in the older films.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
According to Lucas, the correct order to watch the films is by episode order.
There are many references to Christianity in the prequel trilogy, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns.
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace and seemingly fails to fulfill his destiny (until the prophecy comes true in Return of the Jedi).
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.

Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Adolf Hitler's role as chancellor before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels between Palpatine and historical dictators such as Julius Caesar and Napoleon Bonaparte, as well as former president of the United States Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge depicted in Revenge of the Sith mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.

==
Re-releases ==
In 2011, box sets of the original and prequel trilogy were released on Blu-ray, all including alterations.

3D releases were planned for the then-six-film franchise, but after the financially unsuccessful 2012 3D release of The Phantom Menace, the rest were cancelled to focus on the sequels.

The trilogy was made available for streaming on Disney+
upon the service's launch in late 2019.

== Reception ==
The prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, generally transitioning from negative to positive with each installment.
Common criticisms surrounded the over-reliance on  computer-generated imagery and green screens, melodramatic and wooden dialogue including scenes of romance between Anakin and Padmé, slow-paced political scenes, and the comic relief character of Jar Jar Binks.
Director of the first and third film of the Star Wars sequel
trilogy J. J. Abrams criticized Darth Maul's quick death.
Many expressed their disappointment with the trilogy's portrayal of Anakin Skywalker, particularly calling the writing weak and the dialogue wooden, although Hayden Christensen's performance in the third film was more well-received.
Contrarily, Ewan McGregor's portrayal of Obi-Wan Kenobi, following in the footsteps of Sir Alec Guinness, has been generally praised.
Natalie Portman has expressed her disappointment with the trilogy's negative reception, saying that "When something has that much anticipation it can almost only disappoint."
She also acknowledged that "With the perspective of time, it's been re-evaluated by a lot of people who actually really love them now.
"The
trilogy has also received some criticism for clashing aesthetically with the original trilogy.
While the older films feature rough and aged technology, the prequels depict relatively sleek and new industrial designs.
Some have criticized this design choice by saying that it makes the earlier time period appear to depict a more advanced civilization, although Revenge of the Sith brings the design closer to that of the original trilogy.
Lucas has called the choice clever, as it illustrates the halt of technological innovation in a time period of civil war.
Conversely, some argue for the prequel trilogy's positive elements, including its handling of political issues, especially involving the rise of fascism.
This includes Star Wars: The Last Jedi director and writer Rian Johnson, who also praised its visual effects innovations.
Jar Jar Binks has been regarded as the first fully CGI character in a live-action film, and perceived as paving the way for Gollum in The Lord of the Rings.
J. J. Abrams praised the acting of Ian McDiarmid as Darth Sidious, saying the scene where he tells the tragedy of Darth Plagueis is the best scene of the trilogy.
In 2020, Screen Rant compared the way the prequel trilogy ended the saga compared to Disney's sequel trilogy, writing, "Amidst the bad execution of the story, the fact of the matter is, the prequel movies tell one coherent narrative, with a clear through-line between movies – this is something sorely lacking in the sequel trilogy.
"George
Lucas has responded to the negative criticism by saying that, like the original films, they were intended "for 12-year-olds"—while acknowledging that fans who saw the originals when they were young had different expectations as adults.
The prequels have been noted as retaining a dedicated fanbase, primarily composed of millennials who were children at the time of their release.
Additionally, the animated The Clone Wars series, which Lucas made with animation artist Dave Filoni, has been noted to have retroactively improved the perception of the prequel trilogy among fans.

===
Critical response ===


===
Academy Awards ===


===
Box office performance ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
The Star Wars sequel trilogy is the third trilogy of the main Star Wars franchise, an American space opera created by George Lucas.
It is produced by Lucasfilm Ltd. and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures.
The trilogy consists of episodes VII through IX, chronologically following the prequel trilogy (Episodes I–III; 1999–2005) and the original trilogy (Episodes IV–VI; 1977–1983), serving as the final act of the "Skywalker saga".
Lucas had planned a sequel trilogy as early as 1976, but canceled it by 1981.
He ended up producing only the first six episodes and for a time described these as comprising the complete story.
The sequel trilogy concept was revived when The Walt Disney Company entered negotiations to acquire Lucasfilm in mid-2011.
Lucas produced new story treatments, but according to him these were largely discarded.
Both the acquisition and plans to produce the trilogy were announced in late 2012.

The first installment, The Force Awakens, was released on December 18, 2015.
It was directed by J. J. Abrams who co-wrote the screenplay with Lawrence Kasdan and Michael Arndt.
Original trilogy cast members including Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, and Carrie Fisher reprised their roles, co-starring alongside franchise newcomers Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac.
The trilogy's second installment, The Last Jedi, was released on December 15, 2017, with Rian Johnson as screenwriter and director, and most of the cast returning.
The final installment, The Rise of Skywalker, was released on December 20, 2019.
It was directed by Abrams, who co-wrote the screenplay with Chris Terrio.

The trilogy follows a 19-year-old girl named Rey, and the plight of the Resistance against the First Order, which has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire.
Rey learns the ways of the Force under Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa while searching for her parents (who mysteriously abandoned her as a child), and confronts Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin Skywalker—who has fallen to the dark side.
The first two received positive reviews from critics, while the third received mixed reviews.
The trilogy grossed over $4.4 billion at the box office worldwide with each film surpassing a billion dollars worldwide.

==
Background ==


===
Early development ===
According to Mark Hamill, who plays Luke Skywalker, Star Wars creator George Lucas told him in 1976 that he planned three or four Star Wars trilogies.
Lucas suggested that Hamill could have a cameo role in Episode IX, which he imagined filming by 2011.
A Time magazine story in March 1978, quoting Lucas, stated there would be ten Star Wars films after The Empire Strikes Back.
Gary Kurtz, the producer of the first two films, was aware of proposed story elements for Episode VII to Episode IX before 1980.
At the time of the release of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Lucas said there were seven further Star Wars films he wanted to make.
He said he had "twelve-page outlines" for those films.
In an interview with Jim Steranko in Prevue magazine published in late 1980, Lucas described how the expansive scope of Star Wars had started with an overlong screenplay:
So, I took the screenplay and divided it into three stories, and rewrote the first one. ...
Then, I had the other two films, which were essentially split into three parts each, two trilogies.
When the smoke cleared, I said, 'This is really great.
I'll do another trilogy that takes place after this.'
I had three trilogies of nine films, and then another couple of odd films.
...
It's a nine-part saga that has a beginning, a middle and an end.
It progresses over a period of about fifty or sixty years with about twenty years between trilogies, each trilogy taking about six or seven years.

By the time of Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back's release, Lucas had written story treatments for all nine Star Wars episodes.
In 1999, Kurtz revealed a brief outline of these treatments:

Episode I would have explored the methodology of the Jedi.

Episode II would have developed the backstory of Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Episode III would explain the rise of Darth Vader.

Episode IV had already seen Luke decide to become a Jedi and
Obi-Wan's final confrontation with Vader.

Episode V was filmed essentially as written.

Episode VI was to feature Leia as an isolated monarch, Han's death, and Luke showing down with Vader before exiling himself.
Luke and Leia were not related.

Episode VII was to be the first part of a trilogy continuing the story of Luke as a Jedi.

Episode VIII would have featured Luke's sister (unique from Leia).

Episode IX would introduce the Emperor and depict Luke's ultimate battle with him.
In late 1980, Lucas stated that he had "titles and ten-page story outlines for each of" the nine episodes.
In an interview the same magazine, Gary Kurtz explained that the total number of films or their content might change as they were produced.
Lucas similarly stated in an interview with Starlog magazine in September 1981 that he had the nine-film series plotted, but:

... it's a long way from the plot to the script.
I've just gone through that with Return of the Jedi, and what seems like a great idea when it's described in three sentences
doesn't hold together when you try to make five or six scenes out of it.
So plots change a lot when they start getting into script form.

As part of his biographical research on George Lucas in the early 1980s, Lucas allowed author Dale Pollock to read the plot outlines of a 12-film saga on the condition of signing a confidentiality agreement.
Pollock said these sequel trilogy drafts would "involve Luke Skywalker in his 30s and 40s" and that they would be "The three most exciting stories ...
They had propulsive action, really interesting new worlds, new characters.
"
Lucas's plans were drastically changed after The Empire Strikes Back was released, owing to the stress of producing the first three films as well as pressure from his wife to step back from this kind of filmmaking.
By 1981, Lucas had decided to make only one Star Wars trilogy.

===
Cancellation period ===
According to Gary Kurtz, details of elements from the discarded sequel trilogy which were incorporated into Return of the Jedi include:
Luke Skywalker becomes a full-fledged Jedi knight.

Luke's sister, who was originally meant to be a new character, was revealed to be Leia.

The Emperor would first appear and Luke would confront him.
Through the 1980s, Lucas variously hinted at plot elements from his abandoned sequel trilogy, which he said would have revolved around moral and philosophical problems, including distinguishing right from wrong, justice, confrontation, and passing on what you have learned.
Ideas which seem to have been used in Disney's sequel trilogy include:
Episode VII would begin 20–40 years after the end of Return of the Jedi (Lucas in 1980 and 1982).

R2-D2 and C-3PO would be the only characters to appear in all nine films (per Lucas in 1980, 1981, and 1983).

The key actors, Hamill as Luke Skywalker, Ford as Han Solo, and Fisher as Princess Leia, would appear in their 60s or 70s
(Lucas in 1983).

Lucas stated in 1980 that "what happens to Luke ... is much more ethereal.
I have a tiny notebook full of notes on that."
Hamill said in 1983 that if his character were to return again, it would be "on another plane of existence, or not the same character.
"Ideas
that were apparently not retained in Disney's sequel trilogy
include:
The trilogy would deal with the rebuilding of the Republic (Lucas in 1980).

Luke would have a romantic relationship with a female partner (Lucas in 1988).Timothy Zahn, who wrote the Legends non-canonical Thrawn trilogy of novels, was interviewed about the sequel trilogy after its development by Disney was announced in 2012.

He confirmed that it was never meant to be based on his Thrawn trilogy nor the rest of the Expanded Universe, and said that he had been briefed years before on Lucas's plans for the sequels:
The original idea as I understood it—and Lucas changes his mind off and on, so it may not be what he's thinking right now—but it was going to be three generations.
You'd have the original trilogy, then go back to Luke's father and find out what happened to him, and if there was another seventh, eighth, or ninth film, it would be Luke's children.

In 1992, Lucas announced his intentions to produce a prequel trilogy.
When asked, he would frequently repeat that he had no plans to make the sequel trilogy and that he would not allow other directors to make it.
At a press conference for the 1997 Special Edition of the original trilogy, Lucas stated, "I don't have scripts [for the sequel trilogy].
The only notion on that was, wouldn't it be fun to get all the actors to come back when they're 60 or 70 years old and make three more about them as old people."
Also in 1997, he said: "The whole story has six episodes....
If I ever went beyond that, it would be something that was made up.
I really don't have any notion other than, 'Gee, it would be interesting to do Luke Skywalker later on.'
It wouldn't be part of the main story, but a sequel to this thing."
He further stated, "When you see it in six parts, you'll understand.
It really ends at part six.
"On
the possibility of someone else making Star Wars films, Lucas said, "Probably not, it's my thing.
"
In August 1999, at a press conference to discuss The Phantom Menace, Lucas described the "nine-year commitment" required to make a Star Wars trilogy.
In 2002, he said: "Basically what I said as a joke was, 'Maybe when Harrison and Carrie are in their 70s, we'll come back and do another version.'
The thing I didn't realize then, and that I do realize now very clearly, is that not only would they be in their 70s, but I would be in my 70s too."
He reiterated, "Ultimately, the saga will be six films, a 12-hour story.
Then people can watch all six films together as they were intended to be seen.
"In 2007
, Lucas described making the films at that age as "an idea that seemed amusing at the time, but doesn't seem realistic now", and suggested that "off-the-cuff" comments he had made in earlier years had been misconstrued as absolute statements.
In 2008, after all six films had been released, Lucas said: "The movies were the story of Anakin Skywalker and Luke Skywalker, and when Luke saves the galaxy and redeems his father, that's where that story ends.
"
In another 2008 interview, Lucas ruled out anybody else making Star Wars films, and added that the Expanded Universe did not line up with his vision.
Asked if he wanted new Star Wars films to be made after his death, he said: "I've left pretty explicit instructions for there not to be any more features.
There will definitely be no Episodes VII–IX.
That's because there isn't any story. ...
The Star Wars story is really the tragedy of Darth Vader.
That is the story."

===
Renewed development ===
In May 2011, Lucas was in Orlando, Florida, to celebrate the opening of Star Tours –
The Adventures Continue at Walt Disney World.
He was invited to breakfast by Disney CEO Bob Iger, who asked Lucas if he would be willing to sell his company to Disney.
Lucas had begun to consider retiring, but was not ready to do so at that time.
Lucas considered directing Episode VII for a May 2015 release and then selling his company, but decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would step away from making blockbuster films.
In early 2012, after being disappointed by the weak performance of Red Tails, Lucas announced to The New York Times that he was planning to retire.
While he was in New York, he asked Kathleen Kennedy to lunch.
He asked if she would be a co-chair at Lucasfilm with him, with the intention of transferring leadership entirely to her after about a year.
She began working for him on June 1, 2012; Lucas soon proposed that they work together on the sequel trilogy.
They brought in Michael Arndt to write a draft of Episode VII based on Lucas's synopsis.
Star Wars screenwriting veteran Lawrence Kasdan was hired to support Arndt.
After making an appearance at Star Wars Celebration VI in late August, Lucas took Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher to lunch and asked if they would be willing to reprise their roles for the new films.
They agreed, as did Harrison Ford after being promised that Han Solo would be given meaningful closure.
Details of his sequel trilogy treatments included the conclusion of the Skywalker family's story, with its third generation being portrayed in their twenties.
Lucas hoped to explain concepts he had imagined when he originally drafted his saga in the 1970s.
Most specifically he revealed the "symbiotic relationships" between the Jedi, the Force, midi-chlorians (microscopic lifeforms, first mentioned onscreen in 1999's The Phantom Menace), and the Whills (all-powerful creatures first mentioned in the title of the original outline of Star Wars, Journal of the Whills):
[The next three Star Wars films] were going to get into a microbiotic world.
But there's this world of creatures that operate differently than we do.
I call them the Whills.
And the Whills are the ones who actually control the universe.
They feed off the Force.
Back in the day, I used to say ultimately what this means is we were just cars, vehicles, for the Whills to travel around in.
We're vessels for them.
And the conduit is the midi-chlorians.
The midi-chlorians are the ones that communicate with the Whills.
The Whills, in a general sense, they are the Force. ...
But it's about symbiotic relationships.
I think, personally, one of the core values we should have in the world, and kids should be taught, is ecology, to understand that we all are connected.
(
Lucas, 2018)
By June 2012, Lucas had agreed to sell his company, provided that Kennedy would replace him as president of Lucasfilm.
Iger agreed, while insisting that Disney would have final say over future movies.
Lucas's final stipulations before the sale in late 2012 were that his story treatments would be used and that the number of Disney employees who could read them would be limited.
Lucas gave Kennedy the final draft of his story treatments during the October 2012 sale.
The same month, the Disney sale and production of the sequel trilogy, as well as a 2015 release date for a new film, were announced to the public.
Lucas stated, "I always said I wasn't going to do any more, and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more.
But that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"
Both plot outlines, the one written in the 1980s and the one written in the early 2010s, were given to Iger around the time that Disney acquired Lucasfilm.

In January 2013, Lucas held the first story briefing about the as-yet untitled Episode VII at Skywalker Ranch.
Related concepts stemming from these early briefings include the following story elements:
A 14-year-old female Jedi Padawan named Taryn.
Lucas also considered Thea and Winkie as potential names for the character.
The female Padawan was retained as the 19-year-old Rey.

Another teenager named Skylar who befriends the protagonist and carries a blaster.
He ultimately became the stormtrooper character, Finn.
In at least one conception, Skylar was the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and ultimately fell to the Dark Side of the Force (these plot developments were retained for the backstory of Ben Solo/Kylo Ren in the final iteration).
However, in some drafts, this character was not anyone's son, and in others it was not decided whose son he was.

The older Luke Skywalker would have exiled himself to a remote planet where the first Jedi temple was located.
Luke would have started off reluctant to train the female Padawan, but eventually have a change of heart and agree to train her.
Lucas planned for Luke to die in Episode VIII.
Conversely, in 2018, Hamill said that Lucas' original vision for the ending of Episode IX was to have Luke die then instead of making a simple cameo, leaving his sister Leia as a Jedi.
Luke was going to appear with dialogue in the first film.

One of the antagonists would be a character named Darth Talon (later revealed to be the female Sith lord from the Star Wars: Legacy comic book series), who served a powerful master (codenamed "Uber" by the production team) and was responsible (in some versions of the story) for turning the son of Han and Leia to the Dark Side of the Force.
Talon's role in the story was eventually subsumed into the role of Kylo Ren, and "Uber" became Supreme Leader Snoke.

Darth Vader's castle, which Lucas had been developing since the preproduction phase of The Empire Strikes Back, would have been involved.
In an interview published in 2020, Lucas says he decided not to work on the trilogy because he was "about to have a daughter" at the time and decided to "enjoy life for a while."
He also detailed more of his story treatments:
The trilogy would start a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
According to Lucas, "we establish pretty quickly that there's this underworld, there are these offshoot stormtroopers who started their own planets, and that Luke is trying to restart the Jedi."

Darth Maul would return with robotic legs (as had been established in Star Wars: The Clone Wars) and train the female Darth Talon as his apprentice.
According to Lucas, "She was the new Darth Vader and most of the action was with her.
So these were the two main villains of the trilogy.
"
Maul would become "the godfather of crime in the universe because, as the Empire falls, he takes over."

Leia is trying to rebuild the Republic and "get it under control from the gangsters."
Lucas stated that "That was the main story."

Luke "puts the word out, so out of 100,000 Jedi, maybe 50 or 100 are left.
The Jedi have to grow again from scratch, so Luke has to find two- and three-year-olds, and train them.
It'll be 20 years before you have a new generation of Jedi.
By the end of the trilogy, Luke would have rebuilt much of the Jedi, and we would have the renewal of the New Republic, with Leia, Senator Organa, becoming the Supreme Chancellor in charge of everything.
So she ended up being the Chosen One.
"In 2015
, Lucas revealed (to his disappointment) that his outlines had been discarded in order to "make something for the fans".
Episode VII writer and director J. J. Abrams later revealed that the same year, Disney had given him a mandate to discard Lucas's story and "start from scratch".
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens was written by Lucasfilm veteran Lawrence Kasdan, along with J. J. Abrams and Michael Arndt.

Bob Iger's memoirs, published in 2019, recount that Lucas was upset after hearing the plot of The Force Awakens in meetings, specifically about elements that were derivative of the original 1977 film.
Lucas felt betrayed by Iger and Abrams because they discarded some of his sequel trilogy ideas.
As announced by Lucasfilm, the sequel trilogy meant the end of most of the existing Expanded Universe, so as to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience".
Only Episodes I–VI would remain canon to the franchise, along with The Clone Wars animated film and series.
Most everything produced after the 2014 announcement would also be considered canon.

==
Films ==
Unlike the previous two trilogies, whose films were released approximately three years apart ahead of Memorial Day weekend, the sequel films were released two years apart from each other in December.
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015, and introduces the 19-year-old orphan, Rey, who is drawn into the conflict between the Resistance and the First Order, a ruthless military faction commanded by Kylo Ren—the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo.
In The Last Jedi, released on December 15, 2017, Rey is trained by Luke Skywalker, the last living Jedi, while again facing Ren and the First Order.
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019, and features the conclusion of the age-old conflict between the Jedi and Sith, with Rey confronting the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.

===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens ===
About 30 years after the destruction of the second Death Star, Luke Skywalker has vanished.
The remnants of the Empire have become the First Order, which seeks to destroy Luke and the New Republic.
The First Order is opposed by the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa.
On the planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron obtains a map to Luke's location, but he is captured by First Order commander Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo.
Poe's droid BB-8 escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Rey and BB-8 team up with a defecting stormtrooper, Finn, along with Han Solo and Chewbacca, to deliver the map to the Resistance.
Episode VII began pre-production on October 30, 2012.
The screenplay for the film was originally set to be written by Michael Arndt, but time management and creative differences contributed to his departure from the project.
On January 25, 2013, J. J. Abrams was officially announced as Episode VII's director and producer, along with producer Bryan Burk and Bad Robot Productions.
John Williams was hired to compose the music for the entire sequel trilogy.
In October, it was announced that writing duties would be taken over by Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
George Lucas was set to provide Abrams with advice as a creative consultant; however, Lucas had no involvement, with his representative stating that he "ideally would love not to see any footage until he walks into the theater next December.
He has never been able to be surprised by a Star Wars film before
and he said he was looking forward to it.
"
Production began in April 2014; it was released on December 18, 2015.
In the US, the film received a PG-13 rating "for sci-fi action violence" and an M rating In Australia, the second Star Wars film to receive that classification after Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The film broke opening weekend box office records in North America with $248 million ($39 million more than previous record holder Jurassic World) and totals of $529 million worldwide, the largest opening ever.
The film set another new record by becoming the first movie to break the $1 billion mark in box office sales in just 12 days.
It is currently the highest-grossing film of all time in North America and the third highest-grossing film worldwide, unadjusted for inflation.

===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi ===
After finding Luke Skywalker in self-imposed exile, Rey attempts to convince him to teach her the ways of the Force.
She also seeks answers about her past and the conflict between Luke and his nephew Ben Solo (now Kylo Ren).
Unbeknownst to Luke, Rey starts using the Force to communicate with Kylo.
Meanwhile, Leia leads the Resistance as they are pursued by the First Order, led by Supreme Leader Snoke.
Rey leaves Luke in an attempt to redeem Kylo and achieve peace.
After Kylo kills Snoke, Rey is forced to choose between ruling the galaxy with him, or helping the outnumbered Resistance survive.
On November 20, 2012, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg would write and produce Episodes VIII and IX, but were later confirmed to be writing standalone films.
On June 20, 2014, Looper director Rian Johnson was announced as writer and director of Episode VIII; he confirmed in August that he would direct.
On March 12, 2015, Lucasfilm announced that Johnson would direct Episode VIII with Ram Bergman as producer.
In March 2015, Oscar Isaac confirmed he would reprise his role as Poe Dameron in Episode VIII.
In July, it was reported that Benicio del Toro was being considered for a villain; he later confirmed that he had been cast.
In September, it was reported that Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Tatiana Maslany, Gina Rodriguez, Olivia Cooke, and Bel Powley were on the shortlist for two separate parts.
Jimmy Vee was cast as R2-D2, succeeding Kenny Baker, who would die the next year.
Some pre-production filming took place in September 2015 on the island of Skellig Michael, Ireland to take advantage of better weather conditions.
Abrams revealed that the film's script was completed in a November 2015 interview with Wired.
In December, Hamill, Isaac, Christie, and Boyega were confirmed to reprise their roles as Luke Skywalker, Poe Dameron, Captain Phasma, and Finn, respectively.
Kennedy announced at the December 17 London premiere of The Force Awakens that most of its cast would return for Episode VIII.On January 20, 2016
, Lucasfilm and Disney announced that the release of the film would be delayed from May to December 2017.
Three days later, the release date of December 15, 2017 was confirmed, as well as the title
Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Principal photography began in February 2016; additional filming took place in Dubrovnik from March 9 to March 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Principal photography wrapped in July 2016.
Carrie Fisher died on December 27, 2016, but had completed filming her role as Leia.
Much of the filming took place at Pinewood Studios near London.
Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman were the producers and J. J. Abrams executive produced.

===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker is the final film of the Skywalker saga, featuring a climactic clash between the Resistance and the First Order, and the Jedi and the Sith.
The film is set a year following The Last Jedi and depicts the return of Palpatine, who has been secretly controlling the First Order from the Sith planet Exegol.
Palpatine orders Kylo Ren to find and kill Rey, who is revealed to be Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine unveils an armada of Star Destroyers to reclaim the galaxy.
Rey and the Resistance learn of Palpatine's return and embark on a quest to find him.
They eventually locate Exegol; Rey confronts Palpatine, while the Resistance attack Palpatine's fleet.
In June 2014, Johnson was announced as writing a story treatment for Episode IX, but later stated he had not been involved with writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of Episode IX, and he, with Derek Connolly, began writing a script.
In February 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production of Episode IX had begun.
Following the death of Carrie Fisher in late December 2016, media outlets speculated on whether her role would be recast for Episode IX and whether the absence of her character would affect the film's plot.
A few weeks later, Lucasfilm stated that they would not digitally recreate Fisher's performance for the film.
In April 2017, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not be in Episode IX, but it was later announced that Fisher would in fact appear using unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.
In August, it was reported that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.

In September 2017, Lucasfilm announced that Trevorrow had stepped down as director, and a week later, it was announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct Episode IX.
He co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, in addition to producing the film through Bad Robot Productions with Kennedy and Michelle Rejwan.
Disney had originally scheduled the film's release for December 2019, in keeping with the previous two sequel trilogy films, but then moved it up to May 24, a time of the year more common to the first six Star Wars episodes.
However, after Abrams' return, its release date was moved back to December.
On January 10, 2018, it was reported that John Williams will return to compose and conduct the music for Episode IX.
The next month, Williams announced that it would be the last Star Wars film music he would compose.
On July 6, 2018, it was reported that Keri Russell was in early talks for a role in Episode IX.
On July 9, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Billy Dee Williams was confirmed to reprise the role of Lando Calrissian.
On July 27, the official casting announcement was made, including the return of Daisy Ridley, Adam Driver, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Kelly Marie Tran, Joonas Suotamo, Billie Lourd, Mark Hamill, and Anthony Daniels, with Naomi Ackie and Richard E. Grant joining the cast.
The same announcement confirmed Williams' return and that Carrie Fisher would posthumously portray Leia Organa using unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.
Lucasfilm also initially had plans to include unseen footage of Fisher from The Last Jedi, but it was ultimately not used in the film.
It was announced later the same day that Russell had joined the cast.
It was reported that the character Yoda would also return.
On April 12, at the 2019 Star Wars Celebration, the title for Episode IX was confirmed to be The Rise of Skywalker.
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018 and wrapped on February 15, 2019.
The Rise of Skywalker was released in the United States on December 20, 2019.

==
Themes ==
According to J. J. Abrams and Chris Terrio, the trilogy's core theme is about learning from the previous generation, akin to the Americans in the War of 1812, who preserved what was fought for in the American Revolutionary War.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after World War II and "started working together again.
"Polygon
considers that The Last Jedi's portrayal of Luke Skywalker as a pacifist Jedi master reflects the Jedi's beliefs as being inspired by the Buddhist religion due to the character's inner conflict towards using a lightsaber and seeing it as a weapon of destruction.
The Last Jedi features scenes recalling Akira Kurosawa's Rashomon (1950), utilizing the Rashomon effect when Luke tells Rey that he considered murdering his nephew, Ben Solo, due to sensing his inevitable fall to the dark side.
Later, Kylo recounts his perspective, which prompts Luke to tell a third, combined perspective of the event.
According to Adam Driver, Kylo Ren is "morally justified in doing what he thinks is right".
The Rise of Skywalker depicts Kylo Ren having his helmet repaired following its destruction in The Last Jedi.
Abrams compared the fractured mask to Kintsugi, a Japanese ceramic art of repairing broken pottery which accentuates the breakage.
While the helmet obscures his vulnerabilities in The Force Awakens, its fractured form in The Rise of Skywalker instead communicates the fractured nature of his character.
Kylo overcomes and kills his father in The Force Awakens before reconciling with his memory of him in The Rise of Skywalker; according to Terrio, this reconciliation represents the "Atonement with the Father" stage of the hero's journey, which the Star Wars films are heavily patterned on.
Rey's journey mirrors that of Anakin and Luke in the prequel and original trilogies.
The final scene of The Last Jedi depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke, with one boy using the Force to grab a broom.
According to Inverse, this symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
A writer for the same website interprets the end of The Rise of Skywalker as seeing Rey "bury the past" and rejecting "any power her grandfather held over her" in a completion of the hero's journey.

== Reception ==
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi received a positive reception from critics, while The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews.
Fan criticism has surrounded aspects of The Force Awakens being too similar to previous films in the franchise, and The Last Jedi for subverting conventions of the franchise without a compelling reason.
Critical opinions of The Rise of Skywalker have been polarizing; while some praised its celebration of the entire saga, its tribute to Carrie Fisher, and return of many longtime characters from the original trilogy, many were divided on the film's perceived retconning of The Last Jedi, as well as its heavy fan service.
Some critics and fans have alleged that Lucasfilm lacked sufficient planning for the trilogy's overarching story, feeling that the films appear inconsistent and contradictory as a result of the supposedly opposing visions of directors J. J. Abrams and Rian Johnson.
Said criticism has been directed at the consensus that Johnson had essentially been given a blank slate for The Last Jedi with no clear guidelines or direction from Lucasfilm, and in doing so either controversially handled or ignored many of Abrams' decisions for The Force Awakens.
For The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams allegedly chose to further deviate from plot points raised in The Last Jedi, while attempting to introduce his own that were never mentioned or alluded to during the previous two films.
Some critics felt many of the narrative choices for The Rise of Skywalker had been raised in an effort to appease dissatisfied fans.
Others disagreed with the decision not to use a "showrunner" to helm the sequel trilogy, akin to other individuals in projects undertaken by Disney, while Insider acknowledged Lucasfilm's strict creative control over the franchise, highlighting how a number of film directors had been hired and later forced to leave their projects.
Some reports indicate that, contrary to popular belief, some plot points across the trilogy were planned in advance.
The idea of Luke Skywalker living on an island following his failure to stop the murder of his Jedi students and then training an apprentice who would help him overcome his self-doubt was first pitched by George Lucas in 2013 during creative meetings between himself and Lucasfilm as part of story discussions for Episode VII
(these ideas would later be used in The Last Jedi).
Several plot points of The Rise of Skywalker were pitched in an early 2014 story meeting between Lucasfilm executives (including Dave Filoni, Pablo Hidalgo, Doug Chiang, John Knoll, and Kiri Hart) after the plot of The Force Awakens had been finalized, including the notion of Leia as a mentor figure to Rey, Leia breaking through to her son Ben Solo
(Kylo Ren), and the notion of Rey as “the Skywalker” of the trilogy by metaphor rather than blood connection.
The return of Emperor Palpatine in Episode IX was planned as far back as the earliest development phase of the trilogy.
Similarly, Abrams hinted that Palpatine being Rey's grandfather was an early idea he and Lawrence Kasdan had while working on The Force Awakens, although Daisy Ridley later claimed that ideas for Rey's lineage changed throughout filming of The Rise of Skywalker.

===
From Star Wars filmmakers ===
George Lucas agreed with critics who considered The Force Awakens too derivative of the original trilogy.
In an interview with Charlie Rose, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a divorce, and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous six Star Wars films as his "children" and defended his vision for them, while criticizing The Force Awakens for having a "retro feel", saying: "I worked very hard to make them completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships ... to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism.
He subsequently apologized for this remark.
In 2016, the Disney-produced Star Wars anthology film Rogue One was released, and it was reported that Lucas liked it more than The Force Awakens.
In 2017, Lucas described the sequel The Last Jedi as "beautifully made".
In a 2019 memoir, Disney president Bob Iger wrote that Lucas felt "betrayed" after learning that Abrams, Kennedy, and Iger were not using his ideas for the sequel trilogy.
In 2016, responding to complaints that The Force Awakens was too derivative of previous films, Abrams said, "What was important for me was introducing brand new characters using relationships that were embracing the history that we know to tell a story that is new – to go backwards to go forwards".
Abrams apologized for how he handled Chewbacca and Leia's meeting after Han Solo's death, noting that Han Solo's best friend and widow ignore each other, with Leia instead hugging Rey (whom Leia is meeting for the first time).
Johnson's sequel included Leia hugging Chewbacca at the end of The Last Jedi as a way to apologize for the previous film oversight.
Johnson's initial response to the script of The Force Awakens included the suggestion of minor adjustments to the ending.
According to Abrams, these improved the movie and made it line up more with The Last Jedi.
Abrams intended for BB-8 to help Rey search for Luke, which Johnson changed to R2-D2 (due to being Luke's droid, as well as BB-8 belonging to Poe and not knowing Luke).
Additionally, Abrams' ending featured Rey finding Luke lifting rocks with the Force, which was changed due to Johnson's plot of Luke having disconnected himself from the Force.
Johnson stated he saw the Mortis Trilogy of episodes of The Clone Wars, due to a recommendation from the animator of the series Dave Filoni, and that it influenced his portrayal of the Force in his film.
He also stated that he considered including Lando in the film, possibly giving him the role of new character DJ, but didn't because it would had meant Lando betraying the characters without redemption.
In 2019, Abrams said that he liked Snoke's death in the sequel.
He also said that the boldness of The Last Jedi inspired him to be more original on The Rise of Skywalker and that its plot did not derail his plans for the film, adding that in response to criticisms of The Force Awakens, Johnson advised him "not to just do something that you've seen before."
Abrams also affirmed his dedication not to retroactively release alternate versions of the films, saying, "I feel like [when] you're done with a thing, ... that's what it is."
===
Critical response ===


===
Academy Awards ===


===
Box office performance ===
Unlike the previous trilogies, the sequel trilogy experienced diminishing box office returns with each succeeding film.
Nevertheless, it is the highest-grossing trilogy overall, with The Force Awakens ranking as the fourth-highest-grossing film of all time.

==
Tie-in novels and comics ==


=
= Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==
Duncan, Paul (2020).
The Star Wars Archives.
1999-2005.
TASCHEN.
ISBN 978-3-8365-6344-4.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2020).
Star Wars:
Fascinating Facts.
Portable Press.
ISBN 9781684128952.

Jones, Brian Jay (2016).
George Lucas:
A Life.
New York City:
Little, Brown and Company.
ISBN 978-0316257442.

Kaminski, Michael (2008)
[2007].
The Secret History of Star Wars.
Legacy Books Press.
ISBN 978-0-9784652-3-0.

Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
External links ==
Star Wars official site
Sequel trilogy on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Lego Star Wars:
The Video Game (sometimes simply called Lego Star Wars) is a Lego-themed, action-adventure video game based on the Lego Star Wars line of toys, and the first installment in the Lego video game franchise developed by Traveller's Tales, which would develop all future Lego titles from that point on.
It was first released on 29 March 2005, and is a video game adaptation of the Star Wars prequel trilogy:
The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005), with a bonus level from A New Hope (1977).

It was developed by Traveller's Tales for the Microsoft Xbox, Sony PlayStation 2, and Microsoft Windows.
Griptonite Games developed the Game Boy Advance version.
These initial versions were published in April 2005.
A Macintosh port, developed by Aspyr, was released in August 2005.
A GameCube version of the game was released on 25 October 2005.
All versions were published by Eidos Interactive and Giant Interactive Entertainment.

==
Gameplay ==
Gameplay in Lego Star Wars is geared towards family play, and does not feature a game-over scenario.
Given a specific set of characters in each scenario, based on a scene from each of the movies, up to two players can control them, using their different abilities.
By walking up to another friendly character, the player can switch control over to that character; this interaction is necessary in order to use another character's abilities to complete certain puzzles.
Lego Studs, small coin-like collectibles which serve as the game's currency, can be collected by finding them, smashing or using the force on certain objects, or defeating enemies.
Studs increase in value based on color
, silver is the least valuable at only 10 points, going up to gold, valued at 100 points, blue at 1000, and the rarest, purple worth 10,000.
Players also have a health meter consisting of four hearts that gets depleted if they get injured or shot at.
When they lose all their hearts, their character is broken apart and they lose studs (
as opposed to lives).
These studs can be spent on unlocking new characters for Free Play mode, hints for playing the game, and cheats.
Certain segments of the game feature players controlling spaceships flying on a flat plane.
There are also several minikit canisters hidden throughout each level that, when collected, combine to form a vehicle.

When the player first starts the game, they must first complete Chapter I of The Phantom Menace
("Negotiations").
However, once that Chapter is completed, the player may choose to play any unlocked levels from the other two movies in their desired order.

Completing all the game's levels with full stud bars will unlock an additional chapter based on the opening scene of A New Hope, which features a 'prototype' Darth Vader, who uses Anakin's fighting style, and a Stormtrooper whose movements are identical to the Clone Troopers (both of these are remodeled in the next game).

The background music is the same music used in the Star Wars movies, but as the game was released before Episode III's soundtrack, music from the original trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) was used for that movie's levels.
For instance, the alternate soundtrack for the "Binary Sunset" was used in the second Chapter of Episode III, while "The Battle of Endor I" was used in Chapter VI, "Princess Leia's Theme" for chapter V and
"The Battle of Yavin" was used in Chapters 1 and 3.
In The Complete Saga, the tracks that played during gameplay of that episode were replaced with ones from Episode III, although the original trilogy music remained in that episode's cutscenes.

===
Characters ===
Lego Star Wars contains a total of 59 playable characters for LEGO Star Wars; 56 in the GameCube, PS2, Xbox, and PC versions.
The three missing are Gungan, Tusken Raider, and STAP, playable in the GBA version, though the Gungan and STAP are only available through cheat codes.
The playable characters are modeled like actual Lego parts and, on dying, they fall to pieces and also lose studs.
There is a wide variety of characters included in the game, all of which are unlocked by completing levels or by purchasing them at Dexter's Diner.
Characters are divided into groups according to certain skills.
For instance, Jedi and Sith can double-jump, use lightsabers, and have control of The Force, which they can use to activate or lift Lego objects or defeat certain enemies.
Darth Maul has a double-ended lightsaber which improves his defence from laser fire.
Jar Jar Binks, General Grievous and his bodyguard have the super-jump, which allows them to reach obstacles that the Jedi and Sith can not jump to.
Characters like Padmé Amidala and clone troopers, who carry blasters, have the ability to grapple to reach higher places.
Droids, while unarmed, can travel through the game without being intentionally attacked by enemy characters.
Protocol droids and astromech droids can open special doors.
Characters such as Boba Fett and Young Anakin can fit into tight places.
Every character, other than the PK Droid, Gonk Droid (whose only ability is that they are never killed by enemies), and Chancellor Palpatine, has a special ability.

Unlocked characters can be imported into the game's sequel, Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, as an extra called "use old save", which costs 250,000 Lego Studs, and can be used in its character creator function.

Because the game is based on the Prequel Trilogy (1999, 2002, 2005), Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Lando Calrissian and other characters from the original Star Wars Trilogy (1977, 1980 and 1983) are not shown, and appear in the sequel Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
However, if the player unlocks the last level (an episode 4 preview), Darth Vader, a stormtrooper, a rebel trooper and Princess Leia become available.
Original trilogy characters Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, C-3PO, and
R2-D2 are unlockable in the game since they appear in the prequel trilogy also.

===
Free Play ===
Once a non-vehicle level has been cleared in Story Mode, the player may play through that level again in Free Play Mode.
In this mode, players can choose to play through the level with their choice of unlocked characters randomly selected by the program based on their abilities.
At any point, the player can rotate instantly between each of the chosen characters to access areas not accessible during the Story Mode and obtain hidden extras.
No story cut scenes appear in this mode.

===
Dexter's Diner ===
Dexter's Diner is the area where the player chooses what level to enter, or they can enter the Parking Lot to view any vehicles whose parts they have found and pieced together.
The parts to these vehicles are contained in 10 mini-kit canisters which are hidden throughout each level.
Battles often take place in the Parking Lot between canon-good and canon-evil characters, such as Jedi and Sith, respectively.
At the diner counter, the player may purchase, or enter codes, to unlock extras in exchange for Lego studs they have collected by playing through the levels.
===
Game Boy Advance version ===
The Game Boy Advance version behaves differently than the console versions.

It is played from an isometric perspective with only one player, who controls one of 15 playable characters through story scenarios across the prequel trilogy, battling enemies, completing objectives and getting from one place to another.

The levels are not evenly divided across the three Episodes, with Episode II having the fewest levels.

Each level is divided into multiple sections that serve as checkpoints should the player's character fall apart, and players are given a longer health meter that they must prevent from depleting to continue.

Each character possesses a special ability that is constrained by a stamina meter not found in the console version.

Players can also find Jawas in certain levels who can award the player health or stamina upgrades, as well as a maintenance droid that can save them once from death once at the price of currently collected studs in a level.

All boss battles are primarily against villains with lightsabers, and call for heavy button mashing to win, especially when players can exclusively get caught in lightsaber blade locks that must be won to inflict extra damage.

Other characters have different attack abilities that are not in the console versions, such as blaster-wielding characters able to fire charged shots and astromech droids being able to drop proton mines that would damage enemies on contact.

Players are also encouraged to use other characters' abilities in free-play to discover secret areas and find Death Star plans, which replace minikits in the console version.

At the end of each level, players are rewarded and ranked for how many enemies they defeated,
how many blaster bolts they deflected, how many studs they collected and how many Death Star plans they found.

==
Plot ==
The plot of the game is a humorous retelling of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones, and Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, as well as a bonus level with the opening of Star Wars:
Episode
IV - A
New Hope from the viewpoint of Darth Vader aboard the Tantive IV.

==
Development ==
In 2003, Traveller's Tales started the work on the game with assistance from Lego Interactive, who would also publish the game.
After The Lego Group left the gaming industry and closed down Lego Interactive in 2004, a small team of former Lego Interactive employees went on to found their own publishing company, Giant Interactive Entertainment, and would be able to publish all future Lego titles, including Lego Star Wars: The Video Game.
After the huge success of the game, Traveller's Tales downright bought Giant, and renamed them to TT Games Publishing.

== Reception and legacy ==
Lego Star Wars received generally positive reviews.
The PC version received a score of 77/100 from Metacritic and the game maintained a consistently high position at the top of the UK charts in May 2005.Lego
Star Wars was the thirteenth best-selling game of 2005.
Figures released by The NPD Group show the PlayStation 2 version as the tenth best-selling single-platform title of 2005.
The game's worldwide sales total exceeded 3.3 million copies in March 2006 and 6.7 million in May 2009.
In the United States, the game's Game Boy Advance version alone sold 580,000 copies and earned $17 million by August 2006.
During the period between January 2000 and August 2006, it was the 49th highest-selling game launched for the Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS or PlayStation Portable in that country.
The PlayStation 2 version of Lego Star Wars:
The Video Game received a "Double Platinum" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 600,000 copies in the United Kingdom.
By July 2006, the PlayStation 2 version had sold 1 million copies and earned $34 million in the United States alone.
Next Generation ranked it as the 54th highest-selling game launched for the PlayStation 2, Xbox or GameCube between January 2000 and July 2006 in that country.
It was one of The Best-Selling PS2 Games with more than four-fifths of the copies sold on the PlayStation 2.

IGN rated the game 8 out of 10 saying, "If you're a parent, LEGO Star Wars:
The Video Game should be at the top of your child's birthday list.
It has everything a family-oriented title needs: it has personality, puzzles, cooperative modes, replay value, low violence, a lack of frustrating difficulty, and most importantly, it has Darth Vader.
And that's what makes it enjoyable for adults too, because let's face it; Darth Vader makes everything better -- it's a fact."

The game's sequel, Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy, was released in September 2006, while a compilation, Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, was released in November 2007 and Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars was released in March 2011.
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, based on the 2015 film of the same name, was released in June 2016, and Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga, which will depict all nine films in the Skywalker Saga, including the three featured in Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, will be released in 2021.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game at MobyGames
Star Wars:
Battlefront is a series of first- and third-person shooter video games based on the Star Wars films.
Players take the role of soldiers in either of two opposing armies in different time periods of the Star Wars universe.

The series was launched in 2004 by LucasArts with Star Wars: Battlefront, developed by Pandemic Studios for LucasArts.
The game received positive reviews and sold well.
In 2005 Pandemic developed a sequel, Star Wars: Battlefront II, which was also critically and commercially successful.
The games were followed by Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) and Star Wars Battlefront: Elite Squadron (2009) for handheld consoles and Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons for mobile devices.
LucasArts made several attempts to develop a third major Battlefront game but no projects were released before The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of LucasArts.
Subsequently, EA DICE acquired a license to develop a new game, titled Star Wars Battlefront which was released on November 17, 2015.
A sequel, Star Wars Battlefront II, was released on November 17, 2017, and was developed by EA DICE, Criterion Games, and Motive Studios.

==
Gameplay ==
Games in the Battlefront series normally revolve around two armies – the Galactic Republic versus the Confederacy of Independent Systems or the Galactic Empire versus the Rebel Alliance or First Order versus the Resistance – fighting each other on various maps.
Maps take place in the Star Wars galaxy, with battlezones varying in theme and size.
Across the battlefield are multiple "command posts" (objectives) that act as spawn points, and can be controlled by either the player or the computer.

Units can spawn from any friendly command post, and vehicles regularly spawn at their respective command posts when destroyed.
Units can capture neutral or hostile command posts by approaching them and standing within the immediate vicinity for about 30 seconds.
The time to capture quickens with more friendly units within the capture zone.
Some vehicles act as mobile command posts, and must be destroyed as they can not be captured.
On some maps (such as Hoth or Endor), certain structures also act as command posts that can not be captured.
Command post capturing works differently on certain campaign missions as well.

Playable heroes and villains play a significant role in changing the course of battles.

The objective of most matches is to eliminate all of the opponents' reinforcement tickets or to capture the command points, to slowly chip away at their tickets.
Reinforcement tickets are used whenever a unit is killed, or when one faction controls a majority of the command posts on the map (usually when the losing faction only has 2-3).
Only one objective needs to be completed.
When all command posts are captured, the team with no command posts has twenty seconds to recapture or neutralize an enemy command post.
If the team cannot take over a post in this time, the match is over.
Certain campaign levels and multiplayer have requirements that differ from the general game play, however the general structure remains the same.
The game's "Conquest" mode is vaguely based on the Battlefield game mode of the same name.

===
Playable characters ===
Numerous characters from the movies, TV series and other games have been available to play as, which include:


==
Development ==
The first console games of the series were developed by Pandemic Studios, and since 2015, a second series of console Battlefront games has been developed by EA DICE.
Battlefront II (2017) is the first in the series to accurately follow the canon of the films, while the games developed by Pandemic Studios were relegated to Star Wars Legends non-canonical status, along with all of the games in the series released before November 2015.

==
Star Wars: Battlefront (Pandemic Studios) ==


===
Star Wars: Battlefront ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront is the first installment in the Battlefront series.
It was released on September 21, 2004, with a Mac port by Aspyr released in July 2005.
The game is available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Mac OS, and mobile phones.
Jedi are not playable in this game without the help of modified files unsupported by LucasArts.
Other NPCs made playable by similar files include, but are not limited to, Tusken Raiders in the Dune Sea of Tatooine, Ewoks of Endor and Gungans on the Naboo plains.

===
Star Wars: Battlefront II ===
Star Wars:
Battlefront II is the second installment in the Battlefront series, released in Europe on October 31, 2005 – for the PlayStation 2, PSP, Xbox, and Windows – and in North America one day later.
There are some significant differences between Battlefront and Battlefront II.
Battlefront II includes playable Jedi characters, space battles, and story campaigns, as well as Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith-related content.
The release date of Battlefront II coincided with the release of Revenge of the Sith on DVD.

The game is now an Xbox Platinum Hits game, a Sony Greatest Hits game in North America, and an Xbox Classics and PlayStation Platinum game in Europe.

Battlefront II expands upon the original game's single-player experience with mission-based objectives drawn from the first six Star Wars films.
It has a story-based campaign which revolves around the 501st Legion (AKA "Vader's Fist") and its evolution from a legion of clone troopers serving the Republic during the Clone Wars to Imperial stormtroopers.
Many maps from Star Wars Battlefront make a second appearance, and the game adds new locales such as Coruscant and Utapau.
The game also introduces "heroes" – playable characters based on iconic characters from the Star Wars films who are much more powerful than regular soldier (and were also present in the original Battlefront, but only as NPCs that spawned randomly on the battlefield); the hero roster includes Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Chewbacca, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, Mace Windu, Ki-Adi Mundi and Aayla Secura (as well as Kit Fisto, available only on the Xbox version of the game via the Xbox Live patch), whereas the villain roster includes Darth Vader, Darth Sidious, Boba Fett, Count Dooku, General Grievous, Darth Maul, Jango Fett, and Anakin Skywalker (as well as Asajj Ventress, also available only via the Xbox Live patch).
There are more modes in this game, such as Conquest, Hunt (where players fight as natives on planets against other natives or certain troopers in an army, such as Wampas vs. Rebels on Hoth or Tusken Raiders vs. Jawas on Tatooine, to earn 50 points first), Capture the Flag (both with one and two flags), Assault (which, on Tatooine only, is also available as Heroes vs Villains, where one team plays as the heroes and the other one as the villains in a race to rack up points by defeating enemies) and space battles.

=== Canceled sequels ===


====
Star Wars: Battlefront III ====
On September 29, 2006, Computer and Video Games made an unconfirmed claim that Free Radical Design was developing the third game in the Star Wars: Battlefront series, titled Star Wars: Battlefront III.
In June 2008, Kotaku allegedly received information from a former LucasArts employee that Star Wars:
Battlefront III was in the creation process.
On October 2,  Activision Blizzard filed a classification with the Australian Office of Film and Literature Classification listing Star Wars: Battlefront III for the Nintendo DS with a PG rating (E10+ equivalent) for mild animated violence.
However, that same month, Free Radical Design announced that they lost the rights to develop Star Wars: Battlefront III; the game at that point had been in development for two years.
Several years later, Free Radical Design co-founder Steve Ellis said Battlefront III was "pretty much done" in 2008, but that it was effectively canned when LucasArts could not commit to "spend big" on marketing it.
However, GameSpot quoted an unnamed LucasArts employee involved with the project who said Free Radical could not devote sufficient resources to the game and regularly missed deadlines.
A former Free Radical Design employee said some of the technology Free Radical developed for the game, specifically the contiguous game environment from planet surface into space, "is dying with us".
During and after the game's development, screenshots, and gameplay footage became accessible to the public.
In December 2008, Star Wars character renders bearing a Battlefront III watermark surfaced from a laid-off Free Radical employee.
The following month, gameplay footage was leaked from a November 2008 Free Radical in-house showing of Battlefront III footage.
The footage was pulled from IGN after LucasArts demanded its removal.
On April 1, 2012, a user on the game journalist website Betagames discovered Star Wars models and textures buried in Resident Evil:
Operation Raccoon City's archives; PC Gamer's Tom Senior speculated that these could have been from Battlefront III.
Also in April 2012, Past to Present revealed pre-alpha footage of Free Radical Design's Battlefront III.
YouTube videos showing the game's rough state received media attention from outlets such as Joystiq, Kotaku, and Shacknews.
On January 20, 2016, a leaked build of the game surfaced on Reddit.
It is currently playable using an Xbox 360 Development Kits and modified Xbox 360 consoles via a program called "RGLoader".
====
Star Wars:
Battlefront
Online ====
Star Wars:
Battlefront Online was rumored to be the next installment in the series.
On January 28, 2010, Kotaku reported that SOCOM developer Slant Six Games was working with LucasArts to develop an online-only Battlefront title due in 2011.
The game was said to be released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3.
It was also stated that this game may have been the source of the Star Wars: Battlefront 3 concept art renders.
However, the game has been canceled after the studio was unable to meet its 2010 release deadline.

====
Star Wars:
First Assault and Version Two ====
Star Wars:
First Assault was to be a downloadable multiplayer shooter for Xbox Live Arcade.
Digital Trends speculated that Star Wars: First Assault might help LucasArts recover some of their previous investment in Battlefront III and other projects in the franchise.

Speaking to Kotaku an anonymous insider noted that the game was to be "step zero" towards a third Battlefront game.

When footage of the game was leaked onto YouTube Tech site TechnoBuffalo noted that the gameplay very closely resembled that of the Call of Duty franchise.
Alongside First Assault, LucasArts was also working on a separate game titled "Version 2", which was, reportedly, a code name for Battlefront III.

====
Star Wars Battlefront IV ====
In 2018, concept art surfaced of a canceled Battlefront IV, rather than attempting to fit within the previous games and films' continuity, concept art showed the game was meant to focus on an alternate reality where Obi-Wan Kenobi and Luke Skywalker fell to the dark side, instead of Anakin Skywalker.

=== Handheld and mobile only games ===


====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Renegade Squadron is a handheld game released in North America on October 9, 2007, and in Europe three days later.
The game was released only for the PlayStation Portable.
Renegade Squadron is also available in a bundle pack with the then-new white PSP redesign featuring Darth Vader on the back.

Aside from new heroes and vehicles, such as the Millennium Falcon, a new feature is the ability to create a character, allowing the player to adjust the character's features such as weapon, appearance, and speed.
However, the character will be vulnerable due to the lacking of certain aspects that will be replaced by others.
For example, the character may be fast but weak or have good weapons but no stamina and speed.
Before the game's release, LucasArts had stated that over one million different customizable options would be present.
Another new feature allows players to enter asteroid bases on some space maps.

Commander Col Serra describes the forming of Renegade Squadron in the beginning cutscene of campaign.
Then the player starts a series of missions ranging in objectives while including cut scenes between each mission.
The final mission includes the Battle of Endor, in which the objectives are similar to the footage of Return of the Jedi.

====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron was released on November 3, 2009, for the PlayStation Portable and the Nintendo DS.
This marks the third Battlefront game on the PlayStation Portable and the first on a Nintendo console.
The game was originally discovered through its ESRB rating on the official ESRB website which has since been taken down.
It follows in the same vein as its predecessors with space, land and new air battles.
Elite Squadron is most notable for featuring simultaneous space and ground battles in Instant Action, and is the only game in the series with this feature.
Players usually play in a third person perspective, but in the PSP version, they can also switch to a strategy based mode where they may build troops and upgrade armies.
====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons ====
Star Wars Battlefront:
Mobile Squadrons is a mobile game developed by THQ Wireless.
It was released on April 2, 2009.
The game features a persistent online community, and has three character classes.
The gameplay is a first person perspective shooter that can use the touch features of a phone, although the player has no control over movement.

==
Star Wars Battlefront (EA DICE) ==


===
Star Wars Battlefront (2015) ===
At an Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) press conference on June 10, 2013, EA DICE (whose parent company, Electronic Arts, had recently acquired a multi-year license to produce Star Wars video games), unveiled a teaser trailer for a new Star Wars: Battlefront game, built on the Frostbite 3 engine.
The teaser showed a first-person view of the Battle of Hoth, including a crashing Snowspeeder and the foot of an AT-AT.
DICE showed additional development footage at the 2014 E3 conference.
The game's title was eventually announced as Star Wars Battlefront.
In April 2015, EA announced a release date of November 17, 2015  at Star Wars Celebration.
The game is a reboot of the series, focusing on capturing the look of the films.
At launch, four planets were confirmed - Hoth, Tatooine, Endor, and Sullust.
Unlike its predecessors, Star Wars Battlefront does not feature the Clone Wars era found in the prequel films, nor does it feature content from The Force Awakens; as a result, the hero and villain roster is also limited, at launch including only Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Leia Organa, Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine, and Boba Fett.
Free downloadable content (DLC) for the game was released in December 2015, featuring the planet of Jakku with two new maps and a new multiplayer game mode.
The game also features both first and third-person gameplay perspectives, similar to its predecessors.
A gameplay trailer involving the Hoth battle debuted at E3 on June 15, 2015.
The game features a pseudo-campaign — a cooperative experience allowing the player to experience gameplay with one or two players and computer-controlled allies and opponents.

"Outer Rim" is the first DLC pack for the game and was released on March 22, 2016.
It adds new heroes Nien Nunb and Greedo to the game, four new maps set in Jabba the Hutt's Palace (Palace Garage and Jabba's Palace) on Tatooine and a factory area on Sullust (Sorosuub Refinery and Sorosuub Pipelines), and a new mode called "Extraction".
The DLC is available for free to all players who have purchased the game's Season Pass, otherwise costing $10.
The second expansion pack is titled "Bespin" and allows players to fight in the setting of Cloud City, released in September 2016.
The expansion added more maps along with an additional game mode titled sabotage and new heroes Lando Calrissian and Dengar.
The third expansion pack, titled "Death Star", was released in September 2016 as well and added the long-awaited Death Star to the game, along with new heroes Chewbacca and Bossk.

The fourth and final DLC pack was released on December 6, 2016.
It is based on characters and locations from the film Rogue One, and includes Jyn Erso and Orson Krennic as new playable heroes, and a new game mode set both above and on the planet Scarif.
===
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) ===
Blake Jorgensen of Electronic Arts mentioned a sequel in November 2016, and Star Wars Battlefront II was announced in March 2017.
The game was released on November 17, 2017.
Since the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, Battlefront is the first game with a storyline that is considered canonical to the film series.

Star Wars Battlefront II features both single-player and multiplayer game modes, a customizable character class system, and content based on all Star Wars movies up to Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (with content for the other movies, as well as television series being added later on via free DLC).
A Celebration Edition was released in December 2019.
DICE announced that Scarif from Rogue One would be the last content update released for the game.

=== Canceled spin-off ===
In 2019, EA was in the process of developing a game code-named Viking, designed as a spin-off of the Battlefront series with open-world elements.
The game was originally planned for release in fall 2020, coinciding with the next generation of video game consoles, but was canceled in late 2019.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Fan-made sequel games ===


====
Galaxy in Turmoil ====
On January 25, 2016, Frontwire Studios began an attempt to produce an unofficial Battlefront installment called Galaxy in Turmoil.
The fan made game was in production using Unreal Engine 4 and was based on the canceled Star Wars: Battlefront III by Free Radical Design.
Although early versions of the game contained assets from  Free Radical Design, they soon became "place holders" as the full game planned to be released using assets and music made from the ground up.
On June 4, 2016, Galaxy in Turmoil gained a distribution deal through Valve and was planned to be released for free on Steam which generated a fair amount of attention.
On June 22, 2016, Lucasfilm requested the production of Galaxy in Turmoil be halted.

On July 31, 2016, Frontwire Studios announced the cancellation of the game was due to the "possibility of Galaxy in Turmoil taking away attention from Electronic Arts's Battlefront franchise".
Proposals of Galaxy in Turmoil falling under the paywall of Electronic Arts, and ideas of Lucasfilm giving Frontwire Studios a Star Wars license were both rejected due to an agreement between Electronic Arts and Lucasfilm.
Although Frontwire Studios may have fallen within Fair Use laws, legal conflict was avoided and the project was canceled.
There is a playable alpha that contains assets from Free Radical Design that was released to the public then removed early within Galaxy in Turmoil's lifetime.
Galaxy in Turmoil is now planned to be redeveloped as a brand new cyberpunk-themed IP without any Star Wars references, but still with Battlefront III-inspired mechanics including space-to-ground battles.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars video games


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch is an American animated series created by Dave Filoni for the streaming service Disney+.
It is part of the Star Wars franchise, acting as both a sequel to and spin-off from the series Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
The Bad Batch is produced by Lucasfilm Animation, with Jennifer Corbett as head writer and Brad Rau as supervising director.

Dee Bradley Baker stars as the Bad Batch, a squad of elite clone troopers with genetic mutations.
He also voices other clones in the series, reprising his role from The Clone Wars.
Michelle Ang stars as Omega, a female clone that joins the squad.
The series was officially ordered by Disney+
in July 2020 as a spin-off from The Clone Wars, with Filoni, Corbett, and Rau attached.

Star Wars:
The Bad Batch premiered on May 4, 2021, and will consist of 16 episodes.

==
Premise ==
Clone Force 99, also known as the Bad Batch—a group of elite clone troopers with genetic mutations that were first introduced in Star Wars: The Clone Wars—take on daring mercenary missions in the aftermath of the Clone Wars.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Starring ===
Dee Bradley Baker as the Bad Batch:
A squad of elite clone trooper also known as Clone Force 99, consisting of Hunter, Wrecker, Tech, Crosshair, and Echo.
Star Wars creator George Lucas wanted the Bad Batch to be more unique than other clones, with each having special abilities, but he did not want them to be superheroes.
Baker also voices the other clones in the series, including Cut Lawquane and Captain Rex.

Michelle Ang as Omega: A young female clone working as a medical assistant on Kamino.
She too is genetically deviant from standard clone templates and therefore feels a kind of kinship with the Bad Batch.

===
Guests ===
Ben Diskin as AZI-3:
A medical droid on Kamino.

Matthew Wood as battle droids.

Archie Panjabi as Depa Billaba:
A Jedi Master in charge of the clone operations on Kaller.

Freddie Prinze Jr. as Caleb Dume: The padawan of Depa Billaba, who escapes Order 66 on Kaller.

Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine
Bob Bergen as Lama Su: The prime minister of Kamino.

Gwendoline Yeo as Nala Se:
The Kaminoan scientist in charge of the cloning process.

Tom Kane as the narrator
Andrew Kishino as Saw Gerrera: A freedom fighter with ties to the Rebel Alliance.

Stephen Stanton as Admiral Tarkin: A high-ranking Imperial officer.

Nika Futterman as Shaeeah Lawquane:
The adoptive daughter of Cut Lawquane and his wife, Suu.

Kath Soucie as Jek Lawquane:
The adoptive son of Cut Lawquane and his wife, Suu.

Cara Pifko as Suu Lawquane:
The wife of Cut Lawquane.

Ming-Na Wen as Fennec Shand:
An elite mercenary and sniper.

==
Episodes ==


==
Production ==


===
Background ===
By September 2016, Star Wars: The Clone Wars and Star Wars Rebels supervising director Dave Filoni had stepped back from that position on the latter series so he could focus more on the series' writing as well as the development of future animated series for Lucasfilm.
In July 2018, Filoni announced that a final season of The Clone Wars would be released on the streaming service Disney+
in 2020.
The season includes a four episode arc introducing a squad of clone troopers with genetic mutations known as the Bad Batch; the episodes previously existed as story reels for an earlier, unfinished season of the series, and came directly from the plans of Star Wars creator George Lucas.

===
Development ===
Disney+ officially ordered a new series from Lucasfilm Animation in July 2020 titled Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a spin-off from the final season of The Clone Wars following the Bad Batch clones in the aftermath of the Clone War.
The announcement described the series as Dave Filoni's vision, and he serves as executive producer alongside Lucasfilm's Athena Portillo, supervising director Brad Rau, and head writer Jennifer Corbett, with Lucasfilm's Carrie Beck and Josh Rimes as co-executive producer and producer, respectively.
Filoni described the series as "very much in the vein" of The Clone Wars and said it would stay true to Lucas's vision for that series of telling epic, exciting adventure stories.

===
Casting ===
The first trailer for the series was released in December 2020, and confirmed that Dee Bradley Baker would return from The Clone Wars as the voice of all the clone troopers in the series, including the members of the Bad Batch and Captain Rex.
It also revealed that a younger version of the character Fennec Shand from the series
The Mandalorian would be appearing in the series, and actress Ming-Na Wen soon confirmed that she would reprise her role as Fennec from The Mandalorian.
Additionally, Stephen Stanton and Andrew Kishino reprise their roles as Admiral Tarkin and Saw Gerrera, respectively.

===
Music ===
Kevin Kiner was confirmed to be scoring the series in January 2021, after previously scoring The Clone Wars and Rebels.
He wrote the Bad Batch Theme for the final season of The Clone Wars.

==
Marketing ==
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy promoted the series at Disney's Investor Day event on December 10, 2020, revealing the first trailer for the series.
Jacob Oller of Syfy Wire felt the trailer made the series look like a more action-heavy version of The Clone Wars, and compared it to the 1980s television series The A-Team.

==
Release ==
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch premiered on Disney+
on May 4, 2021, Star Wars Day, with a special 70-minute episode.
The second episode was released on May 7, 2021, with subsequent episodes releasing weekly.
It will consist of 16 episodes.

== Reception ==
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 93% approval rating with an average rating of 7.2/10, based on 29 reviews.
Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 70 out of 100 based on 6 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Jesse Schdeen of IGN gave the premiere episode an 8 out of 10 rating, stating that the series is "a worthy successor to The Clone Wars, so much so that it could easily be rebranded as an eighth season" and that "it uses a loose end from that show to build a brand new story about the plight of clones after the war's end, and it's one that immediately resonates".
He also added that the show "captures a lot of what made The Clone Wars so great (including the slick animation style and the vocal talents of Baker), but it doesn't entirely escape that show's flaws, either".
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Over one hundred video games based on the Star Wars franchise have been released, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on films while others rely heavily on the Star Wars Expanded Universe.

Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras:
early licensed games (1979-1993), games developed after the creation of LucasArts (1993-2013), and games created after the closure of LucasArts (2014–present), which are currently licensed to Electronic Arts, and include an EA Star Wars logo.

The first Star Wars games were developed by a variety of companies after Star Wars creator George Lucas licensed the rights to Star Wars video games; several of these games were released under the “Lucasfilm Games” banner.
Early licensed games, released during the 8-bit and 16-bit eras of gaming, barely featured any kind of narrative, and many were action titles that either retold the stories of the original trilogy (1977-1983) or focused on a single scene of a film.

Later on, Lucas took interest in the increasing success of the video game market, and decided to create his own video game development company, LucasArts, so he could have more creative control over the games and their narratives.
During this era, graphics evolved enough for games to be able to tell complex narratives, leading to games that featured more advanced retellings of the stories of the films, with voice-overs and CGI cut scenes, as well as original titles with new narratives that were set in the same continuity as the films.
After The Walt Disney Company's purchase of Lucasfilm in 2012 and the closure of LucasArts the following year, the games developed during the first two eras were discarded from the canon in 2014 and reassigned to the non-canonical Star Wars Legends label.

Following LucasArts' closure, the rights to produce Star Wars video games were reassigned solely to Electronic Arts.
Games published during this era are considered canonical to the franchise, and have featured more influence from the Lucasfilm Story Group, responsible for managing aspects of Star Wars canon.
The EA Star Wars license had been set to expire in 2023, but in 2021, Lucasarts announced new partnerships for others to produce Star Wars and other Lucasfilm games alongside Electronic Arts.

Although many hobbyists and independent game developers have created freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

As of 2020, there have been over 90 million copies of Star Wars games sold.

==
Early licensed games (1979-1993) ==
In 1978, Apple Computer produced an unlicensed Star Wars game on cassette tape for its Apple II.
As a "space pilot trainee", the player destroys TIE fighters using a first-person heads-up display.
The first video game cartridge bearing the name Star Wars appeared that year on the RCA Studio II clones Sheen M1200 and Mustang Telespiel Computer.

The first official licensed Star Wars electronic game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
The game had three levels of play (basic, intermediate, and advanced).
Players took turns examining star systems with the aim of avoiding black holes, locating enemies, and searching for MAGNA, "the FORCE-giving star".
The game was billed as "the most exciting computer game you will ever play".
===
The original trilogy ===
Licensed releases for the Atari 2600  began with The Empire Strikes Back (1982) in which the player piloted a snowspeeder during the Battle of Hoth, destroying AT-AT walkers.
Several other games appeared, such as Return of the Jedi: Death Star Battle (1983), where the player controlled the Millennium Falcon in a mission to destroy the second Death Star, and Jedi Arena (1983), the first game to attempt to simulate a lightsaber battle (in this case, clearly inspired by the Star Wars scene, where Luke Skywalker trains with a seeker).
In 1983, the Star Wars arcade game was released by Atari based on the 1977 film.
In this game (featuring color vector graphics and the first ever digitized speech from a film)
the player enters the seat of Luke's Red Five X-Wing fighter, battles waves of TIE fighters led by Darth Vader, weaves through towers across the surface of the Death Star, and plummets through the battle station's trench in an attempt to destroy it.
The sequel for the game, The Empire Strikes Back, used the same technology to re-create scenes from the second film, including battles with AT-AT walkers and an asteroid field.

Due to the video game crash of 1983, which temporarily killed the home console market, no further games based on the franchise were released until 1987 when UK software publisher Domark released several 8-bit versions of the Star Wars vector arcade game, followed by similar conversions in 1988 of The Empire Strikes Back machine.
In 1987, Namco developed a Star Wars game for the Nintendo Family Computer (Famicom) for the Japanese market exclusively, based on the 1977 film, but with several liberties taken with its storyline.

In 1991, the platformer Star Wars was released for the Nintendo Entertainment System (the Famicom's Western counterpart), Sega Master System, Game Boy and Game Gear, and one year later, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back covered the plotline of the fifth episode of the saga.
Also in 1992, Super Star Wars was released for the SNES, followed by the remaining games in the trilogy:
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) and Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994), the latter also receiving conversions for the Game Boy and Game Gear in 1995.

The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films, developed during this development era:


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope ====
Star Wars (1983–88) -
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Death Star Interceptor (1984/85, System 3 Software Ltd) - Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars (1987) -
Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) - PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) - NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992, the first game in the Super Star Wars trilogy)
- SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) -
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back ====
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982)
- Atari 2600,
Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88)
- Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
- NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993
, the second game in the Super Star Wars trilogy)
- SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
=
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) -
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) -
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994, the third game in the Super Star Wars trilogy) - SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console
Canceled:
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure - Atari 2600
(unreleased)


===
Stand-alone titles ===


====
1980s ====
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) -
Atari 2600
Re-released for: Mobile (2005)
Star Wars: Droids (1988) - Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum – based on the Star Wars:
Droids series


==
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993-2013) ==
In the early 1980s George Lucas decided to invest in videogames.
So through Lucasfilm, Lucas started his own video game company, which he named LucasArts.
However, since Lucas had already licensed the rights to develop Star Wars games, the company instead developed original adventure games and World War II flight combat games.
LucasArts regained the rights to develop Star Wars games in 1993, at that point the videogame company put their previous experience in flight simulators to use, and released a Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulation based on the franchise.
===
The prequel trilogy ===
As The Phantom Menace release approached, dozens of licensed Episode
I tie-in
titles appeared, even educational titles, the market was flooded with several games, most of them of questionable quality.
However at the same time, titles based on the Expanded Universe flourished with critical acclaim, such as the expansion to Jedi Knight, Star Wars Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith and the first game in the Rogue Squadron series.

====
The Phantom Menace ====
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
- Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars:
Episode I (1999) - Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000/01) - PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000/01) - Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) -
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001)
-
XboxAfter
the release of Episode I in theaters in 1999, games from the prequel trilogy were released for most major platforms.
The first releases were video game adaptation (action-adventure) and
Star Wars Episode
I: Racer, based on the podracing sequence in movie.
Others, including Battle for Naboo and Jedi Power Battles, were released, but with little success.
The first strategic game in the Star Wars expanded universe was titled Star Wars: Rebellion and broke new ground in that it incorporated ships and planets not found in the original canon, such as the Rebel Assault Frigate and the Bulwark Cruiser.
But for all its ground-breaking new looks, it was not as successful as would have been hoped.
The second strategic title, Star Wars:
Force Commander was also released, but failed to keep up with other RTS games, since it was more focused on battling (with no resource gathering) and used a primitive 3D engine.
About a decade later, resource gathering lost popularity in favor of faster-paced combat-centric RTS games.

====
Attack of the Clones ====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002)
(Action) PlayStation 2, GameCube, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) - Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (
2002) - Game Boy AdvanceIn 2002, Attack of the Clones premiered in theaters, and another wave of Star Wars based games, including The Clone Wars, Star Wars Racer Revenge, and Bounty Hunter were released, this time focusing on events and characters from Attack of the Clones such as bounty hunter Jango Fett and the Clone Wars.

Star Wars:
Jedi Starfighter was released, allowing the player to be a Jedi Master flying a Jedi starfighter.
A third RTS game with a much more conventional approach to the genre's norms and using the Age of Kings engine, Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds, offered a better alternative to those seeking strategy in the Star Wars universe.

====
Revenge of the Sith ====
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) - PlayStation 2,  Xbox
Handheld and mobile: Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, MobileAdjoining the release of Revenge of the Sith, a video game adaptation (action) was also released close to the premiere, with various degrees of success.
Star Wars:
Republic Commando was also released in 2005.

===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) -
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) - Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009)
- Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures
(2010)
- Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


===
Legends franchises ===
Formerly known as Star Wars Expanded Universe, this continuity was renamed into Legends in 2014 and all media based on them, including video games, ceased to be canon.
The X-Wing series marked the start of the Star Wars games moving away from remaking the official films and began to focus more on the Expanded Universe.
Other titles were published or licensed by LucasArts, such as The Software Toolworks's Star Wars Chess  who also used the first "multimedia explosion" to release Rebel Assault (1993), which used FMV and photos extensively.

The 1996
Nintendo 64 title
Star Wars:
Shadows of the Empire was part of a LucasArts attempt to create a story between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of Jedi, putting the player in control of mercenary Dash Rendar.
Shadows of the Empire featured fan-favorite parts from the Super Star Wars line, such as another reenactment of the Battle of Hoth, piloting a snowspeeder and tying a cable around AT-ATs legs.
After the original trilogy was re-released as the "Special Editions" in 1997, LucasArts published other titles, including Star Wars: Yoda Stories and Star Wars Monopoly, as well as a Star Wars-themed fighting game, Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi.

==== X-Wing ====

Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) - DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) - DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997)
- Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999)
- WindowsStar Wars:
X-Wing was one of the best-selling games of 1993, and established the beginning of the X-Wing computer game series, which garnered numerous awards and recognition.
Star Wars:
X-Wing was followed by several sequels and expansions, such as Star Wars: TIE Fighter, Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter, and Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance.

====
Rebel Assault ====
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Mac


====
Jedi Knight ====
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, XboxThe
first step towards modern games was done with 1995's Dark Forces, the first Star Wars first-person shooter video game.
A hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy
, it featured new gameplay features and graphical elements not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, called the Jedi.
The game was well received and well reviewed, the game put the player in the role of Kyle Katarn, who would later appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
After the Special Edition original trilogy re-release in 1997, LucasArts published Star Wars Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II, then Star Wars Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith released in 1999.
In 2002, its sequel Jedi Outcast was released and gave players the first chance to experience advanced lightsaber duels, and it also detached itself from the usual idea of movie tie-ins.
One year later, the last game in the Jedi Knight series, Jedi Academy was released.
Katarn is a former Imperial stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and ultimately becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the 2015 film The Force Awakens.

====
Rogue Squadron ====
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube
Note: The co-op campaign of Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike, is composed of all the missions of the single player campaign of the previous game, Rogue Leader (except for two missions which are not included), and such missions can only be played in multiplayer, and can not be played in single-player.
Additionally as a bonus, the game includes the Arcade games of Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi.

====
Star Wars Racer ====
Star Wars Episode
I: Racer (1999)
Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo
64
Handheld:
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000)
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002)
PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Racer-related title:
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) PlayStation 2


====
Galactic Battlegrounds ====
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows,
Mac


====
Starfighter ====
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001)
Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


====
Knights of the Old Republic ====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2004)
Windows, Xbox, Mac
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016) and Onslaught (2019).

Canceled:
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III Windows, Xbox
Mobile:
Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic (2013)
iOS, AndroidIn 2003, Knights of the Old Republic, a BioWare RPG that debuted on the Microsoft Xbox and PC.
Knights (also known as KotOR among fans) was critically acclaimed, even winning "Game of the Year" at the Game Developers Choice Awards, (along with many other critics) in 2003.
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords was developed by Obsidian Entertainment and released in 2004.
The Sith Lords was praised for its cerebral writing and moral ambiguity, similar to The Empire Strikes Back, but criticized for being derivative of the first game and being released in an incomplete state.
Another MMORPG titled Star Wars:
The Old Republic was developed by BioWare, which released globally on December 20, 2011.
Pre-orders went up for sale in July 2011 and open beta weekends were confirmed for September 2011.

====
Star Wars: Battlefront (Pandemic Studios) ====
Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Canceled:
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) (PC, PS3, Xbox 360)Handheld:
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007)
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009)
PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Mobile:
Star Wars: Battlefront Mobile (2005)
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009)Pandemic Studios' Battlefront consisted of two games, Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) and Star Wars: Battlefront II in 2005, both games sharing three common console platforms: the Xbox and PlayStation 2.

A third Star Wars:
Battlefront title was planned for 2006 but was cancelled.
Two spin-offs were released, Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron, released in 2007 for the PlayStation Portable and Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron on November 3, 2009 for the Nintendo DS and the PlayStation Portable.
Elite Squadron is the first Battlefront game to offer a transition from space to ground battles at the players choice.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, the Battlefront series was rebooted by EA DICE.

====
Empire at War ====
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


====
The Force Unleashed ====
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii
Complete edition re-release with all DLCs:
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed - Ultimate Sith Edition (2009)
Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360,
PlayStation 3
Handheld: Nintendo DS,
iOS (Star Wars: The Force Unleashed Mobile)
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010) Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Handheld:
Nintendo DS, iOSStar Wars:
The Force Unleashed, released for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Wii, uses a new, detailed graphics engine.
The Wii version utilizes the motion sensing and accelerometer capabilities of the Wii Remote (simulating the ability to swing a lightsaber) and its Nunchuk attachment (used to perform Force powers).
Its sequel, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, was released in the United States on October 26, 2010.

===
Stand-alone games ===


==== 1990s
====
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996)
(3rd person shooter)
Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997)
(Fighting) PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997)
(Adventure) Windows
Handheld: (1997)
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy - UK) (1998) (Real-time strategy)
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) (Rail shooter)
Arcade
Star Wars Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998)
(Rail shooter-adventure)
Windows


====
2000s ====
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) (Real-time strategy)
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) (Vehicular combat) PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002)
(Third person action)
GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005)
(First person shooter)
Xbox, Windows
Mobile:
Star Wars: Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005)
Compilation:
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006)
(Compilation)
Windows


====
2010s ====
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) (Rail shooter)
Arcade


====
Stand-alone handheld and mobile games ====
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are handheld and mobile games.
Additional handheld and mobile games are listed above.
Unless otherwise mentioned, these games are also released for mobile phones.

Star Wars:
Flight of the Falcon (2003) (Action/Space simulation) Game
Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004)
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars:
Battle For The Republic (2005)
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005)
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D
Star Wars:
The Battle Above Coruscant (2005)
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005)
Star Wars Trivia (2005)
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005)
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005)
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006)
(Action-adventure)
PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS – set between episodes III & IV
Star Wars Cantina (2010)
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) - iOS, Unity
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010)
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010)
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2010)
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013)
Star Wars: Tiny Death Star (2013)


===
Miscellanea games ===
The following games are more of Star Wars themed, rather than actually influencing the franchise's fictional plot, they are classified together because of sharing the same genre, rather than officially being part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
====
Jakks Pacific Plug
It In & Play TV Games ====
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) - Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


====
Kinect Motion Sensor ====
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360
====
Educational ====
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Behind the Magic (1998) (Multimedia encyclopedia)
Windows, Macintosh
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


====
Star Wars Galaxies (MMO/RPG) ====
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),
Spin-off : trading card game : Star Wars Galaxies:
Trading Card Games - Champions of the Force (2008
, PC),Compilations
: Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)
The first MMORPG, titled Star Wars Galaxies: An Empire Divided, was also released in 2003 and was subsequently followed in 2004 by its first expansion Jump to Lightspeed.
Two more games, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (its second expansion, which ties in with the concurrently-released Revenge of the Sith),
and after the films, more Star Wars titles continued to be developed and released.
Empire at War (an RTS), was released in early 2006.
While released and being active for years, Star Wars Galaxies' servers shut down on December 15, 2011.
Notwithstanding the game's closure, there are several private emulator projects in various stages of development that intend to allow users to experience Star Wars Galaxies in different incarnations of the game's existence.
However, since the game can no longer be played the way it was originally meant, the game is considered to be cancelled.

====
Closure of LucasArts and cancelled stand-alone-games ====
At E3 2012, EA with LucasArts announced Star Wars 1313, which focuses more on the life of a bounty hunter as he descends to the level 1313 on Coruscant to unravel a criminal plot.
The game focuses more on gunplay and bounty hunter gameplay rather than the Force users and lightsabers combat.
It was set to release in Fall 2013 for Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Windows.
1313 has subsequently been cancelled by LucasArts following its purchase by Disney.
The following are the stand-alone Star Wars videogames that were canceled, the canceled titles that were part of a series are listed along its respective series.

Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: First Assault (2013) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Rivals (2018)
(Third-person shooter)With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, it was announced that LucasArts' development arm would stop making video games indefinitely.
In addition to this, various online browser games have shut down their servers, and can no longer be played.

==
Electronic Arts gains the Star Wars license, and the restructuring of the Star Wars canon (2013-2020) ==
After LucasArts was shut down, on May 6, 2013, Disney and Lucasfilm revealed a partnership with Electronic Arts that granted EA exclusive rights to produce Star Wars games for consoles and PC, with Disney retaining the freedom to handle the games for mobile platforms, such as smartphones, tablets and browsers.
This deal was set to expire in 2023.

On April 25, 2014, most of the previous licensed Star Wars video games, novels, comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise on April 25, 2014.Among the EA subsidiaries responsible for creating the Star Wars games within the deal, were the developers DICE, BioWare, Visceral Games and Respawn Entertainment.
After the canon restructuring, EA announced their new games would fall under the restructured canon.
As of the release of Jedi: Fallen Order, all EA-produced Star Wars games are considered canonical, although only the ones with an actual "story mode" narrative.

===
Reboots ===
====
Battlefront (EA DICE) ====
Star Wars Battlefront (2015) - PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Multiplayer only.

Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) - PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Singleplayer and Multiplayer.
After the restructuring of the Star Wars canon, the Battlefront series formerly developed by Pandemic was rebooted by EA DICE.
The first game was released in 2015, rushed into the market to tie-in with to the release of The Force Awakens.
As a result of the shorter development time, developer EA DICE decided to take a significant departure from all previous installments of the franchise and focus the game entirely on online multiplayer, completely axing the inclusion of a single player campaign or any sort of narrative; the move was heavily criticized by fans, including Finn actor John Boyega.
Only original trilogy characters (Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Boba Fett, Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine) and planets (Tatooine, Hoth and Endor) were playable on launch.
Downloadable content later added the planets
Jakku (from The Force Awakens), Bespin (from The Empire Strikes Back), Scarif (from Rogue One), in addition to the Death Star battle station (from A New Hope), and heroes Nien Numb, Greedo (Outer Rim), Lando Calrissian, Dengar (Bespin), Chewbacca, Bossk (Death Star), and Jyn Erso and Director Krennic (Rogue One: Scarif).
The first Battlefront also received a PlayStation VR add-on mission, the Rogue One X-Wing VR Mission.

The second Battlefront is the first in the series to be considered part of the Star Wars canon.
It addresses a major criticism of the previous game by including a singleplayer campaign with a story-mode set between the ending of Return of the Jedi and the beginning of The Force Awakens, in which the player controls an Imperial special forces commander named Iden Versio; additionally, characters from the films, including Luke Skywalker, Leia Organa, Han Solo, Lando Calrissian and Kylo Ren are playable.
The multiplayer mode features characters from the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as anthology films.
Future content was originally going to be distributed in a "season" system, though this was changed to monthly updates.

===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) ===
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order is a singleplayer game developed by Respawn Entertainment.
It was released on November 15, 2019 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.
The story revolves around a survivor of Order 66, Cal Kestis, who is on the run from the Empire and its Inquisitors.
Jedi:
Fallen Order takes place between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.

===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Squadrons is an action video game developed by Motive Studios.
It was revealed on June 15, 2020, and was released on October 2, 2020, for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, with a singleplayer campaign and multiplayer modes, alongside cross-platform play between all three platforms and virtual reality support for the PS4 and PC versions.

=== Cancelled Games ===


===
"Project Ragtag" ===
Prior to its closure in 2017, Visceral Games was working on an untitled game set in the time between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.
Amy Hennig, former Naughty Dog writer and director who oversaw the Uncharted series, joined Visceral as creative lead on the project codenamed Ragtag.
On October 17, 2017, EA announced the closure of Visceral Games.
EA reassigned the game to its EA Worldwide Studios, led by EA Vancouver, and said they will revamp the gameplay, which had been described as a linear, story-heavy title, into "a broader experience that allows for more variety and player agency".
On 15 January 2019, Kotaku's Jason Schreier reported that the game codenamed "Project Ragtag" had been canceled according to three people familiar with goings-on at EA.
Rogue One writer Gary Whitta openly criticized Electronic Arts for the cancelation, adding that he hoped Disney would hand the Star Wars licence to other companies.

===
Future ===
Following the massive player reception of Star Wars Battlefront II and the success of Star Wars: Jedi Fallen Order, EA CEO Andrew Wilson said that they're doubling down on the Star Wars games, meaning that a possible revival for the Battlefront series or more video games that has yet to be reported in development.

===
Other rumored console games ===
The lower than expected sales and mixed fan reception towards Electronic Arts' handling of the Battlefront sub-franchise has led to rumors of Lucasfilm considering to change the terms of the license, originally set to expire in 2024.
Lucasfilm was rumored to be courting either Ubisoft or Activision to either replace EA, or sharing rights to develop Star Wars games with them.

===
Mobile games ===
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014)
Star Wars: Commander - Android, iOS, Windows Phone (2014)
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense - Android, iOS (2014).
Spans both the prequel and original trilogies.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes - Android, iOS (2015).
As of November 2019, the game covers the prequel, original and sequel eras, and the Expanded Universe; most of the EU content originates from the Knights of the Old Republic series of games.

Star Wars:
Uprising - Android, iOS (2015, discontinued November 17, 2016)
Star Wars:
Heroes Path - iOS (2015)
Star Wars Rebels:
Recon Missions - Android, iOS, Windows Phone (2015)
Journeys series:
Journeys:
The Phantom Menace - iOS (2014)
Journeys: Beginnings - iOS (2014)
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017)
- Force Arena was a player versus player real-time strategy mobile game for iOS and Android.
It was developed and published by Netmarble Games in association with Lucasfilm.
Force Arena is set in the Rebellion era of the Star Wars storyline.
Players control customized squads of characters and vehicles in a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) environment.
The roster of over 80 available characters included Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Darth Vader, Palpatine, Grand Admiral Thrawn, Grand Moff Tarkin, Doctor Aphra, Ezra Bridger, and Jyn Erso.
The game was shut down in March 2019, following an announcement on December 19, 2018.

== Non-exclusivity of Star Wars titles (2021-present) =
=
In January 2021, Lucasfilm revived the Lucasfilm Games label as the licensing brand for all IP from the Lucasfilm production.
This included a new Indiana Jones game to be produced by MachineGames, as well as a new open world Star Wars game to be produced by Ubisoft and Massive Entertainment, the first major non-EA Star Wars game.
Lucasfilm did not speak to the state of EA's prior exclusive license to develop Star Wars games but affirmed EA would still be making such games, but stated that they "feel like there's room for others".
In February 2021, a free-to-play competitive arena combat game developed by Zynga called Star Wars: Hunters was announced.
The game will be released for the Nintendo Switch and on the Apple and Google Play appstores.

==
Star Wars crossover-based video game franchises developed by other companies ==
In some cases Lucasfilm has allowed other videogames franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises, that are developed by other studios.

===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993)
(Chess engine) DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1996)
Windows


===
Pinball and virtual pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
-Star
Wars is a 1992 pinball machine released by Data East.
It is based on the Star Wars original trilogy of films.
A semi-official update, tweaking and refining the gameplay rules was released 20 years later.

Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Zen Studios developed nineteen virtual pinball tables based on the Star Wars franchise, with none of them being imitations of previously released Star Wars physical pinball tables.

All of them are released as downloadable content add-ons for the sequels to Pinball FX and Zen Pinball.

A compilation of all 19 tables, titled Star Wars Pinball, is also available on iOS, Android and Nintendo Switch.

The mobile versions of Star Wars Pinball, are paid apps whose price unlocks one particular table and all other tables are unlocked via in-app purchases, while the Switch version, released in 2019 as both a retail and digital title, includes immediate access to all tables, plus additional features.

An Amazon Luna port of Star Wars Pinball has also been announced as a launch title.

Star Wars Pinball
(2013) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego has licensed videogames based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.
Due to the technical limitations of handhelds, the handheld versions always result in an entirely different game telling the same story as the console version, however the PlayStation handheld versions tend to imitate more closely the console versions albeit with some reduced areas and features.

Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Mac
Handheld(s):  Nintendo DS,
Game Boy Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006): Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube,
Mac
Handheld(s):
Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Windows, Mac
Handheld(s): Nintendo DS, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac
Handheld(s): Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo SwitchCompilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007), consisting of Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac

Handheld(s):
Nintendo DS
Mobile: iOS, Android.
====
Other Lego mobile and web browser games ====
Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011)
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2
(2012)
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012):
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013):
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The New Yoda Chronicles (2014):
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014):
Android, iOS


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds made two Star Wars games.

Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Disney Infinity ===
The third installment of the Disney Infinity series included Star Wars characters for the first time as playable characters, alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS,
Android


==
Cultural impact ==


===
Guest-appearances of Star Wars characters in other videogame franchises ===
This category refers to videogames from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or an unlockable character cameo.

====
Multiple guest-appearances in a series ====
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001), Activision – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002), Activision – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Indiana Jones series:
Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable
LEGO Indiana Jones series:
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts - Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows
Minecraft (2009)
- Various Star Wars DLC packs with Star Wars character skins released.
PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Windows, Switch
Fortnite (2017) - A playable Stormtooper skin was added to Fortnite in 2019.
Din Djarin and Grogu from The Mandalorian also appear as playable skins in the 2020 chapter two, season five event, Zero Point.
Djarin's Amban sniper rifle and his jetpack were included in the event as usable items.

The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020) - The ninth game pack for the life simulation video game
The Sims 4, is a collabration with Star Wars.
Titled The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu, the DLC is focused on adventures on the distant planet of Batuu.
It was released on PC, Mac, Xbox One and PlayStation 4 on September 8, 2020.

====
Single appearances ====
Night Shift (1990), Lucasfilm Games – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003), LucasArts – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-Wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005), LucasArts – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008), Namco Bandai Games – Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all of the DLC in Soulcalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores for unknown reasons.
It was later revealed to be due to unexpected licensing legal problems caused by Disney's purchase of Star Wars.

===
Fan-made Star Wars games ===
Star Wars MUSH was an unlicensed text-based role-playing game active in the early 1990s.

====
Galaxy in Turmoil ====
On January 25, 2016, Frontwire Studios began an attempt to produce an unofficial Battlefront installment called Galaxy in Turmoil.
The fan made game was in production using Unreal Engine 4 and was based on the cancelled Star Wars: Battlefront III by Free Radical Design.
Although early versions of the game contained assets from Free Radical Design, they soon became "place holders" as the full game planned to be released using assets and music made from the ground up.
On June 4, 2016, Galaxy in Turmoil gained a distribution deal through Valve and was planned to be released for free on Steam which generated a fair amount of attention.
On June 22, 2016 Lucasfilm requested the production of Galaxy in Turmoil be halted.

On July 31, 2016, Frontwire Studios announced the cancellation of the game was due to the "possibility of Galaxy in Turmoil taking away attention from Electronic Arts' Battlefront franchise".
Proposals of Galaxy in Turmoil falling under the paywall of Electronic Arts, and ideas of Lucasfilm giving Frontwire Studios a Star Wars IP licence were both rejected due to an agreement between Electronic Arts and Lucasfilm.
Although Frontwire Studios may have fallen within Fair Use laws, legal conflict was avoided and the fan made Star Wars inspired project was canceled.
There is a playable alpha that contains assets from Free Radical Design that was released to the public then removed early on within Galaxy in Turmoil's lifetime.
Galaxy in Turmoil is now planned to be released as a brand new "cyber-punk" themed IP without any Star Wars references, but still with Battlefront III-inspired mechanics including space-to-ground battles.

==
Further reading ==
Barr, Matthew (16 December 2020).
"
The Force Is Strong with This One (but Not That One):
What Makes a Successful Star Wars Video Game Adaptation?".
Arts.
9 (4): 131.
doi:10.3390/arts9040131.
Retrieved 21 December 2020.

Williams, Kyle; Radtke, C. "Star Wars: A Video Game Saga".
UGO.
Archived from the original on April 22, 2007.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars games at MobyGames
IPDB entry for Star Wars.

Recent Auction Results for Star Wars
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga is an upcoming Lego-themed action-adventure game scheduled to be released for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, and Xbox Series X/S.
It will be the sixth entry in TT Games' Lego Star Wars series of video games and the successor to Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
The game will adapt all nine entries in the Skywalker saga series of films.

==
Gameplay ==
Unlike most Lego video games in which players had to advance through the story in a linear order, players can choose to start the game from any of the nine Skywalker saga episodes and complete them in any order they wish.
Each episode will have five story missions, making a total of 45 levels, contrasting from six levels per episode in previous games.
Combat has been revamped from previous titles, such as lightsaber wielders now using a variety of combos with light attacks, heavy attacks, and Force moves, and blaster characters having an over-the-shoulder camera (angle featured in many third-person shooter games).
The game features 300 playable characters.
Much like its predecessor, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, the game's hub will not be a single area, such as the Mos Eisley Cantina in Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga, but a wide range of fully explorable planets filled with many iconic Star Wars landmarks.
Planets and moons confirmed by the developers so far to be explorable in the hub  include Naboo, Tatooine, Coruscant, Kamino, Geonosis, Kashyyyk, Utapau, Mustafar, Yavin 4, Hoth, Dagobah, Bespin, Endor, Jakku, Takodana, D'Qar, Starkiller Base, Ahch-To, Cantonica, Crait, Ajan Kloss, Pasaana, Kijimi, Kef Bir, and Exegol.
Many ships will have freely explorable areas in the hub as well, such as Star Destroyers and the Death Star.
Random encounters will also happen in the game's hub.
For example, an Imperial Star Destroyer could suddenly jump out of hyperspace and send a fleet of TIE Fighters after the player.
Players can choose to engage in dogfights with them or continue onward to progress the story.

==
Development and marketing ==
Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga was first teased to be in development by Lucasfilm sound editor Matthew Wood at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
An announcement trailer premiered at E3 2019 during Microsoft's press conference.
A second trailer showing one scene from all nine movies was released on 20 December to coincide with the release of The Rise of Skywalker.
The official artwork was revealed on 4 May 2020.Disney and Lucasfilm had not shared significant details of The Rise of Skywalker with the game team before the film's release.
In the meantime, TT Games worked on other aspects of the game until Lucasfilm shared more details.
The game is developed in Traveller's Tales' new engine, NTT (pronounced Entity).

===
Audio ===
Like Lego Star Wars
: The Force Awakens, Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga will use original voice acting, with the first actor of the game being Billy Dee Williams voicing Lando Calrissian.

==
Release ==
On 7 May 2020, the release date was mentioned as 20 October 2020 through the Star Wars YouTube channel.
On the same day, the original video was made private and a new video, in which the release date was cut out, was uploaded.
This date was not otherwise confirmed.
On 26 August 2020, the Lego website displayed the release date as being 2021, but the website was taken down.
It has since been updated to remove any suggestion of a release year.
The following day at the 2020 Gamescom Opening Night Live, it was announced that the game would release in Q1/Q2 2021 under the description of "Spring 2021" with additional versions on the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X/S.
On 2 April 2021, it was announced that the game had been delayed, with no further release window specified.
The game will be available in a Standard Edition and a Deluxe Edition.
The Deluxe Edition includes the Character Collection bundle, which collects six character packs based around characters from outside of the Skywalker Saga, which consists of packs from The Mandalorian, Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, the Star Wars: The Bad Batch series and a pack containing Classic Characters.
The retail Deluxe Edition will come with an exclusive Luke Skywalker with blue milk minifigure, and different box art showcasing Darth Vader, with his mask being removable by lifting up the included slipcase.
Physical Deluxe editions will be released for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5 and an Xbox version which can function as both the Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S versions depending on which console it is played on.
A steelbook resembling Han Solo in carbonite is included with pre-orders of any edition from Best Buy or Best Buy Canada or pre-orders of the Deluxe Edition bundle from Game.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Battle Pod is a 2014 arcade game based on the franchise Star Wars.
It was unveiled at the New York Comic-Con on October 8, 2014.

==
Gameplay ==
The game consists of multiple scenarios that correspond with major battles in the original trilogy.
There are six scenarios:
The Battle of Yavin (Yavin) from Star Wars where the player is placed in an X-wing attacking the Death Star to prevent it from destroying Yavin 4.

The Battle of Hoth (Hoth) from The Empire Strikes Back where the player pilots a snowspeeder to assist in the evacuation of Hoth from invading Imperial forces.

A speeder run through Endor (Endor) where the player helps Han Solo make it to the shield generator to destroy the Death Star's shield for the Rebels in space.

The Battle of Endor (Death Star II) from Return of the Jedi, which places the player in the cockpit of the Millennium Falcon to try to destroy the Death Star II and end the war.

There is one scenario that does not follow the storyline of the movies but sets its own path (Vader's Revenge).
This scenario takes place immediately after the destruction of the first Death Star where the player plays as Darth Vader who is trying to prevent the Rebels from escaping with a piece of the Death Star with the ability to eliminate Han Solo in the process.

Another version of the game adds a scene from The Force Awakens, where the player pilots a T-70 X-Wing to engage First Order ships on Takodana and protect General Leia's transport.
The arcade cabinet comes in two versions: the environmental version with the dome screen, and a smaller version, but still sit-down, with a flat screen TV.

== See also ==
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade
Star Wars: Racer Arcade
Mobile Suit Gundam: Bonds of the Battlefield


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
Battle Pod on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yoda purpurata is a species of acorn worm discovered 2,5km (about 1.5 miles) below the surface of the Atlantic ocean, and the sole species of the genus Yoda.
Ranging from 12 to 19 cm (4.7 to 7.5 in) in length, it was named after the fictional character Yoda from the Star Wars franchise.
It is the only known hermaphroditic member within the phylum.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Data related to Yoda purpurata at Wikispecies
Star Wars Forces of Destiny is a 2D animated web series by Lucasfilm Animation released through Disney's YouTube channel.
Set across multiple eras of the Star Wars franchise, it is a collection of two- to three-minute shorts centering on female characters featured in previous Star Wars installments.
The series premiered on July 3, 2017, beginning the daily release of a set of eight episodes; these episodes subsequently began broadcasting on Disney Channel on July 9.
An additional eight episodes were released in Fall 2017, and a second season of eight episodes were released in 2018.

First announced and presented in April 2017 during Star Wars Celebration Orlando
, Forces of Destiny is part of a franchise expansion initiative by Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media and includes a companion toy line by Hasbro and a series of youth-aimed books.
The series is the first 2D animated series produced by Lucasfilm since the 2003 Star Wars: Clone Wars series and the first 2D project by Lucasfilm Animation, which formed after the development of Clone Wars.

==
Premise ==
An animated micro-series starring female characters such as Princess Leia Organa, Sabine Wren, Jyn Erso, Rose Tico, Ahsoka Tano, Padmé Amidala, Hera Syndulla, and Rey.
== Cast and characters ==
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano
Felicity Jones (season 1) and Helen Sadler (season 2)
as Jyn Erso
Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata
Daisy Ridley as Rey
Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala
Shelby Young as Leia Organa
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico
Olivia Hack as Qi'raMatt Lanter reprised his role as Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker from The Clone Wars and Rebels, Tom Kane reprised his role as Jedi Master Yoda, Jim Cummings reprised his role as Hondo Ohnaka, Taylor Gray reprised his role as Jedi Padawan Ezra Bridger, Gina Torres reprised her role as bounty hunter Ketsu Onyo and Ritesh Rajan reprised his role as Tristan Wren.
Film actor John Boyega reprised his role as defected First Order stormtrooper Finn, Mark Hamill reprised his role as Luke Skywalker, son of Anakin and Padmé and Anthony Daniels reprised his role as the droid C-3PO.
Other characters to appear include smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca, droids R2-D2, BB-8 and Chopper.

==
Production ==
Forces of Destiny was announced on April 12, 2017, and a special preview of the series presented at Star Wars Celebration Orlando on April 14.
The series is the first 2D animated series produced by Lucasfilm since the 2003 Clone Wars series and the first 2D animation project created by Lucasfilm Animation; previous 2D animated series such as Ewoks, Droids, and early installments of Clone Wars were created before the formation of the studio.
The series is part of Disney Consumer Products and Interactive Media's franchise expansion initiative.
Forces of Destiny was created as a series of web shorts because it was felt to better appeal to children's watching patterns: "The way that kids are consuming content today, they're still watching linear television, but increasingly they're consuming content digitally, online.
We've created a story format here that reflects that.
It's a combination of digital and linear.
"
Each episode is written by Jennifer Muro and directed by Brad Rau.
==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2017) ===


===
Season 2 (2018) ===
A second season of fifteen additional episodes was announced in September 2017.
The episodes were released on March 19, 2018 online and aired on Disney Channel on March 25, 2018.

==
Distribution ==
Forces of Destiny premiered on July 3, 2017, through Disney's YouTube channel, beginning the daily release of a set of eight episodes.
It was initially announced that this release would culminate in the broadcast premiere of the eight episode set on Disney Channel on July 9 as a thirty-minute special, but on July 9, Disney announced via Twitter that only two episodes were going to be broadcast.
A second set of eight episodes was released in October 2017.
It was subsequently announced that episodes will air in two half-hour specials on Disney Channel on October 1 and 29.
The series is available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

==
Books ==
A series of youth books adapted the episodes.
Daring Adventures: Volume 1 adapted shorts about Sabine, Rey, and Padmé, and Daring Adventures:
Volume 2 adapted shorts about Jyn, Ahsoka, and Leia.
IDW Publishing published Star Wars: Forces of Destiny, a weekly all-ages five-issue comic book miniseries that ran from January to May 2018.

==
Merchandising ==
Alongside the initial series announcement, Lucasfilm also announced a related toy line from Hasbro and an apparel line.
The toy line features a new class of figures, adventures figures fill the space between action figures and dolls.
These 11-inch articulated figures of the six core female characters and smaller paired figures of other characters launched on August 1, 2017 alongside accessories such as lightsabers.
Other characters, including Luke Skywalker and Kylo Ren, are intended to be released.

== Reception ==
SyFy Wire calls Forces of Destiny "a great concept in search of a far better execution. ...
What could have been a female-centric version of Genndy Tartakovsky's Clone Wars shorts from 2003 is instead a series of disconnected stories tied to a singular visual aesthetic ...
As fun as it is to watch these female characters get a bit more screentime, it's still not enough."
===
Awards ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Forces of Destiny at IMDb
Star Wars Forces of Destiny playlist on YouTube
Inside Forces of Destiny and Star Wars Animation on the Star Wars official YouTube Channel
Star Wars: Forces of Destiny on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back is a video game released for the Nintendo Entertainment System in 1992.
It is the sequel the original Star Wars for the NES.
This is the second of three video games released under the Empire Strikes Back title that were developed directly for home video game systems.
It was preceded by a version for the Atari 2600 and succeeded by Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back for the Super NES.

After the game was completed, the developers were occupied making Super Star Wars for the Super NES, so a corresponding NES sequel covering the film Return of the Jedi was never developed, nor released.
A version of the game was released for the Game Boy.
It was reprinted and distributed by several publishers over the course of three years.

On July 26, 2019, the NES and Game Boy versions were officially re-released in both standard and Collector's Edition sets with Disney and Lucasfilms's approval in limited quantities on unlicensed replica game cartridges by Limited Run Games.

==
Gameplay ==
The objective of the game is to destroy an Imperial Probe Droid, escape a Wampa-infested ice cavern, fight during the Battle of Hoth, meet Master Yoda on Dagobah to train with him, and attempt to rescue friendly characters in Cloud City from Darth Vader.

Unlike the previous game, the player can only control Luke Skywalker, who can fight with a blaster pistol or a lightsaber, and who can also board a snowspeeder during the Battle of Hoth.
As Luke learns about the Force, he develops multiple Force Powers that will help him during his mission.

The ending is significantly more upbeat than the movie's ending, as the player must both rescue Han Solo and defeat Darth Vader in combat in order to win.

== Reception ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Empire Strikes Back at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (also known as Star Wars:
Episode VII – The Force Awakens) is a 2015 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the first installment in the Star Wars
sequel trilogy, following Return of the Jedi (1983), and the seventh episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Lupita Nyong'o, Andy Serkis, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Peter Mayhew, and Max von Sydow.
Set thirty years after Return of the Jedi, The Force Awakens follows Rey, Finn, Poe Dameron, and Han Solo's search for Luke Skywalker and their fight in the Resistance, led by General Leia Organa and veterans of the Rebel Alliance, against Kylo Ren and the First Order, a successor to the Galactic Empire.

The film was announced after The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
The film is the first Star Wars film to not extensively involve franchise creator George Lucas, who only served as a creative consultant in the early stages of production.
The film was produced by Abrams, his longtime collaborator Bryan Burk, and Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy.
Abrams and Lawrence Kasdan, co-writer of the original trilogy films
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi, rewrote an initial script by Michael Arndt.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
Filming began in April 2014 in Abu Dhabi and Iceland, with principal photography also taking place in Ireland and at Pinewood Studios in England, and wrapped in November.

The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles on December 14, 2015, and was released in the United States on December 18.
The film received positive reviews for its screenplay, direction, acting performances (particularly those of Ford, Driver, Ridley, Isaac, and Boyega), musical score, visual effects, editing, and action sequences, although some critics found it too similar to A New Hope (1977).
The film marked an improvement in a reception over the previous four Star Wars films.
The film broke various box office records and became the highest-grossing installment in the franchise, the highest-grossing film in the United States and Canada, the highest-grossing film of 2015, and the third-highest-grossing film at the time of its release, with a worldwide gross of over $2 billion and a net profit of over $780 million.
When box office is adjusted for inflation, the film is the top-grossing sequel of all time in North America.
The film received numerous accolades, including five nominations at the 88th Academy Awards and four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards, where it won the award for Best Special Visual Effects.
Two sequels within the sequel trilogy have been released: The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

==
Plot ==
Thirty years after the Galactic Civil War, the First Order has risen from the fallen Galactic Empire and seeks to end the New Republic.
The Resistance, backed by the Republic and led by General Leia Organa, opposes the First Order.
Leia searches for her brother, Luke Skywalker, who has gone missing.

On the desert planet Jakku, Resistance pilot Poe Dameron receives a map to Luke's place from Lor San Tekka.
Stormtroopers commanded by Kylo Ren raid the village and capture Poe, while Kylo kills San Tekka.
Poe's droid, BB-8, escapes with the map and encounters a scavenger named Rey.
Kylo tortures Poe using the Force and learns of BB-8.
Stormtrooper FN-2187, disillusioned by the First Order, frees Poe, and they escape in a stolen TIE fighter.
Upon learning that FN-2187 has no other name, Poe gives him the name "Finn".
As they head to Jakku to retrieve BB-8, a First Order Star Destroyer shoots them, and they crash-land.
Finn survives and assumes that Poe died in the crash.
He encounters Rey and BB-8, but the First Order tracks them and launches an airstrike.
Rey, Finn, and BB-8 steal the Millennium Falcon and escape the planet.

The Falcon gets discovered and boarded by Han Solo and Chewbacca.
Gangs seeking to settle debts with Han attack, but the group escape in the Falcon.
At the First Order's Starkiller Base, a planet converted into a superweapon, Supreme Leader Snoke allows General Hux to use the weapon for the first time.
Snoke questions
Kylo's ability to deal with emotions surrounding his father, Han Solo, who Kylo states means nothing to him.

Aboard the Falcon, Han determines that BB-8's map is incomplete.
He then explains that Luke attempted to rebuild the Jedi Order, but exiled himself when an apprentice turned to the dark side, destroyed the temple, and slaughtered the other apprentices.
The crew travels to the planet Takodana and meets with cantina owner Maz Kanata, who offers help getting BB-8 to the Resistance.
The Force draws Rey to a secluded vault, where she finds the lightsaber once belonging to Luke and his father, Anakin Skywalker.
She experiences disturbing visions and flees into the woods, confused and terrified.
Maz gives Finn the lightsaber for safekeeping.

Starkiller Base destroys the New Republic and its fleet.
The First Order attacks Takodana in search of BB-8.
Han, Chewbacca, and Finn are saved by Resistance X-wing fighters led by Poe, who survived the crash.
Leia arrives at Takodana with C-3PO and reunites with Han.
Meanwhile, Kylo captures Rey and takes her to Starkiller Base, but she resists his mind-reading attempts.
Snoke orders Kylo to bring Rey to him.
Discovering she can use the Force, Rey escapes using a Jedi mind trick on a guard.

At the Resistance base on D'Qar, BB-8 finds R2-D2, who had been inactive since Luke's disappearance.
As Starkiller Base prepares to fire once more, the Resistance devises a plan to destroy it by attacking its thermal oscillator.
Using the Falcon, Han, Chewbacca, and Finn infiltrate the facility, find Rey, and plant explosives.
Han confronts Kylo, calling him by his birth name Ben, and implores him to abandon the dark side.
Kylo seems to consider this, but ultimately refuses and kills his father.
Devastated, Chewbacca shoots Kylo and sets off the explosives, allowing Poe to attack and destroy the base's thermal oscillator.

The injured Kylo pursues Finn and Rey into the woods.
Finn fights Kylo with the lightsaber to protect Rey before Kylo knocks him unconscious.
Rey takes the lightsaber and channels the Force to defeat Kylo in a duel; they are then separated by a fissure as the planet's surface begins to splinter.
Snoke orders Hux to evacuate and bring Kylo to him to complete his training.
Chewbacca rescues Rey and the unconscious Finn, and they escape aboard the Falcon.
As the Resistance forces flee, Starkiller Base implodes.
R2-D2 awakens and reveals the rest of the map, which leads Rey to the oceanic planet
Ahch-To in the Falcon.

On Ahch-To, Rey finds Luke atop a cliff on a remote island.
Without a word, she presents him with his father's lightsaber.

== Cast ==
Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A rogue and a smuggler, formerly a key player in the Rebel Alliance.
Ford said, "[Han] does not aspire to the position of Obi-Wan, nor do I aspire to be some New Age Alec Guinness.
His development is consistent with the character, and there are emotional elements which have occasioned his growth.
[...]
There's a lot of the rogue still left in Solo.
Some things don't change."

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker:
The last Jedi, who has gone into hiding.
Regarding Luke, Han, and Leia, Abrams stated: "They'd be as old and as mythic as the tale of King Arthur.
They would be characters who [the new characters] may have heard of, but maybe not.
They'd be characters who they might believe existed, or just sounded like a fairy tale.
"
Hamill was initially skeptical of Luke only appearing at the end of the film and called his limited screentime "a great surprise".
Abrams added that the film's ending was intended to be "this great long drumroll up to seeing this guy".

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa: The former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, now General of the Resistance, and Luke's twin sister.
After the events of Return of the Jedi, she is described as "a little more battle weary, a little more broken hearted".
Fisher described Leia as "Solitary.
Under a lot of pressure.
Committed as ever to her cause, but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated, tired, and pissed."
Abrams said: "The stakes are pretty high in the story for her, so there's not much goofing around where Leia's concerned."

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren: A dark warrior who is strong with the Force, the leader of the Knights of Ren, and a high-ranking member of the First Order.
He is the son of Han and Leia, nephew of Luke, and the grandson of the deceased Darth Vader.
Driver said the team tried "not to think of him as being bad, or evil, or a villain.
Something that was more three-dimensional.
He's more dangerous and unpredictable, and morally justified in doing what he thinks is right."

Daisy Ridley as Rey: A highly Force-sensitive scavenger who was abandoned as a child on the desert planet Jakku and awaits her absent family's return.
Ridley said: "She's completely self-sufficient and does everything for herself, until she meets [Finn] and an adventure begins.
"Cailey
Fleming as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn: A reformed First Order stormtrooper.
Boyega said that he learned he obtained the part "over a nice breakfast in Mayfair" during which Abrams told him, "John, you're the new star of Star Wars."
Boyega said: "When we find Finn, he's in incredible danger.
And the way he reacts to this danger changes his life, and launches him into the Star Wars universe in a very unique way."
He said in another interview: "He's been taught about Luke Skywalker, he knows about his history.
For him it's like joining the army and then learning about one of the great enemies of your country."

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron: A Resistance X-wing fighter pilot.
Isaac said: "He's the best freaking pilot in the galaxy, [...]
He's been sent on a mission by a certain princess, and he ends up coming up across [Finn], and their fates are forever intertwined."

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata: A wise and perceptive figure operating a somewhat shady cantina on the peaceful forest planet Takodana who is acquainted with Han.
Abrams said Kanata has "lived over a thousand years.
She's had this watering hole for about a century, and it's like another bar that you'd find in a corner of the Star Wars universe."
According to Abrams, the character was based on his former high school English teacher, Rose Gilbert, who lectured at the Palisades Charter High School from 1961 to 2013.
Abrams said the team "really wanted the story to feel authentic, despite being a wild fantasy.
I mentioned Rose in an early story meeting as a sort of timeless, wise figure that I'd actually known in my life."

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke:
The political leader of the First Order.
He is Kylo Ren's master, who seduced him to the dark side and is very powerful in the dark side of the Force.
Serkis described Snoke as "quite an enigmatic character, and strangely vulnerable at the same time as being quite powerful, [...]
He is large.
He appears tall.
And also just the facial design—you couldn't have gotten there with prosthetics.
[...]
Without giving too much away at this point, he has a very distinctive, idiosyncratic bone and facial structure."

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux:
The commander of the First Order's Starkiller Base.
Gleeson described him as "pretty ruthless.
A strong disciplinarian would be a mild way of putting it.
[...]
He's kind of opposite Kylo Ren.
They have their own relationship, which is individual and unusual.
One of them is strong in different ways than the other.
They're both vying for power."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid in Organa's service.
Daniels said the actors were allowed to experiment with their performances, and that Abrams "made a field, a playpen where you were allowed to take your time and suggest things".

Max von Sydow as Lor San Tekka: A retired adventurer on Jakku, aiding the Resistance in finding Skywalker.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca:
A Wookiee and Solo's longtime companion.
Mayhew's double Joonas Suotamo portrays the character in several action scenes, and Ian Whyte performed stunts, as the 71-year-old Mayhew suffered from knee problems.
Tim Rose and Mike Quinn reprise their respective roles as Admiral Ackbar and Nien Nunb from Return of the Jedi, with Erik Bauersfeld and Kipsang Rotich returning their respective voices.
Kenny Baker, originally announced as part of the cast, was credited as "consultant" for R2-D2, with Jimmy Vee performing some of the work for R2-D2.
Ewan McGregor has an uncredited vocal cameo as Obi-Wan Kenobi in Rey's vision sequence, while archival audio of Frank Oz and Alec Guinness as Yoda and Kenobi, respectively, are also used in the same scene; Oz recorded new dialogue for the film, but it was replaced with preexisting audio from The Empire Strikes Back.
Gwendoline Christie portrays Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's legions of stormtroopers.
Dave Chapman and Brian Herring served as puppeteers for BB-8, with Bill Hader and Ben Schwartz credited as "Vocal Consultants".
Ken Leung appears as Statura, an admiral in the Resistance.
Simon Pegg appears as Unkar Plutt, the Junk parts dealer on Jakku.
Greg Grunberg plays Temmin "Snap" Wexley, an X-wing pilot.
Kiran Shah plays Teedo, a scavenger on Jakku who rides a semi-mechanical Luggabeast.
Jessica Henwick appears as Jess "Testor" Pava or Jess Testor, an X-wing pilot.
Brian Vernel appears as Bala-Tik, the leader of the Guavian Death Gang.
Yayan Ruhian and Iko Uwais appear as Tasu Leech and Razoo Qin-Fee, members of the Kanjiklub Gang, a criminal organization.
Warwick Davis appears as Wollivan, a tavern-dweller in Maz Kanata's castle.
Anna Brewster appears as Bazine Netal, a First Order spy, also at Maz Kanata's castle.
Hannah John-Kamen appears as a First Order officer.
Thomas Brodie-Sangster and Kate Fleetwood play First Order Petty Officers, Thanisson and Unamo, respectively.
Billie Lourd, daughter of Carrie Fisher, appears as Connix, a lieutenant in the Resistance.
Members of the Resistance include Emun Elliott as Brance and Maisie Richardson-Sellers as Korr Sella while Harriet Walter appears as Kalonia, the doctor who tends to Chewbacca.
Mark Stanley appears as a Knight of Ren.
Sebastian Armesto portrays Lieutenant Mitaka and Pip Torrens portrays Colonel Kaplan, both serving the First Order.
Daniel Craig, Michael Giacchino, and Nigel Godrich cameo as stormtroopers.
Abrams' assistant, Morgan Dameron, appears as a Resistance officer, while his father, Gerald W. Abrams, appears as Captain Cypress.
The film's dialect coach, Andrew Jack, appears as Major Ematt of the Resistance.
Additionally, Crystal Clarke, Pip Andersen, Christina Chong, Miltos Yerolemou, Amybeth Hargreaves, Leanne Best, Judah Friedlander, and Kevin Smith appear in minor roles.
Riot control stormtrooper FN-2199, who calls Finn a traitor during the battle on Takodana, was portrayed by stunt performer Liang Yang and voiced by sound editor David Acord.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Star Wars creator George Lucas discussed ideas for a sequel trilogy several times after the conclusion of the original trilogy, but denied any intent to make it.
In October 2012, he sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Speaking alongside Lucasfilm's new president, Kathleen Kennedy, Lucas said: "I always said I wasn't going to do any more
and that's true, because I'm not going to do any more, but that doesn't mean I'm unwilling to turn it over to Kathy to do more.
"As
creative consultant on the film, Lucas attended early story meetings and advised on the details of the Star Wars universe.
Among the materials he turned over to the production team were his rough story treatments for Episodes VII–IX, which Lucas requested be read only by Kennedy, Bob Iger, Alan F. Horn, and Kevin A. Mayer.
Lucas later said Disney had discarded his story ideas and that he had no further involvement with the film.
Lucas' son Jett told The Guardian that his father was "very torn" about having sold the rights to the franchise and that his father was "there to guide" but that "he wants to let it go and become its new generation".

The Force Awakens' first screenplay was written by Michael Arndt.
Early drafts had Luke Skywalker appear midway through the film, but Arndt found that "every time Luke came in and entered the movie, he just took it over.
Suddenly you didn't care about your main character anymore.
"
The writers decided to use Luke as the film's MacGuffin and, as something that the protagonists needed to find, would not appear in person until the final scene.
Arndt also developed some backstory elements for the returning characters from the original trilogy, such as how Leia was instrumental in rebuilding the Republic after the fall of the Empire before being discredited when it was publicly revealed that her biological father was Darth Vader (this would go on to become a central plot point in the canonical novel Star Wars:
Bloodline).Several directors were considered, including David Fincher, Brad Bird, Jon Favreau, and Guillermo del Toro; after a suggestion by Steven Spielberg to Kennedy, J. J. Abrams was named director in January 2013, with Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg as project consultants.
Arndt worked on the script for eight months, but said he needed 18 more, which was more time than Disney or Abrams could give him.
The production announced Arndt's exit from the project on October 24, 2013, and Kasdan and Abrams took over script duties.
Abrams expressed relief that the release date was announced for December 2015 instead of a previously discussed summer release.
He and Kasdan planned the story while walking in Santa Monica, New York City, Paris, and London.
The first draft was completed in six weeks.
Abrams said the key to the film was [returned] to the roots of the first Star Wars films and be based more on emotion than explanation.
In January 2014, Abrams confirmed that the script was complete.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm clarified that Episodes VII–IX would not feature storylines from the Star Wars expanded universe, though other elements could be included, as with the TV series Star Wars Rebels.
Abrams stated that he purposely withheld some plot elements from The Force Awakens, such as Rey and Finn's last names and backgrounds.
Kennedy admitted that "we haven't mapped out every single detail [of the sequel trilogy] yet", but said that Abrams was collaborating with The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson, and that Johnson would work with The Rise of Skywalker's then-director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition and that "everybody's got a say in how we move forward with this".
Daisy Ridley later recounted that J. J. Abrams had written drafts for episodes 8 and 9.A fictional language was developed for use in the film by YouTube star Sara Forsberg, who created the viral video series "What Languages Sound Like To Foreigners"; Forsberg developed the language by studying various languages, such as Hindi and Gujarati.
In November 2015, Lucas recorded an hour-long interview with CBS News reporter Charlie Rose in which he said Disney had not been "keen" to involve him and conceded: "If I get in there, I'm just going to cause trouble because they're not going to do what I want them to do, and I don't have the control to do that any more, and all it would do is just muck everything up.
"
He also said, "They wanted to do a retro movie.
I don't like that.
Every movie, I worked very hard to make them different
[...] I made them completely different—different planets, different spaceships to make it new.
"
In early December 2015, Kathleen Kennedy told The Hollywood Reporter that Lucas had seen the movie and "liked it".
In the same month, at the Kennedy Center Honors, Lucas stated, "I think the fans are going to love it
, It's very much the kind of movie they've been looking for."
Abrams felt that, as the first in a new trilogy, the film "needed to take a couple of steps backwards into very familiar terrain" and use plot elements from previous Star Wars films.

=== Pre-production ===
In May 2013, it was confirmed that The Force Awakens would be filmed in the United Kingdom.
Representatives from Lucasfilm met with Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to agree to produce The Force Awakens in the UK.
Osborne committed £25 million of public money towards the film, claiming it was a boost for British culture and its film industry.
According to production company account filings in the United Kingdom, The Force Awakens ultimately received a total of £31.6 million ($47.4 million) from the government.
Beginning in September 2013, production spaces at the Bad Robot facility were converted for shooting of The Force Awakens for the benefit of shooting a minor portion of the film in the United States.
The film's costume designer was Michael Kaplan, who had previously worked with Abrams on the films Star Trek (2009) and Star Trek Into Darkness (2013).
Film editors Mary Jo Markey and Maryann Brandon, long-term collaborators with Abrams, were also signed.
In August 2013, it was announced that cinematographer Daniel Mindel would be shooting the film on 35 mm film (specifically Kodak 5219).
In October 2013, other crew members were confirmed, including sound designer Ben Burtt, director of photography Mindel, production designers Rick Carter and Darren Gilford, costume designer Michael Kaplan, special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, re-recording mixer Gary Rydstrom, supervising sound editor Matthew Wood, visual effects supervisors Roger Guyett, and executive producer Jason McGatlin.
===
Casting ===
Open auditions were held in the United Kingdom and the United States in November 2013 for the roles of Rachel and Thomas.
Casting began in earnest in January 2014, because of changes to the script by Kasdan and Abrams.
Screen tests with actors continued until at least three weeks before the official announcement in April 2014, with final casting decisions made only a few weeks earlier.
Actors testing had strict nondisclosure agreements, preventing them, their agents or their publicists from commenting on their involvement.
Though Lucas intimated that previous cast members Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, and Mark Hamill would return for the new film as early as March 2013, their casting was not confirmed until over a year later.
Saoirse Ronan, Michael B. Jordan, Lupita Nyong'o and Frida Gustavsson, auditioned for new characters; industry publications reported Jesse Plemons was considered, possibly for Luke Skywalker's son;
Adam Driver for an unnamed villain; and Maisie Richardson-Sellers for an unknown character.
Daisy Ridley was cast by February 2014, and by the end of that month a deal had been worked out with Driver, who was able to work around his Girls schedule.
Talks with Andy Serkis and Oscar Isaac began by March and continued into April.
That same month, John Boyega began talks after dropping out of a Jesse Owens biopic.
Denis Lawson, who played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy, declined to reprise his role, saying it would have "bored" him.
In April, the cast was announced with a photo of the first table read of the script at Pinewood Studios near London, picturing director Abrams with Ford, Ridley, Fisher, Peter Mayhew, producer Bryan Burk, Lucasfilm president and producer Kathleen Kennedy, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Hamill, Serkis, Isaac, Boyega, Driver, and writer Lawrence Kasdan.
In June, cast additions Lupita Nyong'o and Gwendoline Christie were announced.
To prepare for his role, Hamill was assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist at the request of the producers, who wanted him to resemble an older Luke.
Fisher was also assigned a personal trainer and a nutritionist.
Abrams initially considered using Daniels only in a voice role for C-3PO, but Daniels opted to reprise the role physically as well; the production team built a new C-3PO costume to accommodate him.
A flashback scene was cut from Rey's vision (following her discovery of Luke's lightsaber), which would have featured Robert Boulter standing in for Luke as he appeared in his duel with Vader in The Empire Strikes Back.
In May, Abrams announced a donation contest for UNICEF from the Star Wars set in Abu Dhabi; the winner was allowed to visit the set, meet members of the cast and appear in the film.
In October, Warwick Davis, who played Wicket in Return of the Jedi, as well as Wald and Weazle in The Phantom Menace (1999), announced that he would appear in The Force Awakens, but did not reveal his role.
In November, Debbie Reynolds confirmed that her granddaughter (Fisher's daughter), Billie Lourd, was in the film.

===
Filming ===
In February 2014, Abrams said filming would begin in May and last about three months.
The official announcement came in March, when Disney and Lucasfilm announced that principal photography would commence in May and be based at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.
That month, it was revealed that pre-production filming would take place in Iceland prior to the start of official filming in May, consisting of landscape shots that would be used for scenery in the film.
In April, Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn confirmed that filming had begun, filming in secret in the United Arab Emirates around Liwa Oasis, part of the emirate of Abu Dhabi, by a second unit.
Later that month, it was revealed that in addition to 35 mm film, segments of the film were being shot in the 65 mm IMAX format.
In July, Bad Robot reported via Twitter that the film would be at least partially shot on IMAX cameras.
Principal photography began in Abu Dhabi on May 16, 2014.
Abrams and the cast members went to Abu Dhabi in early-May, where large sets were built on location—including a shuttle-like spacecraft, a large tower, and a big market—and where explosives were used to create a "blast crater".
Cast members were spotted practicing driving vehicles that would be used during filming.
Production moved to Pinewood Studios in June.

That same month, Harrison Ford fractured his leg while filming at Pinewood after a hydraulic door on the Millennium Falcon set fell on him, and was taken to a hospital.
According to Abrams, Ford's ankle "went to a 90-degree angle".
Production was suspended for two weeks because of Ford's injury.
Ford's son Ben said the ankle would likely need a plate and screws and that filming could be altered slightly, with the crew needing to shoot Ford from the waist up for a short time until he recovered.
A month later, Jake Steinfeld, Ford's personal trainer, said Ford was recovering rapidly.
Abrams also suffered a fractured vertebra in his back when he was trying to help lift the door after Ford's accident, but he kept this to himself for over a month.
In February 2016, it was reported that the Health and Safety Executive brought four criminal charges against Disney subsidiary Foodles Production (UK), Ltd. for alleged health and safety breaches relating to Ford's accident.
Foodles Production (UK) Ltd was subsequently fined $1.95 million in October 2016 for two health and safety breaches, after admitting the counts at an earlier hearing.
In July 2014, filming took place over three days at Skellig Michael, an island off the coast of County Kerry, Ireland, with a cast including Mark Hamill and Daisy Ridley.
Landscape shots for the planet
Takodana were shot in July in the Lake District in the northwest of England.
Production was halted for two weeks in early August 2014
so Abrams could rework shooting in Ford's absence and resumed with a fully healed Ford in mid-August.
In September, the former RAF Greenham Common military base in Berkshire was used and featured set constructions of several spaceships.
Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean Gloucestershire England was used for some scenes.
Principal photography ended on November 3, 2014.

===
Post-production ===
Kathleen Kennedy said The Force Awakens would use real locations and models over computer-generated imagery.
Rian Johnson, director of The Last Jedi, reiterated that Abrams would use little CGI and more practical, traditional special effects, saying: "I think people are coming back around to [practical effects].
It feels like there is sort of that gravity pulling us back toward it.
I think that more and more people are hitting kind of a critical mass in terms of the CG-driven action scene lending itself to a very specific type of action scene, where physics go out the window and it becomes so big so quick."
Abrams' intention in prioritizing practical special effects was to recreate the visual realism and authenticity of the original Star Wars.
To that end, the droid BB-8 was a physical prop developed by Disney Research, created by special effects artist Neal Scanlan and operated live on set with the actors.
In February 2014, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) announced plans to open a facility in London, citing Disney's Star Wars films as a catalyst for the expansion.
ILM's Vancouver branch also worked on the special effects for the film.
Abrams supervised post-production and editing of the film at Bad Robot Productions' headquarters in Santa Monica.
In August 2015, he gave the film's estimated running time as 124 minutes.
Abrams made changes to the film's plot in the editing process to simplify the film, by removing some sequences shown in trailers: "At one point, Maz used to continue along with the characters back to the Resistance base, but we realised that she really had nothing to do there of value [...]
So we ended up leaving those things out.
"On
November 6, 2014, the film's title was announced as Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In December 2015, Pablo Hidalgo, the creative executive at the Lucasfilm Story Group which handles all the canonical continuity for the Star Wars universe, revealed that the working title for the film was Shadow of the Empire "for the longest time".

===
Music ===
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.
He began working on the film in December 2014, and by June 2015 had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would return to themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia, and Han, in ways that "there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with Abrams was similar to the process he went through with Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began in June 2015 at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
The first day of recording was June 1, 2015.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings in Los Angeles.
The score was recorded in 12 sessions within a five-month period between June and mid-November.
The 90-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music; however, Abrams reedited the film, which discarded, modified, or rerecorded the score's part for nearly an hour.
Williams' theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men's chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
Recording of the score was completed on November 14, 2015.
The film's soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015.
Williams' score is more than two hours long.
Lin-Manuel Miranda and Abrams contributed music to the film's cantina scene.
Abrams met Miranda at a performance of his Broadway musical Hamilton, where Miranda jokingly offered to compose cantina music, should it be needed.
Unknown to Miranda, Williams had previously told Abrams that he did not want to compose the music for that scene, wanting to focus on the orchestral score.
Abrams then contacted Miranda, and the two collaborated on the music for the scene over a period of two months.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Disney backed The Force Awakens with extensive marketing campaigns.
On November 28, 2014, Lucasfilm released an 88-second teaser trailer.
It was screened in selected cinemas across the United States and Canada and in theaters worldwide in December 2014.
It was also released on YouTube and the iTunes Store, generating 58.2 million views on YouTube in its first week.
Critics compared the brief footage favorably to the production values of the original trilogy.
The Hollywood Reporter called the trailer "perfectly potent nostalgia", praising its mix of old and new.
Empire was impressed by the continuity with the first films—"the feel of classic Star Wars"—but noted the absence of Hamill, Ford, and Fisher and speculated about the significance of the new characters.
The Guardian wrote that the use of the Star Wars fanfare by John Williams reinforced brand loyalty among fans.

On December 11, 2014, Abrams and Kennedy released a series of eight mock Topps trading cards revealing the names of several characters.
On April 16, 2015, a second teaser trailer, this one lasting two minutes, was shown at the opening panel at the Star Wars Celebration in Anaheim, California.
Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said the reaction to the trailer was "staggering [...]
the entire room of almost eight thousand people just leapt to their feet and roared,
I mean I can't think of anything I've ever been to—other than a rock concert—
that felt quite like that".
The trailer was viewed over 88 million times within the first 24 hours of release.
The trailer shows many of the new characters and the first footage of Chewbacca and Han Solo.
The Huffington Post's Graham Milne wrote that the trailer "was an affirmation of something that we'd long been told was never going to happen.
This was a gift.
This was faith rewarded.
About damn time.
"Vanity
Fair was the first magazine to release an exclusive cover issue devoted to The Force Awakens.
The magazine, released on May 7, 2015, featured exclusive interviews and photos of the cast photographed by Annie Leibovitz.
At the 2015 San Diego Comic-Con International, in addition to a panel with many of the actors, a behind-the-scenes look at the film demonstrated the film's use of practical sets and effects.
It was positively received, with Nigel M. Smith of The Guardian writing: "
The featurette's angle is a strong one and connects with fans of the original trilogy in an incredibly poignant way.
It also does a sly job of teasing Fisher's new look as Leia and Simon Pegg's mysterious involvement as a rumored alien in the movie, without actually showing the actors in action.
"
Smith compared the marketing strategy for the film to that of a previous Abrams film, Super 8, saying "the promos [...] are notable for what they tease, not what they give away.
"Walt
Disney Studios and Lucasfilm presented a look at The Force Awakens at Disney's D23 Expo in August 2015.
Drew Struzan—who designed the poster artwork for the previous Star Wars films—produced a commemorative poster given to the event's attendees.
In October 2015, Lucasfilm unveiled the theatrical release poster and a third trailer.
The poster omitted Luke Skywalker and revealed a Death Star-like "orb".
The trailer debuted during the halftime break of Monday Night Football, before being released online.
The reaction to the trailer by fans on social media was "frenzied", with Lizo Mzimba of the BBC writing that "perhaps the most significant thing about the final trailer before the film's release is how little of the story it reveals."
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph felt the trailer was "a perfect blend of old and new, in keeping with the old-fashioned Star Wars aesthetic".
The trailer received 128 million views in 24 hours.
16 million of the views came from its airing on Monday Night Football.
At the end of October, Air France announced a "Flight and Cinema" package, providing customers who book select flights to Paris transportation to a theater to see the film, since France was one of the first countries to release the film.
On November 23, a partnership with Google was announced, in which Google users could choose to affiliate themselves with either the Dark or Light Side, which would change the appearance of their Google websites.
Additionally, Disney teamed up with Verizon to create a virtual-reality experience for Google Cardboard.
On December 17, 2015, select theaters across the United States and Canada aired a Star Wars marathon, airing the six previous Star Wars episode films in 2D, followed by The Force Awakens in 3D.
Attendees received a special lanyard featuring exclusive marathon art.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced a series of at least 20 books and comics, "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", which were released by multiple publishers starting in late 2015, prior to the film's premiere.
The series includes books by Del Rey and Disney-Lucasfilm publishers and comic books from Marvel Comics.
All titles under the program are canonical to the Star Wars universe.
Alan Dean Foster wrote a novelization of The Force Awakens which was released in e-book form on December 18.
In an effort to avoid revealing plot details before the film's release, the print release of the novelization was delayed until January 2016.
Marvel Comics published a six-issue comic book adaptation of The Force Awakens between June and November 2016.Disney Consumer Products and Lucasfilm announced that September 4, 2015 would be deemed "Force Friday" and would be the official launch of all the merchandise for The Force Awakens.
Beginning at 12:01 am, fans could buy toys, books, clothing and various other products at Disney Stores and other retailers throughout the world.
Disney and Maker Studios hosted an 18-hour live-streaming presentation on YouTube, showcasing multiple merchandise products beginning on September 3, 2015.
Among these products were a remote-controlled BB-8 developed by Sphero.
Sphero had participated in a Disney-run startup accelerator in July 2014, where they were invited into a private meeting with Disney CEO Bob Iger, in which they were shown on-set photos and imagery of BB-8 before its public unveiling.
Many retailers, such as Toys "R" Us, were unable to meet demand for Star Wars products due to the event.

===
Video games ===
The Force Awakens is the first Star Wars film to not have a direct tie-in game to accompany it.
Instead, select characters, scenes and/or locations from the film became part of other Star Wars video games:
Characters from the film were added to an update to the mobile game
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, available for iOS and Android and released by Electronic Arts;
free downloadable content for Electronic Arts' Star Wars Battlefront reboot allowed players to battle on the planet Jakku; an update to the mobile game Star Wars Commander, released by Disney Mobile for iOS, Android and the Windows Store, allowed players to battle on the planet
Takodana during the Galactic Civil War era; and a condensed version of the film's plot becomes an add-on "playset" in the toys-to-life game Disney Infinity 3.0, with Finn, Rey, Poe Dameron, and Kylo Ren as playable characters.
Eventually, the film got a full Lego video game adaptation, titled Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, which was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Wii U, Xbox 360, and Xbox One on June 28, 2016.
==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens premiered in Los Angeles at the TCL Chinese Theatre, El Capitan Theatre, and Dolby Theatre on December 14, 2015.
A white tent stretched along Hollywood Boulevard from Orange Drive to Highland Avenue, covering the "massive" premiere event that hosted more than five thousand guests.
The film was released in 12 countries, including European nations (such as Italy and France), the Philippines, and Thailand on December 16; 32 countries including the United Kingdom, Mexico, and additional European, Asian, African, South American, and Oceania countries on December 17; and in the United States and Canada, Japan, Spain, and Venezuela on December 18, in 3D and IMAX 3D.
It was released in India on December 25 and in China on January 9
, 2016.In the United States and Canada, it had the widest release of December across 4,134 theaters, of which 3,300 were 3D locations, a record 392 IMAX screens (13 of which were 70mm), 451 premium large format screens, 146 D-Box locations, as well as releasing in the Dolby Vision format (high-dynamic range, Rec.
2020 color) in Dolby Cinema.
Worldwide, it was released across 940 IMAX theaters, a new record.
On December 18, 2015, the film began playing on every IMAX screen in the United States and Canada for four straight weeks up to January 14, 2016.
This made it the first film since Warner Bros.' The Hobbit trilogy to receive such a release.
The film finally shed some of its IMAX screens with the release of The Revenant (2015) and The Finest Hours (2016) in mid-January 2016.Advance ticket sales for the film began on October 19, 2015, and were in strong demand, resulting in online movie ticket sites crashing.
Vue Cinemas, the United Kingdom's third-largest theater chain, sold 45,000 tickets in 24 hours, 10,000 of which were sold in 90 minutes, a record for the theater.
In the United States, the film pre-sold a record-breaking $6.5 million worth of IMAX ticket sales on a single day.
IMAX has never previously registered more than $1 million in pre-sales on a single day.
In total, it sold over $50 million in pre-sales, breaking the record.
This number was raised to $100 million including $50–60 million in advance ticket sales by December 14.
However, not all tickets that were pre-sold were for the film's opening weekend, with
Fandango President Paul Yanover saying "people have set aside tickets for screenings in January, weeks after the big opening [...]
We have people buying Star Wars [The Force Awakens] into 2016.
It's not just an opening-weekend phenomenon.
"
Similarly, the film broke pre-sales records in the UK, Canada, and Germany.
The Force Awakens is the first live-action Star Wars film not to be released theatrically by 20th Century Fox; accordingly the film is not introduced with either that company's logo, or its signature fanfare composed by Alfred Newman.
Instead, the film is the first in the series to be distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, and the film is presented with only Lucasfilm's production logo shown silently before the main titles.
Disney chairman Bob Iger explained that the decision not to place Disney branding on the film was "for the fans".
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Force Awakens via download and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 1, 2016, with a Blu-ray and DVD release on April 5.
The home media release contains additional footage, with eight bonus features.
A Blu-ray 3D "collector's edition" of the film was released on November 15, including all the features of the original home releases, as well as several new bonus features, including new deleted scenes and audio commentary by director J. J. Abrams.
The package includes a Blu-ray 3D, regular Blu-ray, DVD, and digital copy of the film, as well as an additional Blu-ray disc for the bonus features.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens grossed $936.7 million in the United States and Canada, and $1.132 billion in other countries for a worldwide total of $2.068 billion.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold close to 110 million tickets in the United States and Canada.
The Force Awakens earned 8.6% of the total 2015 releases in the United States and Canada, second only to the 8.8% of the box office earned by Titanic in 1997.
It was the 24th film in cinematic history to gross $1 billion worldwide, standing as the fastest film to surpass the mark at the time, doing so in 12 days.
It was also the third film in history to surpass $2 billion worldwide, doing so on its 53rd day of release.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $780.1 million, accounting for production budgets, P&A, talent participations, and other costs, with box office grosses, and ancillary revenues from home media, placing it first on their list of 2015's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".
====
Commercial analysis ====
With a production budget of $259–306 million, plus $175 million for marketing, printing and advertising costs, The Force Awakens was predicted to be a major box office success.
The cost of the film was subsidized by £31.6 million (US$47 million) from the UK film incentive program.
Total costs, after accounting for profit participations, production and distribution of home videos, as well as other ancillary mediums, is expected to run $423 million.
Reports in April 2015 from The Hollywood Reporter and Amboee Brand Intelligence predicted the film would earn up to $540 million worldwide for its opening, breaking the record for the biggest worldwide opening, as well as breaking the record for the biggest U.S. opening.
They believed that The Force Awakens would have the widest release ever, across 4,500 theaters in the United States and Canada.
Instead, it received a total of 4,134 theaters, and had the widest December opening.
Box office analyst Phil Contrino likened the film to Avatar (2009), which opened to $77 million in the United States and Canada and went on to earn $2.8 billion worldwide, saying The Force Awakens would earn $1 billion "without blinking" and could gross $2 billion.
In August 2015, Deadline Hollywood predicted an opening weekend of $615 million worldwide could be possible, including a $300 million opening in the United States and Canada.
Months prior to the film's release, box office analysts reported opening weekend projections were at $175–250 million.
Analysts said that the box office receipts of the film, when compared to predecessors, must be adjusted for inflation, and that the first Star Wars film made more when this adjustment is made.
It has further been observed that each of the first three films in the series was more profitable in calculating revenue against production costs.
Box office analyst Paul Dergarabedian said that while Avatar and The Force Awakens were both released on the same date of December 18, higher ticket prices in 2015 and IMAX screenings could push Star Wars "into the box office stratosphere".
By January 13, analysts concluded that it was unlikely that The Force Awakens would surpass Avatar's global gross.
While The Force Awakens was very successful in the United States and Canada, the same success was not witnessed in many overseas individual markets such as Germany, India, Latin America, and parts of Asia.
One cited reason for this is that overseas audiences do not have the same nostalgia or affinity for the film as those in the U.S.
The Star Wars franchise has traditionally lacked resonance with filmgoers in China, and marketing for The Force Awakens heavily focused on appealing to that market.
Nancy Tartaglione of Deadline Hollywood argued that, if accounting for its 40/60 domestic to international split, The Force Awakens did well overseas.
Avatar did well internationally because of its novelty, the marketing campaign advertising it as showcasing the newest 3D technology that can only be fully appreciated in the theaters, and because of its extended time in overseas theaters.
While The Force Awakens had appeal with its special effects, analysts felt that it lacked the novelty factor; they also cited that its gross was stilted due to markets making way for new films sooner than was previously done, and for films not playing in overseas theaters as long as they did back when Avatar was released.
Dergarabedian stated, "No matter what, [The Force Awakens] is an absolute, all-out blockbuster without peer in terms of the sheer speed at which it has crossed all of these major box-office milestones."
Moreover, Mike Fleming of Deadline Hollywood argued that the movie was the "most valuable movie" of the year, with "the net profit to Disney was an astounding $780.11M, and the Cash on Cash Return was twice that of any other film [released in 2016], at 2.00".
====
United States and Canada ====
In the United States and Canada, The Force Awakens was released on December 18, 2015.
It made a record-breaking $57 million from Thursday night previews, of which IMAX screenings generated a record-breaking $5.7 million from 391 screens.
On its opening day, the film grossed $119.1 million, marking the biggest single- and opening-day record and the first time a film has earned more than $100 million in a single day.
Without Thursday-night grosses, the film earned the second-largest opening-day gross and a record of $247.9 million for its opening weekend.
The debut was 19% bigger than the previous record holders
The Avengers (2012) ($207 million) and Jurassic World (2015) ($208 million).
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend record of $30.1 million (12.65%) from 391 IMAX theaters, which nearly amounts to the $252.5 million total earned by Return of the Jedi—the second-lowest-grossing film in the series—in its original run.
2D screenings accounted for 53% of the total opening gross while 3D accounted for 47%.
RealD 3D comprised $78 million of the opening gross, setting a new record.
Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 39.8% in the United States and Canada, earning $149.2 million, to remain in first place at the box office and recording the biggest second weekend of all time.
On January 2, after just 16 days of release, it became the second film (following Avatar) to gross over $700 million in the United States and Canada, and on January 6 became the highest-grossing film of all time domestically, doing so in 20 days.
On January 9, it became the first film in cinematic history to cross $800 million domestically unadjusted for inflation.
On February 5, The Force Awakens became the first film to earn over $900 million, unadjusted for inflation, in the United States and Canada.
The film fell outside of the top ten for the first time in its eleventh weekend during the weekend February 26–28, 2016, and did not achieve $1 million in ticket sales for the first time in its fourteenth weekend.

====
Other territories ====
Internationally, the film was released in over 30,000 screens.
It opened on December 16, 2015, in 12 international markets and earned $14.1 million on its opening day, debuting at first place in all of them.
It expanded in an additional 42 countries on December 17, generating $58.6 million for a two-day international total of $72.7 million, reaching first place in all 44 markets.
It grossed a total of $129.5 million in three days after adding $56.8 million on its third day, and set a new midnight record in the United Kingdom with $3.6 million.
It broke opening-day records in the United Kingdom ($14.4 million), Germany ($7.1 million), Australia ($6.8 million), Sweden ($1.7 million), Norway ($1.1 million), and in 12 other countries.
Other markets which generated large opening days were Spain ($3.5 million) and Japan ($3 million).
After the five days, The Force Awakens had a total international opening gross of $281 million from 30,000 screens, a new record for December opening and the third-biggest international opening of all time.
International markets generating opening-weekend tallies of at least $10 million were the United Kingdom ($50.6 million), Germany ($27.5 million), France ($22.5 million), Australia ($19.6 million), Japan ($13.4 million), and Russia ($12.3 million).
The film had the biggest opening of all time in 18 countries including the United Kingdom, Germany, Australia, Russia, and Sweden.
After five days, the film had a total worldwide opening record of $529 million from 74 territories, which was the biggest worldwide opening at that time, making it only the second time in cinematic history—after Jurassic World—that a film had opened to more than $500 million globally.
This included an IMAX opening record of $48 million.
Revenues from IMAX dipped slightly, generating $19 million in its second weekend, for a record total of over $70 million in 11 days.
IMAX generated $17.9 million from 276 IMAX theaters.
The film had a steeper decline in its second weekend, falling 51% to $136.9 million.
Of the notable major markets, the film had an unsuccessful opening in India where it opened third against two local blockbusters with a mere $1.51 million.
As of February 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($180.7 million), China ($124.5 million), Germany ($109.7 million), Japan ($92.6 million), and France ($88.2 million).
On January 17, 2016, it passed the $1 billion mark overseas becoming the first film of Disney, the third film of 2015 and the fifth film overall to achieve this feat.
It topped the international box office chart for five consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avengers: Age of Ultron (2015) to have five straight wins, before being dethroned by The Revenant in its sixth weekend.
In Japan, it topped the box office for six straight weekends.

===
Critical response ===
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics.
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 440 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.20/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "Packed with action and populated by both familiar faces and fresh blood
, The Force Awakens successfully recalls the series' former glory while injecting it with renewed energy."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 55 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 80 out of 100, The Force Awakens received "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale; women, and people under the ages of 25 and 18 gave it an "A+", while 98% of audiences gave it either an "A" or a "B".
Audiences polled by PostTrak gave the film an 88% "definite recommend" while 96% said it met or exceeded their expectations.
Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said the film "sets out to shake Star Wars from its slumber, and reconnect the series with its much-pined-for past", and "it achieves this both immediately and joyously
is perhaps the single greatest relief of the movie-going year."
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian said that it was "both a narrative progression from the earlier three films and a shrewdly affectionate next-gen reboot", and it was "ridiculous and melodramatic and sentimental, but exciting and brimming with energy and its own kind of generosity.
"
Variety's Justin Chang wrote that the film has "sufficient style, momentum, love, and care to prove irresistible to any who have ever considered themselves fans".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a beautiful, thrilling, joyous, surprising, and heart-thumping adventure".
Ann Hornaday, writing for The Washington Post, thought the film had "enough novelty to create yet another cohort of die-hard fans", and the film struck "all the right chords, emotional, and narrative, to feel both familiar and exhilaratingly new."
The Charlotte Observer's Lawrence Toppman said Abrams had "pulled off a delicate balancing act, paying clever homage to the past."
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film his highest rating and called it "the best Star Wars sequel yet and one of the best films of 2015".
Frank Pallotta, reviewing the film for CNN Business, found it was the best Star Wars film since the original trilogy and that it "is bound to be a film experience long remembered by fans and non-fans
alike".
Certain critics found The Force Awakens derivative of the original Star Wars trilogy, some expressing their opinion that the film was essentially a remake of A New Hope.
Tom Long of The Detroit News wrote that though some may find the film too similar to the original Star Wars, it leaves "the ungainly and unneeded clumsiness of the subsequent prequels far behind", with "the energy, humor, and simplicity of direction [has] been recaptured".
The Tribune-Star called it "basically the same" as the original film but "isn't that what we all wanted anyway?"
Stephanie Zacharek of Time wrote that Abrams had delivered "everything we expect, as opposed to those nebulous wonders we didn't know we wanted".
Reviewing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson cited the film's "top-tier production values and a strong sense of scale and scope", but felt it was so much "an exercise in fan service [that] it is only due to the charisma and talent of our newbies and J. J. Abrams' undeniable skill as a visual storyteller that the Mad Libs narrative doesn't outright destroy the picture".
Brian Merchant of Motherboard said that the film "is supposed to be all about exploring the unexplored, not rehashing the well-trod", and is "one of the most unabashedly creative enterprises of the 20th century has been rendered another largely enjoyable."
RogerEbert.com's Gerardo Valero went as far as to accuse the film of plagiarizing A New Hope and resorting to nostalgia.
He felt that it "didn't [justify] a return to the universe" from not having an original story of its own to tell in the plot, characters, and musical score, negatively comparing it to George Lucas' prequel trilogy, and that some of its climactic moments felt unearned.
In an interview with journalist Charlie Rose that aired on December 24, 2015, Lucas likened his decision to sell Lucasfilm to Disney to a "divorce" and outlined the creative differences between him and the producers of The Force Awakens.
Lucas described the previous Star Wars films as his "children" and criticized the "retro feel" of The Force Awakens, saying: "I worked very hard to make [my films] completely different, with different planets, with different spaceships—you know, to make it new."
Lucas also likened Disney to "white slavers", which drew some criticism; he subsequently apologized.
In a 2019 memoir, Disney chairman Bob Iger said that George Lucas "couldn't even hide his disappointment" towards J. J. Abrams' interpretation.
According to Iger, Lucas said, "there's nothing new" after seeing the film, and that "there weren't enough visual or technical leaps forward".
Lucas preferred Rian Johnson's sequel The Last Jedi and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).
===
Accolades ===
Several awards held their nominations before the December release of The Force Awakens, making the film ineligible for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards and some other awards ceremonies.
However, the film was added to the 21st Critics' Choice Awards' slate of best picture nominees after a special vote by the board of directors, and the announcement of the 2015 American Film Institute Awards was delayed until after the release of The Force Awakens, where it was named one of Top Ten Films of the year.
The film received five Academy Award nominations at the 88th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, Best Film Editing, and Best Visual Effects.
The film garnered four nominations at the 69th British Academy Film Awards for Best Original Music, Best Sound, and Best Production Design, including two wins, one for Best Special Visual Effects and a BAFTA Rising Star Award for John Boyega.
It was nominated for Best Picture at the 2016 Critics' Choice Awards.
The film received seven Visual Effects Society Awards nominations, winning four, including Outstanding Visual Effects in an Effects Driven Feature Motion Picture.
It received the most nominations at the 21st Empire Awards, including Best Film, Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film, Best Director for J. J. Abrams, Best Male Newcomer for John Boyega, and Best Female Newcomer for Daisy Ridley.
The Force Awakens received 13 nominations at the 42nd Saturn Awards, where it won in eight categories, including Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Actor for Harrison Ford, Best Supporting Actor for Adam Driver, Best Music, Best Special Effects, Best Editing, and Best Make-Up.
Daisy Ridley and John Boyega each received several nominations and accolades for their performances.
They were nominated as Best Newcomers at various critics circle and associations, including the Alliance of Women Film Journalists, and the Florida Film Critics Circle, The Force Awakens received 11 nominations at the MTV Movie Awards, including Movie of the Year, Best Female Performance for Ridley, Best Breakthrough Performance for Boyega, and Best Virtual Performance for Lupita Nyong'o and Andy Serkis.
==
Sequels ==


===
The Last Jedi ===
Rian Johnson confirmed in August 2014 that he would write and direct The Last Jedi, which was released on December 15, 2017.
Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Jimmy Vee, and Joonas Suotamo reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
The Rise of Skywalker was released on December 20, 2019.
J. J. Abrams directed the film and co-wrote it with Chris Terrio.
Hamill, Fisher, Driver, Ridley, Boyega, Isaac, Daniels, Nyong'o, Suotamo, and Tran reprised their roles in the film, and are joined by Naomi Ackie, Keri Russell, and Richard E. Grant.
Billy Dee Williams returns from the original trilogy as Lando Calrissian and Ian McDiarmid returns from original and prequel trilogies as Palpatine.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==
Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

==
Further reading ==
Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York: DK Publishing.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.
==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens at Disney A to Z
The Star Wars Trilogy, also known as the original trilogy or the classic trilogy, is the first set of three films produced in the Star Wars franchise, an American space opera created by George Lucas.
It was produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox, and consists of the original Star Wars film (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Beginning in medias res, the original trilogy serves as the second act of the nine-episode Skywalker saga.
It was followed by a prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
Collectively, they have been referred to as the "Skywalker Saga" to distinguish them from spin-off films set within the same universe.
The films center on the Galactic Civil War between the Rebel Alliance and the tyrannical Galactic Empire, as well as the archetypical hero's journey of Luke Skywalker in his quest to become a Jedi under the tutelage of exiled Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda.
Luke joins forces with Princess Leia, Han Solo, Chewbacca, C-3PO, R2-D2 and the Rebel Alliance in facing the Empire and the evil Sith Lord Darth Vader.
The original Star Wars received widespread acclaim from critics for its storytelling, characters, John Williams' music and groundbreaking visual and sound effects, and surpassed 1975's Jaws as the highest grossing film of all time, turning science fiction films into a blockbuster genre, until it was surpassed by E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial in 1982.
The three films have been hailed as among the greatest films of all time.
With the trilogy's success, Star Wars became a pop culture phenomenon, spawning a multi-million dollar merchandising empire.

==
Background ==
In 1971, Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights.
He began developing his own story inspired by the work of Edgar Rice Burroughs.
Immediately after directing American Graffiti (1973), Lucas wrote a two-page synopsis for his space opera, titled Journal of the Whills.
After United Artists, Universal Studios and Disney rejected the film, 20th Century Fox decided to invest in it.
Lucas felt his original story was too difficult to understand, so on April 17, 1973, he began writing a 13-page script titled The Star Wars, sharing strong similarities with Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress (1958).
By May 1974, he had expanded the script into the first draft of a screenplay,  but found that the script had grown too long for a single film.
Subsequent drafts evolved into the script of the original film.
Lucas negotiated to retain the sequel rights.
Tom Pollock, then Lucas's lawyer, writes: "We came to an agreement that George would retain the sequel rights.
Not all the [merchandising rights] that came later, mind you; just the sequel rights.
And Fox would get a first opportunity and last refusal right to make the movie.
"
Lucas was offered $50,000 to write, another $50,000 to produce, and $50,000 to direct the film; his directing compensation was later increased to $100,000.
He also negotiated the sequel rights and ownership of 40% of the merchandising profits.
American Graffiti cast member Harrison Ford had given up on acting to try to become a carpenter, until Lucas hired him to play Han Solo.
==
Casting ==
Thousands of actors were assessed in the search for the trilogy's main cast.
The selected actors are considered by many viewers to have onscreen chemistry even though some of them were inexperienced, with the notable exceptions of Alec Guinness and Peter Cushing.
Some, like Ford, have called the dialogue in the scripts clunky, and several lines were unscripted; some of these are considered the most memorable moments in the films.

==
Films ==
Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977; unlikely hero Luke Skywalker is drawn into a galactic conflict between the Empire and Rebel Alliance by two droids and an old Jedi Knight; he helps make one of the Rebellion's most significant victories.
The film's unanticipated success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies, with the original film given the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope to establish it as the first part of the second trilogy.
The first sequel, Star Wars:
Episode V – The Empire Strikes Back, was released on May 21, 1980, and sees Luke begin training as a Jedi under the last living Jedi master, Yoda.
Luke confronts Sith Lord Darth Vader, who is revealed to be Luke's father.
Vader attempts to convert Luke to the dark side of the Force.
The third film, Episode VI – Return of the Jedi, was released on May 25, 1983, and follows Luke as a full-fledged Jedi.
Luke attempts to redeem Vader, thereby saving the galaxy from the Empire.
The sequels were self-financed by Lucasfilm, and generally advertised without the episodic number distinction present in their opening crawls.

===
Star Wars ===
A Rebel spaceship is intercepted by the Empire above the desert planet of Tatooine.
Aboard, the deadliest Imperial warlord Darth Vader and his stormtroopers capture Princess Leia Organa, a secret member of the Rebellion.
Before her capture, Leia makes sure the droid R2-D2 will escape with stolen Imperial blueprints for an armored space station, the Death Star, and a holographic message for the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi, who has been living in exile on Tatooine.
Along with C-3PO, R2-D2 falls under the ownership of Luke Skywalker, a farmboy who has been raised by his aunt and uncle.
Luke helps the droids locate Obi-Wan, now a solitary old hermit known as Ben Kenobi.
He reveals himself as a friend of Luke's absent father, Anakin Skywalker, who was Obi-Wan's Jedi apprentice until being murdered by Vader.
He tells Luke he must also become a Jedi.
After discovering his family's homestead has been destroyed by the Empire, they hire the smuggler Han Solo, his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca and their space freighter, the Millennium Falcon.
They discover that Leia's homeworld of Alderaan has been destroyed, and are soon captured by the planet-destroying Death Star itself.
While Obi-Wan disables its tractor beam, Luke and Han rescue the captive Princess Leia, passing through incredible dangers.
Finally, they deliver the Death Star plans to the Rebel Alliance with the hope of exploiting a weakness, and launch an attack on the Death Star.

The first rough draft, titled The Star Wars, introduced "the Force" and the young hero Luke Starkiller.
Annikin
[sic] appeared as Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
Between drafts, Lucas read Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, and was surprised to find that his story "was following classical motifs.
"
The third draft replaced (a deceased)
Annikin with Ben Kenobi.
Some months later, Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to two sequels.
Lucas hired Alan Dean Foster, who was ghostwriting the novelization of the first film, to write them—with the main creative restriction that they could be filmed on a low budget.
By 1976, a fourth draft had been prepared for principal photography.
The film was titled The Adventures of Luke Starkiller, as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars.
During production, Lucas changed Luke's name to Skywalker and shortened the title to The Star Wars, and finally just Star Wars.
At that point, Lucas was not expecting the film to warrant full-scale sequels.
The fourth draft of the script underwent subtle changes to become a self-contained story ending with the destruction of the Empire in the Death Star.
The intention was that if the film was successful, Lucas could adapt Foster's novels into low-budget sequels.
By that point, Lucas had developed a tentative backstory to aid in developing the saga.
Star Wars exceeded all expectations.
The success of the film and its merchandise sales led Lucas to make Star Wars the basis of an elaborate film serial, and use the profits to finance his filmmaking center, Skywalker Ranch.
After the release of the first sequel, the original film was subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the screenplay released in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars and for all subsequent rereleases beginning with a theatrical rerelease in 1981.
===
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, the Empire forces the Rebel Alliance to evacuate its secret base on Hoth.
Instructed by Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke travels to the swamp world of Dagobah to find the exiled Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke's Jedi training is interrupted by Vader, who lures him into a trap by capturing Han and Leia at Cloud City, governed by Han's old friend Lando.
During a fierce duel, Vader reveals a shocking truth about Luke's father.
Owing to financial concerns, Alan Dean Foster's sequel novel, Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978), restricted the story to Luke, Leia, and Darth Vader.
After the success of the original film, Lucas knew a sequel would be granted a reasonable budget, and hired Leigh Brackett to write it from Lucas's story.
She finished a draft by early 1978, but died of cancer before Lucas was able to discuss changes he wanted her to make.
His disappointment with the first draft may have made him consider new directions.
Lucas penned the next draft, the first screenplay to feature episodic numbering for a Star Wars story.
Lucas found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the yearlong struggle writing the first film, and quickly wrote two more in April 1978.
The plot twist of Vader being Luke's father had drastic effects on the series.
After writing these drafts, Lucas fleshed out the backstory between Anakin, Obi-Wan, and the Emperor.
With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies, designating the first sequel
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back in the next draft.
Lawrence Kasdan, who had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark, was hired to write the next drafts, and given additional input from director Irvin Kershner.
Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult story, and developed the sequel from the light adventure roots of the first film.

===
Return of the Jedi ===
About a year after Han's capture, Luke joins Leia and Lando in a rescue attempt to save him from the gangster Jabba the Hutt.
Afterward, Luke returns to Dagobah to complete his Jedi training, only to find Yoda on his deathbed.
In his last words, Yoda confirms the truth about Luke's father, and that Luke must confront Vader again in order to complete his training.
As the Rebels lead an attack on the second Death Star, Luke engages Vader in a lightsaber duel as the Emperor watches; both Sith Lords intend to turn Luke to the dark side and take him as their apprentice.
Ford had originally not signed on to appear in a second sequel, but was convinced to return under the condition that his character would die.
Kurtz wanted a bittersweet and nuanced ending outlined with Lucas that not only saw Han dead, but also depicted the Rebel forces in pieces, Leia struggling as a queen, and Luke walking off alone
(as in a Spaghetti Western)—while Lucas wanted a happier ending, partly to encourage toy sales.
This led to tension between the two, resulting in Kurtz leaving the production.

==
Themes ==
The Star Wars trilogy, unlike science fiction that features sleek and futuristic settings, portrays the galaxy as dirty and grimy in Lucas's concept of a "used universe".
This was in part inspired by the period films of Akira Kurosawa, which like the original Star Wars trilogy, often begin in medias res without explaining a complete backstory.
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Darth Vader's design, initially inspired by Samurai armor, also incorporated a German military helmet.
Lucas originally conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Lucas has also drawn parallels between Palpatine and historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I "shock" troopers, Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (Hermann Hoth was a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.

==
Re-releases ==
The original Star Wars film was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982.
All three films were released on various home video formats, including LaserDisc and VHS, until 1996.
The trilogy was theatrically re-released in a 1997 "Special Edition", featuring various additions and changes, some of which were negatively received.
These versions were released on VHS, replacing the original versions of the films as Lucas's 'original' vision, and were created in part to reinvogorate interest in the saga ahead of the prequel trilogy.
Further changes to all three films were made for a DVD release in 2004, intended to bring the films into greater continuity with the prequels.
These were re-released in 2006 with bonus discs of the original versions of the films (transferred from the 1993 LaserDiscs).
In 2011, original and prequel trilogy box sets were released on Blu-ray, all including another round of alterations.

In the early 2010s, 3D releases were planned for the then-six-film franchise.
However, after the financially disappointing 2012 3D release of The Phantom Menace, the rest were cancelled.
In 2019, Kathleen Kennedy, president of Lucasfilm since the 2012 acquisition of the company by Disney, stated that she would not make alterations to Lucas's original trilogy, because "those will always remain his."
While promoting The Rise of Skywalker, director J. J. Abrams expressed his hopes that the original versions of the trilogy would be officially released, but said that the powers that be had told him "that that's not necessarily possible".
He further said that when making The Force Awakens, he had gotten into a disagreement about the dialogue between Vader and the Emperor in The Empire Strikes Back before realizing that different versions of the film were being referred to; he cited the Despecialized Editions of the films, while the other party had recalled the current official version.
It was initially unclear whether the first six films of the Star Wars franchise would be available on Disney+ upon the service's launch, as TBS held streaming rights through 2024 as part of its cable rights to the franchise.
However, on April 11, 2019, it was announced that the films would be available at launch.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
The original Star Wars film was released in the summer of 1977 to critical acclaim and was a huge  summer blockbuster, surpassing Jaws (1975), until 1982 when it was surpassed by E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial.
The following year, it won six out of its eleven nominations at the 50th Academy Awards.
The success of the first film led to it becoming a pop cultural phenomenon spawning countless TV spin-offs, video games, films and a multi-merchandising empire.
It was then proceeded by two instalments,
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), which were also both very successful, with the former's climax, where Vader is revealed as Luke's father, becoming one of the most iconic plot twists in motion picture history.

The original trilogy was praised for its groundbreaking visual and sound effects, John Williams' music, writing, characters and concept.
Star Wars,  The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi are considered by many to be among the greatest movies ever made
(Jedi is somewhat less well-regarded).

====
Academy Awards ====


===
Box office performance ===


===
Accolades ===
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

==
Impact and legacy ==


===
Popular culture ===
The popularity of the films have generated numerous references in popular culture works from TV series such as The Simpsons, Family Guy, South Park and Robot Chicken and films such as Clerks and Toy Story 2, and in the political lexicon, as in Ted Kennedy's nickname for Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative.
The trilogy's artistic and technological achievements have been influential on other filmmakers, including Ridley Scott, James Cameron, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, Peter Jackson and Christopher Nolan, as well as sequel trilogy director J. J. Abrams.

The trilogy's impact has led to future careers of its stars including Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), Kenny Baker (R2-D2), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), James Earl Jones (Darth Vader), Billy Dee Williams (Lando Calrissian) and Warwick Davis (Wicket W. Warrick).
===
Prequel and sequel trilogies ===
The success and large impact of the original Star Wars trilogy led to two more trilogies, beginning with the prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), all directed by George Lucas.
The prequels feature Baker, Daniels, Oz, Mayhew and McDiarmid reprising their roles, alongside Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christiansen, Liam Neeson and Samuel L. Jackson.
While financially successful, the prequel trilogy received mixed reviews, gradually improving with each installment to fairly positive feedback for Episode III.

Three years after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy began to be released, consisting of The Force Awakens (2015), The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
George Lucas had little direct involvement in the creation of these films.
The new cast features Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Issac, Adam Driver, Domhnall Gleeson and Andy Serkis, with the main original cast reprising their roles.
While financially successful, this trilogy also received mixed reviews—this time starting positive, but gradually degrading with each installment.

===
Other media ===
The original Star Wars trilogy has been the main basis of the Star Wars franchise, which includes films outside the Skywalker Saga, numerous TV spin-offs like Star Wars: The Clone Wars, The Mandalorian and other upcoming live-action series for Disney+, hundreds of video games, books, comics and more.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==
Multiple global locations were used for filming locations during the production of the Star Wars films to provide the setting for alien planets in the Star Wars Universe.

Most locations were used to shoot principal photography with actors; more recently as digital filmmaking has become more common, some prequel trilogy locations were shot with no actors present and digitally composited into the films to provide a backdrop of a story setting.

In addition to filming locations, a list of film studios is also included for reference.

== Locations ==
Listed below are locations used for filming of the following Star Wars films:
Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005)
Star Wars:
Episode VII –
The Force Awakens (2015)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Star Wars:
Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars:
Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker (2019)


===
Map ===


===
Location filming ===
==
Studios ==


==
See also ==
Behind-the-scenes documentaries:
The Making of Star Wars
SP FX:
The Empire Strikes Back
Classic Creatures:
Return of the Jedi
From Star Wars to Jedi:
The Making of a Saga
Empire of Dreams
Star Wars:
The Legacy Revealed


==
References ==
Notes
Sources
Howard, Marcus Hearn ; foreword by Ron (2005).
The Cinema of George Lucas.
New York: Abrams.
ISBN 0810949687.

==
External links ==
Star Wars Locations and their GPS coordinates - Article featuring every filming location, Lat/Long coordinates and scene comparisons
Star Wars Locations - fan site devoted to Star Wars filming locations
Star Wars filming locations category on Wookieepedia
Star Wars filming locations category on 501st
Legion Spanish Garrison
Filming locations on the Internet Movie Database:
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Episode IV:
A New Hope
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
George Lucas's filming locations on Movie-Locations.com
Duncan Beiny (born 1977 in London, England), better known as DJ Yoda, is a hip hop turntablist who uses samples to create an animated musical style.
He is known for several awards and media industry achievements.

==
Early life and career ==
After attending Highgate School, he studied English and American literature at the University of Warwick from 1995 to 1998.
During this period, he began performing at Mojo, a popular Warwick hip hop and soul night at the student's union until he graduated.
After he left university, he began releasing underground demo mix-tapes to small music shops.
Through the popularity of these tapes, Antidote Records asked him to create an official mixtape, from which How to Cut & Paste Mix Tape Vol.1 was released.
He has won a DMC DJ of the Year award in the Scratch DJ category (2001) and was one of six nominees for best UK hip-hop DJ in the UK Hip-Hop Awards.
He has also been nominated by Q magazine as one of the "Ten DJs To See Before You Die", has released a series of mix-tapes, and has toured the globe with Goldie and the Scratch Perverts.
Yoda released his debut album of original material, entitled The Amazing Adventures of DJ Yoda, on 2 October 2006 on Antidote Records.
The album features guest vocalists, including Biz Markie, Sway, Ugly Duckling and MC Paul Barman.
In addition to releasing his own material, he has also performed scratches on Danger Mouse and Jemini's Ghetto Pop Life.

He has been a regular guest on BBC Radio 1 appearing alongside Steve Lamacq and Annie Mac.
In 2009, he was nominated for a Sony Radio Academy Award.
In 2010, he also won the 9th Annual Independent Music Awards for Contemporary Classic Album with the Heritage Orchestra.
He has been the hip-hop correspondent for IDJ magazines, and also wrote the DJ page for the now defunct Hip Hop Connection magazine, and has been part of the judging panel for the DMC DJ World Finals.

In 2014 he was commissioned to create DJ Yoda
Goes to the Sci-Fi Movies as part of the BFI’s Sonic Cinema event.
He presented the first audio-visual radio mix on BBC Radio 6 Music.
As part of their BBC Music Day, Radio 4 invited Yoda to mash-up the entire station, remixing The Archers, the Shipping Forecast, and John Humphrys.

In 2015 he was Dr Dre’s first choice to record a guest mix on his inaugural Beats 1 show for Apple Music, and performed at Banksy’s pop-up Bemusement Park, Dismaland.

In 2016 his "Stranger Things Mix" racked up more than a quarter of a million plays on SoundCloud, culminating in his UK tour of Stranger Things: The Mixtape Live.
That same year, his A History of Gaming premiered at the London Film Festival, charting nostalgic video games from the early 1980s onwards.

In 2019 he released Home Cooking featuring Nubya Garcia, Eva Lazarus, Edo.
G, Theon Cross, Henry Wu and Joel Culpepper.
The album was released on Lewis Recordings.

==
Discography
==
===
Singles ===
DJ Yoda Featuring People Under The Stairs
– Quid Control (2002)
Wheels (Antidote Records) (2006)
Playin'
Around (Antidote Records)
(2007)
Charlie Sheen (Get Involved)
(2012)
DJ Yoda
Featuring Man Like Me –
Idiot (Get Involved)
(2012)
DJ Yoda
Featuring A Boy Called George – Happy (Get Involved)
(2012)
And to the World / Click (Radio Edit)
(Get Involved)
(2015)
Pebble Beach / 2468
(Get Involved) (2015)
DJ Yoda
Featuring Scroobius Pip – Sega RIP (Get Involved)
(Unknown)
Open Your Eye (feat.
Rex Domino & Shlomo)
(Get Involved)
(2015)
The Baddest (Get involved) (2015)


=== EPs ===
Wheels (Antidote Records)
(2006)
DJ Yoda & Friends (2011)


===
Albums ===
The Amazing Adventures of DJ Yoda (Antidote Records)
(2006)
Chop Suey (Get Involved Records)
(2012)
DJ Yoda Presents Breakfast of Champions
(Get Involved Records)
(2015)
Home Cooking (Lewis Recordings) (2019)


===
Games ===
DJ Hero


===
Mix CDs ===
How to Cut and
Paste Mix Tape Vol.1
(Antidote Records)
(2001)
Fisticuts (Spine Magazine)
(2001)
How to Cut and Paste Mix Tape Vol.2 (Antidote Records) (2002)
How to Cut & Paste: The 80's Edition (Antidote Records) (2003)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Unthugged (Antidote Records) (2003)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Boxfresh (Boxfresh Records) (2004)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Unthugged 2
(Antidote Record)
Hey!
Wha' Happened?!
(
2006)
FabricLive.39
(fabric Records)
(April 2008)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Jews Paid (2008)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Jews Paid
Too (2008)
How to Cut & Paste:
Country & Western Edition
(Antidote Records)
(2009)
How to Cut & Paste:
The Thirties Edition (2009)
How to Cut & Paste:
The Asian Edition (2013)
How to Cut & Paste:
The Halloween Edition (2014)
DJ Yoda presents Breakfast Of Champions (2015)
DJ Yoda presents Breakfast Of Champions (Rotty Chimes Remixes) (2016)
The Stranger Things Mixtape (2016)
Make Mixtapes Great
Again (2019)
How To Cut
And Paste Collection (2019)


===
Vinyl ===
Piano Breaks (1998)
Home Cooking (2019)


===
Cassette ===
Jewbonics (1998)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Jews Paid (1999)
Dan Greenpeace & DJ Yoda – Jews Paid
Too (1999)


===
Compositions ===
Quid Control [12" vinyl]
(Antidote Records)
(2002)
The Amazing Adventures of (Antidote Records)
(2006)


===
DVDs ===
DJ Yoda Goes to the Movies (Promotional DVD, 2006)
DJ Yoda Goes to the Movies 2 (2007)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official Website
DJ Yoda at Antidote Records
DJ Yoda interview on ilikemusic.com
Star Wars:
Aftermath is a trilogy of Star Wars science fiction novels by American author Chuck Wendig.
Set soon after the events of the 1983 film Return of the Jedi, the series explores the time period between that film and 2015's The Force Awakens.
The trilogy began in 2015 with Aftermath, which was followed by the sequels Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016) and Aftermath: Empire's End (2017).
Aftermath is one of the projects in "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens", a 2015 Star Wars publishing initiative to connect The Force Awakens with previous film installments.

The Aftermath trilogy features the characters Wedge Antilles, an X-wing fighter pilot from the original Star Wars film trilogy, and Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn.
Wendig also introduces several new characters, including ex-Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin "Snap" Wexley, Temmin's rebuilt B1 battle droid Mister Bones, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, and the Imperial turncoat Sinjir Rath Velus, one of the first gay characters in Star Wars canon.

The first novel of the trilogy debuted at No.
4 on The New York Times Best Seller list, and No.
4 on USA Today's best seller list.

==
Publication ==
In March 2015, Disney Publishing Worldwide and Lucasfilm announced the "Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" publishing initiative, a collection of novels and comic books from multiple publishers intended to connect The Force Awakens with previous film installments.
Among the first planned releases, the originating 2015 novel Aftermath was subsequently described as being set between the films Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.
The Hollywood Reporter called the novel "arguably the centerpiece of the Journey line.
In July 2015, Del Rey confirmed that Aftermath would be the first novel in a planned trilogy.
Aftermath was published on September 4, 2015, and the titles for the other installments—Life Debt and Empire's End—were announced at the New York Comic Con in October 2015.
Life Debt was released on July 12, 2016, and Empire's End was released on February 21, 2017.

==
Impact ==
The Aftermath series features the characters Wedge Antilles, an X-wing fighter pilot from the original Star Wars film trilogy, and Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain in John Jackson Miller's 2014 novel A New Dawn.
Wendig introduces several new characters in Aftermath, including the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, the Imperial turncoat Sinjir Rath Velus, ex-Rebel pilot Norra Wexley, Norra's teenage son
Temmin "Snap" Wexley, and Temmin's rebuilt B1 battle droid Mister Bones.
Temmin next appeared in the sequel films
The Force Awakens (2015) and
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) as an X-wing fighter pilot Snap Wexley, portrayed by Greg Grunberg.
Introduced in the first installment Aftermath, SpecForces officer Jom Barell becomes a main character as a member of the team in Life Debt.
Acknowledging lesbian Moff Delian Mors from Paul S. Kemp's 2015 novel Star Wars: Lords of the Sith as the first openly gay character in the Star Wars canon, Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly called Aftermath's Sinjir "the first major gay hero" in the franchise.
After receiving some fan backlash, Wendig defended the inclusion of a gay character on his blog, writing "If you can imagine a world where Luke Skywalker would be irritated that there were gay people around him, you completely missed the point of Star Wars."
The trilogy also introduced secondary character Cobb Vanth, the sheriff of Freetown on the desert planet Tatooine, via an interlude chapter in each of the three novels.
Known to have acquired the distinctive armor of Mandalorian bounty hunter Boba Fett, Vanth is portrayed by Timothy Olyphant in season two of
the Disney+ series The Mandalorian.
Empire's End features a reappearance of Lando Calrissian, who reclaims control of Bespin's Cloud City from the Imperials who occupy it.
Chewbacca is reunited with his young son Lumpawaroo, who had been enslaved on their native planet Kashyyyk.
Prequel trilogy character Jar Jar Binks appears in the novel, having become a street performer who entertains refugee children but is loathed by adults who blame him for his part in the rise of the Empire.
Chris Taylor of Mashable wrote that the situation reflects real life in that adults disliked Jar Jar in the films, but children were entertained by him.
Ben Solo, the son of Leia and Han who becomes Kylo Ren, is born on the planet Chandrila, the day a peace treaty is signed between the Empire and the New Galactic Republic.
Rae Sloane coins the term "First Order" as she establishes the reborn empire that will eventually take that name.
General Hux, a character introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, appears as a child in Empire's End; his father is the creator of the training program that will ultimately produce First Order stormtroopers.
Hux's first name (Armitage) and origin as the illegitimate son of Imperial officer Brendol Hux was previously revealed in Life Debt.
The Chiss Grand Admiral Thrawn is mentioned in Empire's End as the source of the information about the Unknown Regions which Palpatine uses in his Contingency plan, and the novel is the first appearance of  Niima the Hutt, a crime lord based on the desert planet Jakku who controls her people by controlling their resources.
The Star Wars:
The Force Awakens:
The Visual Dictionary (2015) and Star Wars: Rey's Survival Guide (2015) note that the Niima Outpost is named after her.

== Works ==


===
Aftermath (2015) ===
Star Wars:
Aftermath is the first novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on September 4, 2015.

====
Plot ====
Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine have fallen and the second Death Star has been destroyed, but the Rebel Alliance—now calling itself the New Republic—has yet to fully subdue the scattered forces of the Empire that remain.
Stumbling upon a hub of Imperial activity on the Outer Rim planet Akiva, Rebel pilot Wedge Antilles is captured by Admiral Rae Sloane.
Meanwhile, his wartime comrade Norra Wexley has also arrived on the planet to reunite with her teenage son Temmin.
Former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus, living quietly on Akiva following the disastrous Battle of Endor, is unhappy to find the Empire at his door, and Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari's latest contract leads her to a wealth of valuable targets.

====
Critical reception ====
Aftermath debuted at No.
4 on The New York Times Best Seller list, and No.
4 on USA Today's best seller list.
IGN's Jared Petty awarded the novel a score of 5.9 out of ten, saying "Star Wars: Aftermath is a well-written but ultimately disappointing first look into the post-Endor galaxy."
===
Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016) ===
Star Wars:
Aftermath:
Life Debt is the second novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on July 12, 2016.

==== Plot ====
Former Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, the former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus, and the SpecForces officer Jom Barell have become a ragtag team working to collect Imperials whom the New Republic wants to bring to justice.
Fresh from their latest mission, the team is asked by General Leia Organa to find her husband Han Solo, who has gone missing during a personal mission to free the Wookiees on the enslaved planet Kashyyyk.
The group finds Han and helps him free an imprisoned Chewbacca and a score of longtime Imperial prisoners—among them Norra's husband, Brentin.

Under the secret guidance of the deceased Emperor Palpatine's former advisor, Gallius Rax, Grand Admiral Rae Sloane works to consolidate the remnants of the Empire's forces.
Rax reveals the existence of an extensive Imperial fleet, and gathers a selective group of former imperials to form his "Shadow Council".
Though their goals seem aligned, Sloane becomes increasingly distrustful of Rax as she begins to discover the extent of his machinations.

With the last minute aid of Leia, Wedge Antilles, and Admiral Ackbar, Han's team frees Kashyyyk from Imperial rule.
Meanwhile, as the New Republic celebrates the liberation of the prisoners, Rax's insidious plan comes to fruition.
Brainwashed to kill, Brentin and the other prisoners suddenly attack Chancellor Mon Mothma and other New Republic political and military targets, as well as civilians.
Disgusted by Rax's tactics and realizing that her attaché Adea Rite is under his command, Sloane flees.
Injured by Norra, she aligns herself with Brentin, who is desperate to avenge himself on Rax.
They find Rax as he arrives at his homeworld of Jakku with his fleet.

====
Critical reception ====
IGN's Jared Petty awarded the novel a score of 6.8 out of ten, saying "Star Wars Life Debt: Aftermath is an interesting but uneven return to a galaxy far, far away."
===
Aftermath:
Empire's End (2017) ===
Star Wars:
Empire's End is the third novel in Wendig's Aftermath trilogy.
It was published by Del Rey Books on February 21, 2017.
====
Plot ====
Using information gleaned from the bounty hunter Mercurial Swift, the team of former Rebel Alliance pilot Norra Wexley, her teenage son Temmin, the Zabrak bounty hunter Jas Emari, and the former Imperial officer Sinjir Rath Velus track Grand Admiral Rae Sloane to the desolate planet Jakku.
They arrive to find the remaining Imperial fleet of Star Destroyers in orbit; Norra and Jas head to the surface seeking Sloane, while Temmin and Sinjir escape to Chandrila to alert Leia Organa and the New Republic.
Norra and Jas are captured by Imperial stormtroopers; Norra is enslaved, and Jas—who has a bounty on her head—is handed over to the crime lord Niima the Hutt.
Temmin's reprogrammed B1 battle droid Mister Bones rescues Norra, and they reunite with an escaped Jas.
Sloane and Norra's estranged husband Brentin seek revenge against Gallius Rax, but are captured by him instead.
Meanwhile, the indecisive New Republic Senate fails to approve a military offensive against the Imperial forces at Jakku.

Sinjir recruits former SpecForces operative Jom Barell for a covert mission with Temmin, Han Solo, and Sinjir's sometimes lover Conder Kyl to identify the leverage which the Black Sun and Red Key criminal syndicates used to influence the vote.
Their efforts provide Chancellor Mon Mothma with the votes she needs, and the motion passes.
Led by Admiral Ackbar, the New Republic forces attack with Temmin flying an X-wing under Wedge Antilles' command, and Jom rejoining SpecForces.
Sloane and Brentin learn of Rax's insidious program which trains abducted children to be vicious killers.
Norra finally intercepts Sloane, but postpones her revenge to join her nemesis in finding out what Rax is protecting in his desert base.
The battle turns for the New Republic when the Imperial dreadnought Ravager is destroyed.
Mister Bones saves Temmin's life, but the droid is destroyed.
Sloane confronts Rax, who has commenced what Palpatine called his "Contingency": the Jakku Observatory will destroy the planet and the entirety of both the Imperial and New Republic forces, plunging the galaxy into chaos.
Rax will flee on a predetermined course to the Unknown Regions with a select few Destroyers, where he will create a new empire.
Sloane kills Rax and stops Jakku's destruction, but assumes Rax's role as shepherd of Palpatine's plans.

Sinjir becomes an advisor to Mothma, who escapes an assassination attempt, and Brentin and Jom are killed on Jakku.
Leia gives birth to Ben Solo, her son with Han, as the Empire formally surrenders.
Wedge establishes a flight academy on Hosnian Prime, where he and Norra will be instructors, and Temmin—now officially known as "Snap"—will attend.

====
Critical reception ====
Sean Keane of the New York Daily News called Empire's End a "thrilling conclusion" to the trilogy.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Aftermath on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Aftermath:
Life Debt on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Aftermath: Empire's End on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Albunione yoda is a marine isopod assigned to the family Bopyridae, which is known to occur near Taiwan.
It is an ectoparasite that resides in the gills of its host, the mole crab Albunea groeningi.
A. yoda was named after a character of the Star Wars saga, Jedi Master Yoda, because with the slightly curved long lateral extensions of the head of the female, it looks like the head of Yoda with his long drooping ears.

==
References ==
The Star Wars series has spawned multiple live-action and animated films.
The series started with a film trilogy set in medias res—beginning in the middle of the story—which was later expanded to a trilogy of trilogies, better known as the "Skywalker saga".
The original trilogy was released between 1977 and 1983, the prequel trilogy between 1999 and 2005, and a sequel trilogy between 2015 and 2019.
The original eponymous film, later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope, was followed by the sequels Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), forming what is collectively referred to as the original trilogy.

Years later, a prequel trilogy was released, consisting of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005).
After Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, a sequel trilogy began with Episode VII – The Force Awakens (2015), continued with Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi (2017), and concluded with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
In between the sequel films, two anthology films were released, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016) and Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018), both set between the prequel and original trilogies.
The combined box office revenue of the films equates to over US$10 billion, and it is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise.
All the major theatrical live-action films were nominated for Academy Awards.
The original film was nominated for most of the major categories, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, while all sequels have been nominated for technical categories.

The first spin-off film produced was the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In 1984 and 1985, two live-action films featuring the Ewoks were televised in the United States and released theatrically in Europe.
Several Star Wars television series have also been released.

==
Skywalker saga ==
The main Star Wars film series is a trilogy of trilogies; as it neared completion, it began to be referred to as the "Skywalker Saga".
It was released beginning with the original trilogy (Episodes IV, V and VI, 1977–1983), followed by the prequel trilogy (Episodes I, II and III, 1999–2005) and the sequel trilogy (Episodes VII, VIII and IX, 2015–2019).
The first film released, Star Wars (1977), is the fourth film chronologically and was later subtitled Episode IV – A New Hope.
The saga begins with Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) and concludes with Episode IX – The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

The story follows each generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family and their struggle against the evil Sith lord Palpatine (Darth Sidious).
The prequel trilogy focuses on Anakin Skywalker, his training as a Jedi, and eventual fall to the dark side as Darth Vader.
The original trilogy follows his children, Luke and Leia, as they join the Rebel Alliance and battle Vader, Palpatine and his Galactic Empire.
The sequel trilogy features Ben Solo a.k.a Kylo Ren—the son of Leia and Han Solo, nephew of Luke, and grandson of Anakin—who seeks to rule the galaxy with Rey, the granddaughter of Palpatine and the last Jedi apprentice of Luke and Leia.

Each episodic film begins with an opening crawl, accompanied by the main Star Wars theme by John Williams, who composes the scores for each film.
The first six films—most notably the original trilogy—have had retroactive changes made after their initial theatrical releases.

==
Standalone films ==
As Lucas was outlining a trilogy of trilogies, he also imagined making additional movies unrelated to the Skywalker saga.
The first theatrical films set outside the main episodic series were the Ewok spin-off films Caravan of Courage: An Ewok Adventure (1984) and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985), the first of which was screened internationally after being produced for television.
After the conclusion of his then six-episode saga in 2005, Lucas returned to spin-offs in the form of television series.

An animated film, The Clone Wars (2008), was released as a pilot to a TV series of the same name.
An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney CFO Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans directly before Episode IV.
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) focuses on Han's backstory, also featuring Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian.

===
Animated film ===


====
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Preceding the airing of the animated TV series in late 2008, the theatrical feature Star Wars: The Clone Wars was compiled from episodes "almost [as] an afterthought.
"
It reveals that Anakin trained an apprentice between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith; the series explains Padawan Ahsoka Tano's absence from the latter film.
The character was originally criticized by fans, but by the end of the series the character had become a fan favorite.
The film and series exist in the same level of canon as the episodic and anthology films.

===
Anthology films ===
Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney in 2012, and parallel to his development of a sequel trilogy, George Lucas and original trilogy co-screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan started development on a standalone film about a young Han Solo.
In February 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger made public the development of a Kasdan film and Entertainment Weekly reported that it would focus on Han Solo.
Disney CFO Jay Rasulo has described the standalone films as origin stories.
Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that there was "no attempt being made to carry characters (from the standalone films) in and out of the saga episodes.
"
The standalone films released so far are subtitled "A Star Wars Story".
====
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016) ====
Rogue One is set directly before Episode IV: A New Hope and focuses on the eponymous group of rebels who obtain the plans to the Death Star.
Its laser was developed by scientist Galen Erso (played by Mads Mikkelsen) after the Empire forcibly abducted him, separating him from his daughter Jyn.
Galen secretly sends a defecting Imperial pilot, Bodhi Rook, to deliver a message warning of the weapon's existence and revealing its weakness to his rebel friend Saw Gerrera.
Under the false promise of her father's liberation, Jyn agrees to help Rebel Alliance intelligence officer Cassian Andor and his droid K-2SO retrieve the message from Saw, now the paranoid leader of an extremist cell of rebels.

The idea for the movie came from John Knoll, the chief creative officer of Industrial Light & Magic.
In May 2014, Lucasfilm announced Gareth Edwards as the director of an anthology film, with Gary Whitta writing the first draft for a release on December 16, 2016.
The film's title was revealed to be Rogue One, with Chris Weitz rewriting the script, and Felicity Jones in the starring role.
Ben Mendelsohn and Diego Luna also play new characters, with James Earl Jones returning to voice Darth Vader.
Edwards stated, "It comes down to a group of individuals who don't have magical powers that have to somehow bring hope to the galaxy."
The film was the first to feature characters introduced in animated Star Wars TV series, namely The Clone Wars' Saw Gerrera, portrayed by Forest Whitaker in the film.
The movie received generally positive reviews, with its performances, action sequences, soundtrack, visual effects and darker tone being praised.
The film grossed over US$500 million worldwide within a week of its release.

====
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018) ====
Solo, the second anthology film, focuses on Han Solo about 10 years before A New Hope.
After an escape attempt from his Imperial-occupied home planet of Corellia goes wrong, a young Han vows to return to rescue his girlfriend Qi'ra.
Han "Solo" joins the Imperial Academy; however, he is expelled for his reckless behavior.
Han and his newfound Wookiee friend Chewbacca resort to a criminal life, mentored by veteran smuggler Beckett.
After angering gangster Dryden Vos, Han and his company's lives depend on pulling a heist for him.
Without a ship to travel, they hire Lando Calrissian, the captain and owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Before selling Lucasfilm to Disney, George Lucas had hired Star Wars original trilogy veteran Lawrence Kasdan to write a film about a young Han Solo.
The film stars Alden Ehrenreich as a young Han Solo, Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca (after serving as a double for the character in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi), Donald Glover as Lando Calrissian, Emilia Clarke as Qi'ra, and Woody Harrelson as Beckett.
Lucasfilm originally hired Phil Lord and Christopher Miller to direct, but they were fired during principal photography, and replaced by Ron Howard.
A twist ending acknowledges one of the major story arcs of The Clone Wars and Rebels animated series, while leaving the story open ended for sequels.
====
Rogue Squadron (2023) ====
During Disney Investor Day 2020, it was announced that Patty Jenkins would direct a film titled Rogue Squadron, set to be released on December 22, 2023.
The film will be the first film in the franchise directed by a woman, and according to the official Star Wars website, it will "introduce a new generation of starfighter pilots as they earn their wings and risk their lives in a boundary-pushing, high-speed thrill-ride, and move the saga into the future era of the galaxy."
According to Jenkins, the film will be "something original with great influence from the games and the books.
There's a lot of things being acknowledged and understood about the greatness of all of those things, but yes, it's an original story
and I'm so psyched to do it.
"
When asked who was writing the Script for Rogue Squadron, Patty Jenkins said, "I want him to have his own proper announcement, so I'm going to wait until that comes out."
==
Unspecified future films ==
Rian Johnson, the writer/director of The Last Jedi, is confirmed to write and direct the first film of a new trilogy he was outlining as of early 2019.
Though the project is still active as of February 2021, no release date has been set due to Johnson's involvement with other projects.
The trilogy will differ from the Skywalker-focused films in favor of focusing on new characters and possibly a different era than the main film franchise.
In mid-2018, Lucasfilm confirmed that multiple anthology films were in development, with their release following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.
In addition to Rogue Squadron (2023), two untitled films are scheduled for mid-December 2025, and 2027.On May 7, 2019, Disney released its 2020–2027 theatrical release schedule, which revealed that Star Wars films are scheduled to hit theaters in 2023, 2025, and 2027.On September 25, 2019, it was announced that Marvel Cinematic Universe producer Kevin Feige was developing a Star Wars film with Kathleen Kennedy; it was later announced that Michael Waldron would write the screenplay.
On February 21, 2020, Variety reported that a Star Wars film from Sleight director J. D. Dillard and Luke Cage writer Matt Owens was in the early stages of development.
On May 4, it was officially announced that Taika Waititi (who directed the first-season finale of The Mandalorian) will direct a Star Wars film from a screenplay he is co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.

== Produced for television ==
The first spin-off film (also the first sequel to be released) was a holiday TV special aired in 1978.
Two live-action TV films created in the mid-1980s feature the Ewoks.

===
Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) ===
Produced for CBS in 1978, the Star Wars Holiday Special was a two-hour television special, in the format of a variety show.
Stars of the original film and archive footage from the original Star Wars film appeared alongside celebrity guest stars in plot-related skits, musical numbers, and an animated segment, all loosely tied together by the premise of Chewbacca's family waiting for his arrival for the "Life Day" celebration on his home planet, Kashyyyk.
The special was aired only once and had a widely negative reception.
The 11-minute animated sequence, which features the debut of bounty hunter Boba Fett, was positively received.
===
Ewok films ===
The Ewoks from Return of the Jedi were featured in two spin-off television films, The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor.
Both aired on ABC on the Thanksgiving weekends of 1984 and 1985, respectively, with at least the first also being given a limited international theatrical release.
Warwick Davis reprised his debut role as the main Ewok, Wicket, in both.
They are set between the events of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
Both films were released on VHS, Laser Disc, and on a double-feature DVD.
Although based on story ideas from Lucas, they do not bear Star Wars in their titles, and were considered to exist in a lower level of canon than the episodic films.
Following Disney's acquisition of the franchise, they were excluded from the canon.
The Battle for Endor would be the last live-action Star Wars television project produced by Lucasfilm until 2019's The Mandalorian.

====
The Ewok Adventure (1984) ====
In a story by Lucas and a screenplay by Bob Carrau, the Towani family spaceship shipwrecks on the forest moon of Endor.
While trying to repair their ship, the castaway family is split, when a giant creature known as the Gorax kidnaps the parents.
Taking pity on the kids, a group of native Ewoks led by Wicket decides to help little Cindel Towani and her older brother Mace, rescue their parents.
Among other stylistic choices making the film unique from the Star Wars episodes is the inclusion of a narrator.

====
Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor (1985) ====
The sequel focuses on the Ewoks protecting their village from marauders led by the evil Lord Terak, who killed all the members of the Towani family except for Cindel, in search of a power battery.

===
A Droid Story ===
In December 2020, A Droid Story, an animated adventure film for Disney+ was announced.
According to the official Star Wars Twitter, the "epic journey will introduce us to a new hero guided by R2-D2 and C-3PO.
"

== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===
The Star Wars films are the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time worldwide, behind the Marvel Cinematic Universe, having grossed over $10 billion at the global box office.

===
Critical response ===


===
Accolades ===


====
Academy Awards ====
The eleven live-action films together have been nominated for 37 Academy Awards, of which they have won seven.
The films were also awarded a total of three Special Achievement Awards.
The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
received Special Achievement Awards for their visual effects, and Star Wars received a Special Achievement Award for its alien, creature and robot voices.
====
Grammy Awards ====
The franchise has received a total of fifteen Grammy Award nominations, winning six.

Notes
==== Library of Congress ====
In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.
By 2015, Star Wars had been transferred to a 2K scan which can be viewed by appointment.

====
Emmy Awards ====
Caravan of Courage:
An Ewok Adventure was one of four films to be juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects at the 37th Primetime Emmy Awards.
The film was additionally nominated for Outstanding Children's Program but lost in this category to an episode of American Playhouse.
At the 38th Primetime Emmy Awards, Ewoks: The Battle for Endor and the CBS documentary Dinosaur!
were both juried-awarded Emmys for Outstanding Special Visual Effects.
The film additionally received two nominations for Outstanding Children's Program and Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Miniseries or a Special.

==
Unproduced and rumored films ==
In early 2013, Bob Iger announced the development of a spin-off film written by Simon Kinberg, reported by Entertainment Weekly to focus on bounty hunter Boba Fett during the original trilogy.
In mid-2014, Josh Trank was officially announced as the director of an undisclosed spin-off film, but had left the project a year later due to creative differences, causing a teaser for the film to be scrapped from Star Wars Celebration.
In May 2018, it was reported that James Mangold had signed on to write and direct a Fett film, with Kinberg attached as producer and co-writer.
By October, the Fett film was reportedly no longer in production, with the studio instead focusing on The Mandalorian, which utilizes a similar character design.
In August 2017, it was rumored that films focused on Jabba the Hutt, and Jedi Masters Obi-Wan and Yoda were being considered or were in development.
Stephen Daldry was reportedly in early negotiations to co-write and direct the Obi-Wan movie.
At D23 Expo in August 2019, it was announced that a streaming series about the character would be produced instead.
Felicity Jones, who played Jyn Erso in Rogue One, has the option of another Star Wars film in her contract; notwithstanding her character's fate in Rogue One, it has been speculated that she could return in other anthology films.
In 2018, critics noted that Solo was intentionally left open for sequels.
Alden Ehrenreich and Emilia Clarke confirmed that their contracts to play Han Solo and Q'ira extended for additional films, if required.
An unannounced film centered around the Mos Eisley Spaceport was reportedly put on hold or cancelled in mid-2018, leading to rumors of the cancellation or postponement of the anthology series.
Lucasfilm swiftly denied the rumors as "inaccurate", confirming that multiple unannounced films were in development.
Game of Thrones creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss were to write and produce a trilogy of Star Wars films scheduled to be released in December 2022, 2024, and 2026, which were first announced to be in development in February 2018.
However, citing their commitment to a Netflix deal, the duo stepped away from the project in October 2019.
Kennedy stated her openness to their returning when their schedules allow.
Additionally, though unconfirmed by Lucasfilm, BuzzFeed reported in May 2019 that Laeta Kalogridis was writing the script for the first film in a potential Knights of the Old Republic trilogy.
In January 2020, a film set in the era of The High Republic was rumored to be in development.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars television series


===
Parodies ===
Hardware Wars
Spaceballs
Thumb Wars
Robot Chicken Star Wars
Laugh
It Up
, Fuzzball:
The Family Guy Trilogy
Ice Pirates


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website
Kylo Ren is a fictional character and a major antagonist in the Star Wars franchise.
Introduced in the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens, he is portrayed by Adam Driver.
Kylo Ren is the chosen name of Ben Solo, the only child of original Star Wars trilogy characters Han Solo and Princess Leia Organa.
Though trained by his uncle Luke Skywalker as a Jedi, he was seduced to the dark side of the Force by Supreme Leader Snoke, and aspires to be as powerful as his grandfather, the Sith Lord Darth Vader.
Ren is eventually redeemed like his grandfather before him and helps Rey in her fight against her grandfather, the revived Emperor Palpatine.

Ren is also the master of the Knights of Ren, as well as a high-ranking member and later the Supreme Leader of the First Order, an organization spawned from the former Galactic Empire.
He appears in The Force Awakens, The Last Jedi (2017), Star Wars Resistance (2018 – 2020), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), as well as related media and merchandising.
Driver's performance received acclaim from critics and fans.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Driver won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the first Star Wars actor since Alec Guinness to win the award.
Driver received a second nomination in the same category for his performance in The Rise of Skywalker.
Kylo Ren is widely regarded as one of the greatest villains of the 2010s.

==
Concept and creation ==
Abrams requested that Ren's mask be designed to be memorable to a child.
As late as March 2014, the film's main antagonist was only known to the production team as "Jedi Killer", and had gone through numerous unapproved design attempts.
The same month, Glyn Dillon's design for the character's costume was finally approved.
According to Abrams, "the design was meant to be a nod to the Vader mask," and concept designer Doug Chiang says that the character "takes on [the] persona of [Vader] to haunt Luke."
According to The Force Awakens costume designer Michael Kaplan,

I don't know if it was the kind of spaghetti type lines on it or what, but the next time J.J. came by that was what we presented to him
and he loved it.
Also the silver in those lines kind of reflects and changes color with the action.
You know, if he's standing in front of fire you see that, so it almost brings you into the mask.

Driver's casting in the film in an unnamed role was first announced on April 29, 2014.
Kylo Ren was first seen from behind, but still not named, in the 88-second
The Force Awakens teaser trailer released by Lucasfilm on November 28, 2014, wielding a jagged red lightsaber with a crossguard.
The name Kylo Ren, as well as the character's design, was revealed by Entertainment Weekly in a Lucasfilm-designed Topps-style trading card mock-up on December 11, 2014.
A May 2015 Vanity Fair photo shoot by Annie Leibovitz confirmed that Driver would be portraying Kylo.
According to other cast members, Driver is a method actor, which meant that he sometimes stayed in character on set as Ren and left his mask on between scenes.
Driver explained that his goal was "to forget you're in Star Wars and treat it like any other job that's filled with moments and problems," because from the perspective of the characters living within the film's universe, "Darth Vader is real."
==
Character ==
Abrams told Empire in August 2015, "Kylo Ren is not a Sith.
He works under Supreme Leader Snoke, who is a powerful figure on the Dark Side of the Force."
Abrams had previously told Entertainment Weekly that the character, "came to the name Kylo Ren when he joined a group called the Knights of Ren."
Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described Ren as "a hot-headed, radicalised Dark Side jihadi, whose red lightsaber splutters and crackles as violently as his temper".
Abrams noted, "The lightsaber is something that he built himself, and is as dangerous and as fierce and as ragged as the character."
The Telegraph also explains that Ren's wild and erratic temper and "angsty" instability make him dangerous.
Melissa Leon of The Daily Beast describes Ren's use of the Force as "formidable", citing his ability to stop a blaster shot mid-air, immobilize victims and probe their minds against their will.
Kasdan told Entertainment Weekly in August 2015, "I've written four Star Wars movies now, and there's never been a character quite like the one that Adam plays.
I think you're going to see something that's brand new to the saga," noting that the character is "full of emotion".
Abrams explained, "I think that what makes Ren so unique is that he isn't as fully formed as when we meet a character such as Darth Vader ...
He is not your prototypical mustache-twirling bad guy.
He is a little bit more complex than that."
Driver said in December 2015 that, despite the visual similarities to Darth Vader, Ren is "unlike any villain the franchise has seen".
He explained:

I feel there's a recklessness about him that's maybe not normally associated with the Dark Side.
You normally think of order, and structure, and full commitment and no hesitation ...
he's just a little bit more unpolished.
It's in his costume, in his lightsaber—how you kind of get the sense that it could just not work at any moment; that it could just blow up.
That’s kind of like a big metaphor for him.

Driver claimed that he was privy to several details of Kylo Ren's backstory during the making of the films.
According to Lev Grossman, who interviewed the actor in the lead-up to The Rise of Skywalker, Driver reported that “both Han Solo and Leia were way too self-absorbed and into this idea of themselves as heroes to really be attentive parents in the way a young and tender Kylo Ren really needed.”
The backstory of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren was elaborated upon in a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren (written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney), which was published and released by Marvel Comics from December 18, 2019 to March 11, 2020.Certain aspects of Kylo Ren's overall arc across the three films of the Sequel Trilogy were also known to Driver from the start of production on the first film.
He claimed that he “had one piece of information of where it was all going...and things were building towards that.”
He later clarified:
J.J. Abrams told me when I met him for the first time that I should imagine a journey of a character completely opposite to Darth Vader...
someone who starts as a child and becomes a man over the course of three movies.
He becomes closer to his convictions, becomes more assured about his choices, but has metaphorically and physically killed his father to become his own person.

When asked by IGN in December 2017 if he believed Kylo Ren was capable of redemption, The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson replied, “Yeah...
Are you kidding?
Vader was worse than Kylo ever was, I think, and Vader got redeemed.”
Citing the complexity of the character, Johnson articulated, “I don’t see the point of trying to get behind his mask and learn more about him if all we’re going to learn is ‘Yeah, he’s just an evil bad guy that needs to be killed.’”
The Rise of Skywalker co-writer Chris Terrio also supported this position through comparing Kylo with Darth Vader.
According to Terrio, “Vader was complicit in genocide and cruelty and depravity.
Yet there is this inherent optimism in Star Wars that the light in you is never truly gone.
That you can still redeem yourself right up until the last minute – which, in Vader’s case, was literally true...
Leia never really gave up hope that Kylo could be redeemed, and she knew that Rey was probably the way that it would happen.”
Abrams further elaborated on this point:
Maybe it’s the optimist in me, but I would like to think that anyone, even someone who does the most horrendous things, is redeemable.
And certainly because his mother, Leia, is a believer that there is still light in him, it was hard to imagine that she would be wrong about him.

The Rise of Skywalker revealed that Kylo Ren and Rey were two halves of a “dyad” in the Force, which Terrio alternatively described as “sort of soulmate[s] in the Force”  and “twins of fate, twins of destiny.”

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens (2015) ===
Kylo Ren first appears in The Force Awakens as a high-ranking member in the First Order, a tyrannical regime that has risen from the remains of the Galactic Empire.
After arriving at Jakku to retrieve a map containing the coordinates where Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) is to be found, Ren kills an old priest named Lor San Tekka (Max von Sydow), and captures Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac), who has also been sent to recover the map by General Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher).
Ren soon learns that the pilot had entrusted his astromech droid, BB-8, with the map.
Poe flees with the help of rogue stormtrooper Finn (John Boyega), who later finds BB-8, and the scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley).
Finn, Rey, and BB-8 escape Jakku in the Millennium Falcon, and are soon intercepted by the ship's former owner, Han Solo (Harrison Ford), and his co-pilot Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).

It is revealed that Ren is the son of Han and Leia, originally named Ben, and was once one of Luke's Jedi pupils.
He was corrupted to the dark side of the Force by the First Order's Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), and helped destroy Luke's new Jedi Academy.
However, Ren still feels the pull of the light side of the Force and seeks the strength to overcome it from his grandfather Darth Vader, whose burnt helmet is in Ren's possession.
Arriving at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on Takodana, Ren captures Rey, who he senses has seen the map.
While interrogating her, he realizes that she is strong with the Force, though unaware of it.
Rey finds herself able to resist his powers and experience Ren's emotions, and confronts him over his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather.
She later uses the "Jedi mind trick" to compel her stormtrooper guard to let her escape.
Han arrives at the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, as part of the Resistance's plan to destroy it.

After Han plants explosives to destroy the base, he confronts Ren—calling him by his real name, Ben—and implores him to abandon the dark side, warning him that Snoke will kill him once he has control of the galaxy.
Ren tells Han he feels conflicted, and asks his father for help, which Han promises to give; Ren then ignites his lightsaber, impaling and killing Han.
An enraged Chewbacca fires at Ren, wounding him.
As Finn and Rey flee the damaged base, Ren follows and confronts them.
Finn fights Ren with Anakin Skywalker's recovered lightsaber, but Ren overpowers and severely wounds him.
Rey then takes up the lightsaber and, using the Force, begins to overcome Ren, striking him on the face with the lightsaber.
Before the duel is finished, they are separated by a seismic fissure created by the collapsing base.
Rey and the others escape as Snoke orders General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson) to evacuate the base and bring Ren to him to complete his training.

===
The Last Jedi (2017) ===
Ren's inner conflict continues into The Last Jedi, particularly through his conversations with Rey, with whom he connects through the Force.
Rey learns from Luke why Ben Solo turned to the dark side:
Luke had seen a vision of the destruction Ben would cause and was briefly tempted to kill him in his sleep; when Ben awoke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn, he turned on his uncle and apparently destroyed the Jedi Temple.
Rey believes that there is still good in Ren, and resolves to bring him back to the light side.

Meanwhile, Ren is reproached by Snoke for his failure to defeat Rey, and Ren tries to prove himself by leading an attack on a lead Resistance starship.
He hesitates to destroy it after sensing his mother's presence, but his wingmen destroy the ship's bridge, almost killing Leia.
Upon Rey's arrival, Ren captures her and brings her to Snoke, who tortures her for Luke's location before ordering Ren to kill her.
Instead of complying, Ren uses the Force to ignite Luke's lightsaber at Snoke's side and cut him in half, and subsequently slays Snoke's royal guard with Rey's assistance.
After the guards are slain, Ren reveals to Rey his goal to create a new order in the galaxy, separate from the legacies created by Snoke and Luke, and beseeches Rey to join him.
He gets her to acknowledge that her parents abandoned her, and tells her that despite of her being a nobody that comes from nowhere, he truly cares about her.
Rey hesitates and then refuses to join him, realizing that Ren will not turn back to the light side; the two briefly struggle over Anakin's lightsaber with the Force, resulting in the weapon breaking in half and knocking both warriors unconscious.

After Rey escapes, Ren frames her for Snoke's assassination, uses the Force to choke Hux until he acknowledges Ren as the new Supreme Leader of the First Order, and orders his forces to attack the Resistance base on Crait.
When Luke appears during the attack, Ren orders his men to fire on him, to no effect; Luke remains standing, revealing that he is only present as a Force projection, serving as a distraction to allow the Resistance to escape from the First Order.
After Luke vanishes, the First Order storms the base, but the Resistance has already evacuated.
Ren shares a final look with Rey through the Force before Rey slams the door to the Millennium Falcon and escapes with the Resistance.

===
The Rise of Kylo Ren (2019–2020) ===
Ren's past as Ben Solo is depicted in The Rise of Kylo Ren.
As a child, he is trained as a Jedi by his uncle Luke Skywalker alongside his fellow students Voe, Hennix, and his best friend Tai; Voe grows jealous of Ben for his superior Force capability and Luke's perceived favoritism and nepotism.
On a mission to the planet Elphrona to investigate an ancient Jedi outpost with Luke and Lor San Tekka, Ben telepathically communicates with Snoke, whom Luke had recently fought, for which Ben respects him.
Upon arriving on the planet, the trio encounters the Knights of Ren, a group of Force-wielding mercenaries searching the ruins for artifacts.
After a brief confrontation between the group and Luke, their leader, Ren, stops the proceedings by activating a kill switch on his lightsaber.
After he and Luke agreeing to a truce, Ren unmasks and, placing his mask on the ground, offers Ben an open invitation to the group's ranks if he ever desires in the future, sensing great capability for "the Shadow" within him.

Several years later, after collapsing his hut on his uncle Luke after the latter apparently tried to kill him in his sleep, Ben yells towards the Jedi Temple in outrage at Luke's actions and is terrified when a bolt of lightning strikes, destroying it.
Later that night, Voe, Hennix, Tai return from off-planet to find Ben before the burning Temple.
After they are unable to sense Luke's presence, Ben elaborates on the confrontation, believing himself to have killed Luke, and states that he intends to leave the planet.
Believing Ben to be responsible for the Temple's destruction, Voe attacks Ben only to be easily subdued with Hennix and Tai, and Ben leaves the planet on a nearby shuttle, with the trio in close pursuit.
After considering returning to his mother on Hosnian Prime, Ben instead decides to meet Snoke in person after receiving another message from him.
Scarred from a previous encounter with Luke, Snoke encourages Ben to seek out the Knights of Ren.
Traveling to the outpost on Elphrona, Ben retrieves Ren's mask and puts it on, putting the pair in communication.
After mentioning Snoke, Ren invites Ben to meet the Knights on Vanrak, before he is confronted by Voe, having followed him via a tracker in his ship provided by Hennix.

Refusing to fight, only to defend himself from Voe's attacks, Ben uses the Force to catch her after she falls off of a building, witnessed by Tai.
However, Hennix, believing Ben to have killed her, throws his lightsaber in a lethal spin at Ben; in deflecting it, Hennix is bisected.
Leaving, Ben collapses the outpost around Voe and Tai to subdue them and leaves the planet.
Later, Ben meets with Ren and his Knights, who informs him he will need to provide a "good death" for membership.
After telling him of the encounter with Hennix, Ren states that Ben was not responsible for it, and therefore ineligible for membership, although he offers him another chance due to Snoke having vouched for him.
Providing him a uniform, the group proceeds to the Mine Moon of Mimban, where Ben assists the Knights in stealing an artifact known as the Mindsplinter from miners using a variation of the Jedi mind trick taught to him by Snoke.
Ben is horrified when the Knights subsequently execute the smugglers after Ren had promised Ben to merely release them.
Suddenly, Voe and Tai, having followed Ben from Tai reading his mind, arrive.
Voe attacks the Knights of Ren, while Tai reasons with Ben over his decision to leave, and the pair cease fighting.
Witnessing this, Ren snaps Tai's neck, killing him, telling Ben that Snoke was wrong and that he doesn't wish to "live in the shadow".
Declaring that "I am the Shadow", an enraged Ben takes up Tai's lightsaber and his own and duels Ren.
While doing so, Rey senses Ben from across the galaxy without knowing why, Ben's mother Leia senses his fall, Snoke calls out his praises and Palpatine is revealed to be manipulating both Snoke and Ben, and to have destroyed the Jedi Temple, although Ben remains unaware of this.
The duel culminates in Ben impaling Ren, providing him the "good death" he asked for before sending the Knights and Voe flying.

Shocked at Ben killing Ren, Voe attempts to reach for her lightsaber, only for it to be taken by Ben.
Deriding her role in Hennix's and Tai's deaths and declaring that she is "not a Jedi", Ben knights Voe with Ren's lightsaber, before turning to find the Knights of Ren kneeling before him, having accepted him as their new leader.
Later, on Ren's ship, Ben crushes the Kyber crystal from his own lightsaber in his bare hand and forges himself a new crossguard lightsaber in the image of one he had seen on Elphrona, taking the name Kylo Ren, derived from "Skywalker" and "Solo".
===
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ===
In The Rise of Skywalker, Ren has been ruling as the Supreme Leader of the First Order for a year.
In the film's beginning, Ren searches for a Sith wayfinder to lead him to the Sith planet Exegol, with the hopes of killing the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) as a show of his power.
When Ren finds the wayfinder and arrives on Exegol, Palpatine reveals that he has been manipulating Ren and the First Order, having created Snoke as a means of turning Ren to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order, a massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Palpatine offers the armada to Ren in a bid to form a new Sith Empire—with Ren as Emperor—on the condition that he kill Rey.

Ren searches the galaxy for Rey and continues corresponding with her through the Force to discern her location.
Rey has been searching for a second wayfinder; Ren tries to stop her from finding it.
Eventually, Ren informs Rey that she is Palpatine's granddaughter, and furthermore, they are a dyad in the Force with extremely powerful potential when joined together.
He urges her once more to take his hand and to overthrow Palpatine together.
Rey refuses, but Ren is unwilling to kill her and follows her to Kef Bir, the location of the second wayfinder.
Meeting her on the wreckage of the second Death Star, Ren destroys the second wayfinder and duels her.
The duel ends with Rey impaling Ren, who had been distracted by his dying mother, Leia, reaching out to him through the Force.
A guilt-ridden Rey (also sensing Leia's death) uses the Force to heal Ren and leaves aboard his ship, after telling him that she wanted to take Ben Solo's hand, but not Kylo Ren's.
Alone on the wreckage, Ren converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber, renouncing his role as Supreme Leader and reclaiming his old identity of Ben Solo.

Ben rushes to help Rey defeat Palpatine on Exegol.
Rey senses his presence and uses their Force connection to give him Anakin's lightsaber, which Ben uses to defeat the Knights of Ren.
Palpatine then senses Rey and Ben's connection as a dyad of the Force, and absorbs their energy to restore his full power, before casting Ben into an abyss.
However, Rey manages to defeat and kill Palpatine before dying from the effort.
Ben climbs out of the abyss and finds Rey's inert body.
Ben manages to transfer all of his life essence into her, successfully resuscitating her but sacrificing his own life in the process.
They share a passionate kiss before Ben dies peacefully in Rey's arms.
His body fades away simultaneously as his mother's body becomes one with the Force at the Resistance base.

===
Related works and promotional material ===
Kylo Ren is a point of view character in the 2015, 2017, and 2019 novelizations of the Star Wars sequel trilogy by Alan Dean Foster, Jason Fry, and Rae Carson.

Kylo is a playable character in the 2015
The Force Awakens add-on to the Disney Infinity 3.0 video game, with an Infinity character figurine available separately.
He is also a character in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
Hasbro has released a 3+3⁄4-inch (9.5 cm)
Kylo Ren action figure, and a 6-inch (15 cm) figure in their Black Series line.
He is also featured in the Lego Star Wars playsets Kylo Ren's Command Shuttle (2015) and Battle on Takodana (2016), as well as a Lego Buildable Figure.
The Lego version of Kylo also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises, and as a playable character in Lego Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
In January 2016, Driver reprised the role for a Star Wars/Undercover Boss sketch on Saturday Night Live, with Kylo Ren disguising himself as a radar technician named "Matt" to determine what the Starkiller Base employees really think of him.
Driver again reprised the role in January 2020 for a follow-up Saturday Night Live sketch titled “Undercover Boss:
Where Are They Now?”
in which Kylo goes undercover as “Randy,” an entry-level intern on a star destroyer.
In the 2017 Chuck Wendig novel Star Wars: Aftermath: Empire's End, Ben Solo is stated as having been born on the planet Chandrila on the same day as a peace treaty is signed between the remnants of the Empire and the New Galactic Republic (about a year after Return of the Jedi, or 29 years before The Force Awakens).
Kylo Ren is also mentioned in the 2017 novel Star Wars: Phasma, which takes place before The Force Awakens.

Kylo appears in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Matthew Wood and Roger Craig Smith, masked and unmasked respectively.
In the game, Kylo interrogates Del Meeko about Lor San Tekka's location (who possess the map to Luke Skywalker) using his Force abilities.
When Del finally relents and reveals the map and Lor San Tekka's location, Kylo leaves him for Hask, Del's former comrade in Inferno Squad.
Kylo Ren (voiced once again by Matthew Wood) also appears in the Star Wars:
Resistance series finale episode
"The Escape", where he kills Agent Tierny for failing to destroy the Colossus Resistance.

Matthew Wood also portrayed General Grievous in both Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and the TV series
Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

Kylo Ren is also one of the numerous voices heard in the fourth and final season of Star Wars: Rebels in the episode "A World Between Worlds", with an excerpt of Driver's dialogue from The Force Awakens being used.
Kylo Ren appears as a walk-around character within Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios.
The character appears during Star Tours – The Adventures Continue and
Star Wars:
Rise of the Resistance, with the latter featuring the character in audio-animatronic form with Driver providing the voice.
On November 28, 2019, Ichikawa Ebizō XI starred as Kairennosuke in Star Wars Kabuki: Kairennosuke and the Three Shining Swords (スター・ウォーズ歌舞伎〜煉之介光刃三本〜, Sutā Uōzu Kabuki ~Rennosuke
Kōjin San-pon~)
, a kabuki production that re-enacted key events of Kylo Ren in The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi.

== Reception ==
The character and Driver's portrayal have received critical acclaim; Driver won the 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal.
In January 2018, Kylo was voted seventh greatest movie villain of all time by the readers of Empire.

Many reviewers commended Ren's conflicted nature and depth, as well as his costume design, and noted there were many places the character could be taken in future installments.
Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised the character and the actor alike, saying, "He is gorgeously cruel, spiteful and capricious – and unlike the Vader of old, he is given to petulant temper tantrums, with his lightsaber drawn."
Terri Schwartz of IGN also called Driver's performance "spectacular", noting that "his performance adds great depth to a character who could have come off as one-dimensional, and the implications of his arc leave a viewer with plenty to think about after they leave the theater.
"
Collin wrote, "To describe Kylo Ren as this film's Vader would be accurate in a sense ...
But it would also be to undersell the deep ingenuity with which this astonishing character has been crafted by Abrams, Kasdan and Arndt, and also the wells of emotional tumult Driver invests in him.
"
Comparing the character to the one-note Vader of the 1977 film, Melissa Leon calls Ren "a living battleground between darkness and light, making him a far more resonant and familiar portrayal of that struggle than we've ever seen in Star Wars ...
[which] makes him a far more interesting villain.
"
Abrams told Entertainment Weekly, "it was a great joy to work with Adam Driver on this role, because he threw himself into it in a deep and remarkable way."
Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter noted, "Ren is given a pronounced inferiority complex, a clever bad guy twist that could be taken to interesting places both in the writing and performance."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote, "The bald-faced attempt to clone Vader, one of the greatest badasses in film history, is clankingly obvious, but Driver, masked and unmasked, gives him hypnotic and haunting contours."
Kyle Buchanan of Vulture.com was underwhelmed by the reveal of Driver under the mask.
Leon, however, argued:

But that face—that of a normal, vulnerable young man—is the most subversively terrifying thing about J. J. Abrams' reimagining of A New Hope.
Rather than pure evil, Ren is something far more familiar: He is human.
Just like the real-life young men with minds clouded by fear, hate, and anger who commit unspeakable acts in our world every day ...
all the visual cues that leave the character open to criticisms of not being "evil" enough—are all signs of Ren's struggle between the Dark Side and the Light.

Some viewers noted that Ren's character arc shares similarities with that of the Star Wars Expanded Universe character Jacen Solo, the son of Han Solo and Princess Leia who threatens the galaxy as a fallen Jedi.
Additionally, critics have noted a resemblance between Ren's character design and that of Revan, the protagonist of Knights of the Old Republic.

==
Family tree ==


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Szostak, Phil (2015).
The Art of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419717802.

Szostak, Phil (2017).
The Art of Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419727054.

Szostak, Phil (2019).
The Art of Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Abrams Books.
ISBN 978-1419740381.

Wendig, Chuck (2017).
Star Wars:
Aftermath: Empire's End.
Del Rey.
ISBN 9781101966976.

==
Further reading ==
Scoville, Max (December 20, 2017). "
Star Wars:
Hey, What's Up With The Knights of Ren?".
IGN.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Kylo Ren at Wikimedia Commons
Kylo Ren in the StarWars.com Databank
Kylo Ren on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Kylo Ren on IMDb
Star Wars:
Thrawn (also known simply as Thrawn) is a Star Wars novel by Timothy Zahn, published on April 11, 2017 by Del Rey Books.
It chronicles the origins of Grand Admiral Thrawn, a popular character originating from the Star Wars Legends line of works, which were declared non-canon to the franchise after Disney redefined Star Wars continuity in April 2014.
The novel was announced in July 2016 alongside news that the character Thrawn would be reintroduced into the Star Wars franchise on the 3D CGI animated television series Star Wars Rebels.

A sequel, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released in July 2018.
A third novel, Thrawn: Treason, was released in July 2019.

==
Plot ==
Found on an unnamed Outer Rim planet, the exiled Chiss warrior Thrawn pledges himself to Emperor Palpatine and joins the Imperial navy.
Thrawn's cunning and expertise as a tactician help him to rise through the ranks with unprecedented speed, though his renegade tactics ignite the ire of his superiors.
At Thrawn's side is his translator-turned-aide-de-camp, Ensign Eli Vanto, whom he trains in the ways of war.
Meanwhile, ruthless administrator Arihnda Pryce plots her own rise to power.

==
Development ==
The character of Thrawn was originally introduced in Zahn's 1991 novel Heir to the Empire, and became a fan favorite.
He went on to appear in several other novels, short stories, comics, and video games.
Following the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars fiction produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In a prerecorded video, Zahn announced at the London Star Wars Celebration in July 2016 that he was writing a new novel for Del Rey Books titled Thrawn.
The same day, Del Rey confirmed on Twitter the novel's spring 2017 release.
In a subsequent interview with StarWars.com, Zahn noted that the novel would cover several years between Thrawn's "first encounter" with the Empire and the events of the third season of Star Wars Rebels, an animated television series in which the character will appear prior to the book's release.
He said:

It's very exciting [to write Thrawn again].
A writer never knows which characters are going to click with the readers, and it was highly gratifying to me that Thrawn captured the imaginations of so many people over the past quarter century.
Over the years I've written a lot of books and stories that featured him, but with this book I'll be visiting a part of his life that I never before had a chance to explore.

Asked if he would be incorporating any material from previous Thrawn novels, Zahn said, "I've thrown in a few bits and pieces.
Nothing too blatant, just little Easter eggs for those who are familiar with my other books.
"
Though in Legends works Thrawn was mostly used in post-Return of the Jedi storylines, both Rebels and Thrawn take place prior to the events of the original 1977 film and show his rise to power.
Zahn said, "I get to show how he's treated by his fellow officers and shipmates on his way up the military ladder, particularly when he's not in a command position over them.
"A full synopsis of the novel was released in January 2017, followed by an excerpt in March 2017.

==
Publication ==
Thrawn was published on April 11, 2017.
Del Rey Books produced three variant covers: the standard edition is white, featuring Thrawn's face split by the spine; the Barnes & Noble-exclusive edition has the same cover design in black, with a double-sided pull out poster that has a Thrawn portrait on one side and the Del Rey novel timeline on the other; and
the Star Wars Celebration limited edition has a textless cover with Thrawn's full face, the portrait on the back cover, and special end papers.

== Reception ==
Adrian Liang of Omnivoracious called the novel "a solid addition to the new official Star Wars novels", noting that "the Thrawn POV chapters are the weakest" while the Vanto sections "provide the most insight and entertainment."
==
Comic adaptation ==
In July 2017, Marvel Comics announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Thrawn is scheduled for release in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with five more to follow on a monthly basis.

==
Sequels ==


===
Thrawn: Alliances ===
A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was announced during New York Comic Con in October 2017.
The novel was scheduled to be released on June 26, 2018, but was later delayed to July 24, 2018.
The cover artwork was revealed in November 2017, and an excerpt was released on the official Star Wars website on March 23, 2018.
The excerpt was the first canon appearance of the planet Batuu, which was featured in Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge, the new theme park expansion at Disneyland and Disney's Hollywood Studios, in 2019.
Thrawn: Alliances was released by Del Rey Books on July 24, 2018, and debuted at #1 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
Thrawn: Alliances focuses on Thrawn's partnership with Darth Vader, whom he meets at the conclusion of Thrawn.
In the novel, Grand Admiral Thrawn and Darth Vader are sent on a mission to the unknown regions to explore a disturbance in the Force felt by Emperor Palpatine.
The mission is more than that, however, as Thrawn's split loyalties between the Empire and his native people the Chiss and Vader's past as a Jedi require a test of loyalty for both.
The book also features flashbacks to a Clone Wars conflict featuring Thrawn and Anakin Skywalker.

===
Thrawn: Treason ===
In December 2018, it was announced that Timothy Zahn would write and publish another Thrawn sequel, titled Thrawn: Treason.
The novel was released by Del Rey Books on July 23, 2019, and debuted at #5 on The New York Times Best Seller list.
The novel explores the crisis Thrawn encounters when he discovers that his people are in peril, forcing him to choose between loyalty to the Empire or loyalty to the Chiss Ascendancy.

==
Prequels ==


===
Chaos
Rising ===
At the 2019 New York Comic Con, a new trilogy from Zahn was announced, to be entitled Thrawn: The Ascendency Trilogy, or simply the Thrawn Ascendancy trilogy, to launch with Book I:
Chaos Rising in May 2020.
After being delayed twice, the first novel was ultimately released on September 1, 2020.The prequel follows Thrawn's original rise through the ranks of the Chiss Ascendancy and the allies and enemies he collects along the way.

===
Greater Good ===
In October 2020 a sequel to Chaos Rising was announced, titled Greater Good, which was released on 27 April 2021.
===
Lesser Evil ===
On April 1, 2020, the final novel in the Thrawn Ascendency trilogy was announced, titled Lesser Evil, which is set for a November 16, 2021 release.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Thrawn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is a computer-animated television series created by George Lucas.
The series began with a theatrical feature film which was released on August 15, 2008, and debuted on Cartoon Network two months later on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three years between the prequel films
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith.
Being a reboot of the previous 2D series Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003–2005), each episode had a running time of approximately 22 minutes to fill a half-hour time slot instead of the 3–15 minute episodes that the previous series had.
Dave Filoni was the supervising director of the series.
The Clone Wars was a massive ratings success, becoming one of Cartoon Network's highest rated shows during its initial run.
Throughout its run, the series received mostly positive reception from critics, receiving praise for its writing, action, characters, visuals, voice acting, music, scale and tone.
The series has also garnered a massive fan following and was also nominated for many industry awards, including the Daytime Emmy Awards and the Annie Awards.
In early 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down".
Thirteen episodes composing a new sixth season were made available in the U.S. for streaming on Netflix, along with the entirety of the series, beginning March 7, 2014.
A project known as The Clone Wars Legacy adapted unproduced story arcs into other formats, such as comics and novels.
The series was revived for a seventh and final season of 12 new episodes, which premiered on Disney+
on February 21, 2020.A related series, Star Wars Rebels, was released during the hiatus between the sixth and seventh seasons of The Clone Wars, featuring several characters from The Clone Wars, including Captain Rex, Ahsoka Tano and Maul.
Star Wars:
The Bad Batch, a sequel/spin-off series centering on the titular clone trooper team introduced in the seventh season, premiered on May 4, 2021.
==
Series overview ==


===
Setting ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is set during the prequel trilogy era, in the period of three years between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
The series focuses on the eponymous conflict between the Galactic Republic, which is supported by the Jedi Order, and the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a movement organized by the Sith Lord Count Dooku to unite numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic against it.
Unbeknownst to the galaxy, Darth Sidious, Dooku's secret master, is the one pulling the strings of both sides, as part of his master plan to eliminate the Jedi and gain enough power to create a new governing state under his rule.

The series was initially conceived as an anthology, with episodes sharing little narrative connections between them, but later seasons feature story arcs that span several episodes.
The protagonists are various characters from the live-action films, including Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Padmé Amidala, Yoda, and Mace Windu, as well as new characters created for the series, such as Anakin's Padawan learner Ahsoka Tano, and various clone troopers who are given distinct personalities, like Captain Rex of the 501st Legion.
The antagonists are typically members of the Separatist Alliance, though numerous episodes also focus on crime lords, bounty hunters, and Force-sensitive characters (Sith or just dark side users) who are not affiliated with the Separatists.

===
Synopsis ===
Season one focuses on various battles fought between the Republic and the Separatists, and their efforts to convince more planets and races to join them.
The main antagonists are Count Dooku, his informal apprentice Asajj Ventress, and the cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid armies, General Grievous.
There are also several episodes that do not focus on the conflict with the Separatists, but rather other aspects of the Clone Wars.

Season two features both one episode-storylines, and a few arcs that span between two and five episodes.
This season focuses heavily on bounty hunter characters, with one story arc featuring Darth Sidious hiring Cad Bane to steal a holocron from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant that will help him locate Force-sensitive children, while another deals with Boba Fett beginning his bounty hunter career and, alongside a group of more experienced mercenaries, seeking revenge against Mace Windu for killing his father.
Other major story arcs focus on the planet Mandalore, which took a neutral stance in the Clone Wars and whose pacifist leader, Duchess Satine Kryze, is targeted by both the Separatists and the Mandalorian terrorist faction Death Watch; and the Jedi leading Republic forces in an assault on the main Separatist battle droid manufacturing facility on Geonosis.

The first half of both season three and four are diplomatic in nature, and focus on the role of the Republic Senate in the Clone Wars, and how different races and planets are affected by the galaxy-wide conflict, as well as the Republic's efforts to help them.
During season three, several story arcs focus on the development of certain characters, such as Anakin, who is led to an ancient Force realm alongside Obi-Wan and Ahsoka, and learns more about the nature of the Force and his role as the Chosen One; Ahsoka, who defies Anakin's orders to join his team in a mission to break a Jedi Master out of a Separatist prison, and must later lead her own team of captured Jedi Padawans when they find themselves hunted by Trandoshans; and Ventress, who is betrayed by Dooku, returns to her Nightsister clan on Dathomir, and tries to exact revenge on her former master through his new apprentice, Savage Opress, who ultimately turns on both Ventress and Dooku to follow his own path.

In season four, one story arc focuses on the 501st Legion, who must act independently for the first time when the Jedi General they have been temporarily assigned to serve under is revealed to be a traitor and manipulates them into killing each other, forcing the clones to capture and execute him.
Other story arcs feature Obi-Wan faking his death and going undercover as a bounty hunter to thwart a plot to capture Chancellor Palpatine; Ventress abandoning her Sith ways and becoming a bounty hunter after the Separatists' massacre of the Nightsisters; and Savage finding his long-lost brother, Darth Maul, who seeks revenge against Obi-Wan for his defeat over a decade prior.

Season five features five main story arcs.
In the first one, the Republic helps a group of rebels from Onderon, led by siblings Steela and Saw Gerrera, liberate their planet from Separatist occupation.
The second arc focuses on a group of Jedi younglings who, after completing their path to becoming Padawans, have to prove themselves by rescuing Ahsoka from pirates.
The third arc revolves around a team of droids who, while undertaking a mission to intercept an encrypted Separatist message, encounter an amnesiac former clone commando and must help him recover his memories to escape the planet they have been stranded on.
The fourth arc deals with the return of Darth Maul, who joins forces with Death Watch and other criminal syndicates to take over Mandalore and exact revenge on Obi-Wan.
The final arc features Ahsoka being framed for bombing the Jedi Temple, and having to prove her innonence while on the run from the Republic.
Though she is ultimately cleared of the charges against her after Anakin captures the real culprit, Ahsoka elects to abandon the Jedi Order, leaving Anakin devastated.

Season six consists of four story arcs:
clone trooper Fives investigating the premature activation of Order 66 in a fellow trooper's mind, and discovering the truth about the inhibitor chips implanted in each clone's brain, only to be silenced by Palpatine before he can expose it; Padmé trying to help her old flame
Rush Clovis expose the corruption in the Intergalactic Banking Clan, which causes tensions in her and Anakin's relationship when he learns about her secret mission and intervenes; Jar Jar Binks and Mace Windu rescuing the captured Queen of Bardotta from a cult headed by the Nightsisters' former leader, Mother Talzin; and Yoda embarking on a journey to learn more about the nature of the Force after he is visited by the spirit of the late Qui-Gon Jinn.

Season seven consists of three story arcs.
The first one is focused on Captain Rex's character, as he, Anakin, and a team of clones with genetic mutations rescue ARC Trooper Echo, previously believed to have been killed in action, and defeat the Separatists on Anaxes with his help.
The second one focuses on Ahsoka, who befriends sisters Trace and Rafa Martez and helps them settle a debt with the Pyke Syndicate, while trying to conceal her Force powers because of the sisters' hatred of Jedi.
The final arc, which is set concurrently with Revenge of the Sith, depicts the Siege of Mandalore, a battle that had been referenced in previous Star Wars media.
Ahsoka reluctantly returns to the Republic to lead an assault alongside Rex and Mandalorian warrior Bo-Katan Kryze against Darth Maul's forces on Mandalore in hopes of capturing him.
Unbeknowst to them, Maul has foreseen the fall of the Republic and the Jedi Order, and Darth Sidious turning Anakin to the dark side, and hopes to prevent these events by killing the latter.
After Maul is captured, Sidious executes Order 66, causing Ahsoka to be attacked by her own clone troopers, whom she is hesitant to kill.
She manages to restore Rex's free will, and releases Maul to cause a distraction, but he ends up disabling the ship they are on.
All three ultimately escape, with Ahsoka and Rex later burying the clones who died in the ship's crash, and going their separate ways.
The final scene of the series shows Darth Vader finding Ahsoka's lightsaber among the ship's wreckage some time later, and leaving with it in silence.

==
Episodes ==
The series started with a theatrically released animated film; this decision was made after the production team watched completed footage of several early episodes for the planned television series, which were ultimately combined into a single feature-length film.
Warner Bros. Pictures distributed the film, while subsequent episodes aired separately on Cartoon Network.
For the film, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Samuel L. Jackson, and Matthew Wood reprised their roles as Count Dooku, C-3PO, Mace Windu, and the B1 Battle Droids, respectively, from the live-action movies, but Lee and Jackson would not return for the television series.

On December 5, 2011, a full-length feature cut of one of the Season 3 trilogies of episodes (the one composed by "Nightsisters," "Monster," and "Witches of the Mist") was released for download on iTunes as an uninterrupted movie that was previously shown at selected screenings in 2010.
The three episodes were written by Katie Lucas, who had previously written the Season 1 episode "Jedi Crash" as well as the Season 3 episodes "Sphere of Influence" and "Assassin."
A repeat of season one aired in "decoded" episode format.
Each installment contained unobtrusive text windows giving supplemental information about the characters and events playing out on screen.
The series was cancelled in March 2013, after the conclusion of its fifth season, as a result of The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm and the decision to remove most Star Wars Expanded Universe works from canon.
Despite this, The Clone Wars was one of the few pieces of Star Wars media to remain part of the new continuity established by Disney, and a sixth season was released on March 7, 2014 on Netflix, along with additional media, such as comic books and novels, based on unfinished story arcs that would have been included in the season.
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes in a seventh season to be released on Disney+.
A trailer for the season was released on April 14, 2019 at Star Wars Celebration Chicago.
On August 23, 2019, series creator Dave Filoni announced at the D23 Expo that it will be the final season.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, Additional voices
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Plo Koon, Additional voices
Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano,
Additional voices
Dee Bradley Baker as Clone Troopers, Saesee Tiin, Onaconda Farr, Bossk, Arok the Hutt, Admiral Trench,
Additional voices
Tom Kane as Narrator, Yoda, Admiral Wullf Yularen,
Additional voices
Matthew Wood as General Grievous, Battle Droids, Poggle the Lesser, Wat Tambor,
Additional voices


===
Recurring ===
Ian Abercrombie (Seasons 1–6) /
Tim Curry (Seasons 5–6) /
Ian McDiarmid (Season 7) as Chancellor Palpatine / Darth Sidious
B.J. Hughes (Season 1) /
Ahmed Best
(Seasons 1–6) as Jar Jar Binks
Clancy Brown as Savage Opress
Corey Burton as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Cad Bane, Ziro the Hutt, Chairman Papanoida, Additional voices
Terrence C. Carson as Mace Windu
Jim Cummings as Hondo Ohnaka
Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Ben Diskin as AZI-3, Krismo Sodi, Morley, Otua Blank, WAC-47
Robin Atkin Downes as Castas, Cham Syndulla, Cin Drallig, Ima-Gun Di, Rush Clovis
Jon Favreau as Pre Vizsla
Nika Futterman as Asajj Ventress, Chi Eekway Papanoida, Gardulla
the Hutt, Sy Snootles, TC-70
Brian George as King Katuunko, Chi Cho, Ki-Adi-Mundi
Barbara Goodson as Mother Talzin
Anna Graves as Duchess Satine, Sugi, Tiplar, Tiplee,
Additional voices
Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura,
Riyo Chuchi
Julian Holloway as Almec, Admiral Killian
Tom Kenny as Greedo, Lt.
Tan Divo, Nute Gunray, Silood
Jaime King as Aurra Sing, Cassie Cryar, Additional Voices
Phil LaMarr as Bail Organa, Kit Fisto,
Orn Free Taa
Daniel Logan as Boba Fett, Clone Cadets
James C. Mathis III as Gregar Typho
Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia, Mama the Hutt
Kevin Michael Richardson as Jabba
the Hutt, Hay-Zu, Xomit Grunseit
Katee Sackhoff as Bo-Katan Kryze
Meredith Salenger as Barriss Offee,
Che Amanwe Papanoida, Ione Marcy, Pluma Sodi
Kath Soucie as Mon Mothma, Jek Lawquane, Mina Bonteri
Jason Spisak as Lux Bonteri, Zinn Paulness
Stephen Stanton as Mas Amedda, Tarkin, Colonel Meebur Gascon, Moralo Eval, Marg Krim, Additional voices
Catherine Taber as Padmé Amidala, Additional voices
Tasia Valenza as Shaak Ti
Sam Witwer as Darth Maul,
The Son


===
Notable guests ===
Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker
Clare Grant as Latts Razzi
Seth Green as Todo 360, Ion Papanoida
Mark Hamill as Darth Bane
James Marsters as Faro Argyus
Bobby Moynihan as Pintu Son-El
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn
Simon Pegg as Dengar
Greg Proops as Tal Merrik
Elizabeth Rodriguez as Rafa Martez
Ray Stevenson as Gar Saxon
George Takei as Lok Durd
David Tennant as Huyang
Adrienne Wilkinson as The Daughter
Michael York as
Dr. Nuvo Vindi


==
Production ==
At April 2005's Star Wars Celebration III, George Lucas stated that "we are working on a 3-D continuation of the pilot series that was on the Cartoon Network; we probably won't start that project for another year.
"
Lucas hired Dave Filoni after having seen episodes of Avatar: The Last Airbender he had worked on.
By July 2005, pre-production had begun on the series, according to Steve Sansweet, head of Lucasfilm fan relations.
Sansweet referred to the series as "the next generation of the Star Wars saga, a cutting edge 30-minute, 3-D computer-animation series based on the Clone Wars that take place between Episode II ... and Episode III."
Sansweet described the look of the new series as "a melding of Asian anime with unique 3-D animation styling.
"
Primary production took place at the Lucasfilm Animation facility in Singapore.
According to another statement by Sansweet, "Lucasfilm Animation will be hiring a total of about 300 digital artists and others in both California and Singapore locations to produce not only the series but animated feature films in the years ahead."
He said about the series, "to get the series underway, Lucasfilm Animation has hired key production and creative talent to lead the development of its first animation project.
"
Sansweet has said that "a large component of the future of Star Wars and Lucasfilm is CGI animation."

Lucasfilm Animation used Autodesk software to animate both the film and the series.
The Maya 3D-modeling program was used to create the highly detailed worlds, characters and creatures.
Character designer Kilian Plunkett referred to the character designs from Genndy Tartakovsky's original 2003 Clone Wars series, and animators reviewed designs from the 2D series when creating the animation style.
Tartakovsky was not involved with the production, and criticized Lucas's decision to revisit the era.
In 2007, Rob Coleman divulged that one episode was complete, with 15 more in production, and that he was going to direct five of the first 22 episodes.
He revealed that the reaction from licensees was very positive, and that the final assembly of shows was done at Skywalker Ranch.

Speaking at PaleyFest on March 3, 2007, Lucas revealed that the series would be episodic, and as such would not focus on Anakin Skywalker's story; with episodes dedicated to clone troopers and other characters.
Lucas revealed further information in a fan interview, including a new character named Ahsoka Tano, over 100 episodes and a possible appearance by Boba Fett.
The first trailer for the series was released on the official Star Wars website on May 8, 2007.
In an interview in the September 24, 2007 issue of TV Guide, Lucas confirmed that 39 episodes of the series had been completed.
On April 8, 2007, Ain't It Cool News reported that musician Eric Rigler had recorded music for the series.
Rigler disclosed that each planet in the Star Wars galaxy would have its own theme music.
The episode Mr. Rigler performed on was based on Bulgarian music and played on Uilleann pipes.
Kevin Kiner composed the original score for each episode.

Stuart Snyder, who oversaw Cartoon Network and other Turner Broadcasting System cable networks from 2007 to 2014, said he became interested in the new Clone Wars series immediately upon starting the job in May 2007.
Snyder flew out to San Francisco, California to screen several episodes, and told Lucas the only place he wanted to see the show was on Cartoon Network.
Snyder wished to create an action/adventure block of shows on Friday night in an attempt to rejuvenate Cartoon Network.
Snyder expressed confidence that the shows would help boost ratings: "You catch me at a time where I have a smile on my face because of our internal results.
I can say there's a little bit of bragging on the third quarter for us.
"The
"Young Padawans" arc from Season 5 was intended to be aired separately from The Clone Wars as a feature-length pilot for a spin-off series that never materialized.
Seasons 6, 7, and 8, were in some form of production at the time of the show's cancellation in March 2013, shortly after Lucasfilm was purchased by Disney.

==
Release ==
An online comic released alongside the series depicts story snippets between episodes.

=== Broadcast ===
On August 31, 2008, a sneak peek of The Clone Wars was shown on Cartoon Network.
The series premiered on October 3, 2008, at 9 p.m. on Cartoon Network.
The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network is shown in a 16:9 (1.77:1) aspect ratio, cropped from its original aspect ratio (OAR) of 2.35:1 (as seen in the UK Sky Premiere screenings).
The show began airing on their Adult Swim block on March 14, 2009, making the series the first Cartoon Network series to simultaneously air on both Cartoon Network and Adult Swim.
The series also aired from January 15 to March 26, 2009 on TNT, making it the first form of animation to air on that channel in over a decade.
The show entered an off-network syndication in 2012, and in the fall of that year Trifecta Entertainment & Media put it into barter syndication.
on Weekends It aired on many affiliates on the Independent Stations as well as an affiliates of Fox MyNetworkTV and The CW
(the latter network's CW Plus service also carries the program as part of its national schedule).
The show has been taken off the air in off-network syndication since fall 2013 due to low costs and was not renewed for Season 2 in the 2013-2014 TV Season due to Disney's completed acquisitions of Lucasfilm Ltd In December 2012.

On March 11, 2013, it was announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down" to focus on the Star Wars sequel trilogy and a new series, Star Wars Rebels.
On February 13, 2014, Netflix announced that starting on March 7, 2014 they would begin the US distribution of the entire TV series, including some previously unreleased director's cuts, and the previously unaired new season dubbed "The Lost Missions".
The latter also became available for purchase on digital video stores, such as iTunes, in mid-2014.
The Netflix distribution of the series, along with the Blu-rays, included versions of some episodes with previously censored material.
One of the most well-known edits was the removal of the character Ventress kissing a clone after she had stabbed him with her lightsaber.
The show was removed from Netflix on April 7, 2019.
For the revival and final season, the remaining episodes of the series are exclusively available on Disney+.
The first episode for Season 7 was released on February 21, 2020, with the final episode being released on May 4 of the same year.

===
Home media ===
Warner Home Video distributed the videodisc releases of the first five seasons, while Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment handled the videodisc release of the sixth season as Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – The Lost Missions.

Apart from the season-by-season videodisc sets, there were also three special DVD releases consisting of four episodes from a particular season that reflected a certain story arc or theme:

A Galaxy Divided, an early DVD release of the series which included the four season 1 episodes ("Ambush", "Shadow of Malevolence", "Destroy Malevolence", "Downfall of a Droid")
Clone Commandos, another DVD compilation that includes episode five "Rookies" as well as episodes 19 through 21 ("Storm over Ryloth", "Innocents of Ryloth" and "Liberty on Ryloth").

Darth Maul Returns, a feature-length "director's cut" edited together from Season 4 episodes "Massacre", "Bounty", "Brothers" and "Revenge" and was initially available exclusively at Target.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
Although it began with mixed-to-positive reviews, the series achieved critical acclaim over time.
On July 11, 2008, television critics were shown a completed episode of the series.
The Hollywood Reporter's Live Feed blog called the footage "likely the most photo-realistic animated TV series ever produced.
"The
review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 67% of critics have given the first season a positive review based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 5.73/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "With an agreeably entertaining first season, Star Wars: The Clone Wars opens a fun, kid-friendly chapter of the franchise's sprawling mythology."
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100 based on 9 critic reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
According to Rotten Tomatoes, 100% of critics have given the third and fifth seasons a positive review based on 5 reviews each, with an average rating of 8/10 and 7.85/10 respectively; 100% of critics have given the sixth season a positive review based on 12 reviews, with an average rating of 8.92/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "Sophisticated storytelling and quality animation make the sixth season of Star Wars
: The Clone Wars a fitting end to the series.
"
In 2009, IGN named The Clone Wars the 89th best animated series, specifically praising the episodes "Rookies", "Cloak of Darkness", and "Lair of Grievous" as having some of the best storylines in the Star Wars Expanded Universe.
According to Rotten Tomatoes, 100% of critics have given the seventh season a positive review based on 24 reviews, with an average rating of 8.43/10.
The site's critics consensus reads, "
Thanks to its beautifully animated action-sequences and its impressively layered storytelling, The Clone Wars' final chapter affirms its place as one of Star Wars' greatest entries.
"

===
Ratings ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars became the most-watched series premiere in Cartoon Network history.
The series averaged 3 million total viewers in its debut, according to Nielsen Media Research.
Cartoon Network said the Star Wars spin-off ranked as the number one channel among all major animated networks in the time slot among total viewers (the largest in the demographic for any premiere telecast of an original Cartoon series).
On July 23, 2010, at the San Diego Comic-Con, Craig Glenday, editor of the Guinness World Records, presented Star Wars: The Clone Wars supervising director Dave Filoni, CG supervisor Joel Aron, and lead designer Kilian Plunkett a certificate proclaiming the cartoon series "the highest rated sci-fi animation currently on television".
Tech Times said that, "while the Star Wars prequel films fail to make audiences care about characters like Anakin Skywalker, The Clone Wars succeeds.
"
During May 2020, following the release of the seventh season on Disney+, The Clone Wars became the most streamed digital original show in the United States.

=== Accolades ===


==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, 65 more episodes were in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6: The Lost Missions, but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, StarWars.com released details of three story arcs from the unfinished episodes.

===
Literature ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events from the season 5 episode "The Lawless", detailing his escape from Sidious; Maul regains control of the criminal Shadow Collective, and battles Dooku, Grievous, and Sidious.
The arc was adapted into a four-part limited comic book series, Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, which debuted in May 2014.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Nightsister Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into Dark Disciple, a novel by Christie Golden released on July 7, 2015.
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.

===
Story reels ===
Two arcs consisting each of four episodes were released on the official Star Wars website for free in the form of complete animatics, albeit with unfinished animation as those episodes only went through the earliest stages of production.
Both were fully voiced by the cast.

====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released on the official Star Wars website.
The arc took place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a Kyber crystal.
The arc also dealt with Anakin's feelings after the departure of Ahsoka.
It was also included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The unfinished animatics for The Bad Batch, a four-episode arc, were screened at the Star Wars Celebration convention in Anaheim, California on April 17, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, it is a four-part story arc focusing on a ragtag unit of clone commandos of the same name.
The arc was subsequently released on StarWars.com for free shortly after on April 29, 2015.
The completed episodes were aired as the first part of the seventh season.
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone War.
The Bad Batch comes out May 4th 2021.
(
https://www.ign.com/articles/star-wars-the-bad-batch-release-date-time-schedule-disney-plus)


== Video games ==
Seven video games have been released, which are based on the style and character designs of the series.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels, a fighting game released on November 11, 2008 for Wii.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance, an action-adventure game released on November 11, 2008 for Nintendo DS.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes, another action-adventure game taking place between Season 1 and Season 2, released on October 9, 2009 for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS.

Clone Wars Adventures, an online PC game launched on September 15, 2010 online by Sony Online Entertainment and shut down on March 31, 2014.

Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars, released in March 2011 by TT Games for PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, PC, Mac, and Nintendo 3DS, which further stylizes the characters as part of the Lego Star Wars theme and is mostly based on the first two seasons.

Star Wars:
The Clone Wars Pinball, a virtual pinball adaptation of the series' original run, released in 2013 as a purchaseable add-on for Zen Studios' Star Wars Pinball collection for most seventh- and eighth-generation home video game systems, computers and mobile devices.

Disney Infinity 3.0, released in September 2015 by Disney Interactive for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3, Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U, Microsoft Windows, iOS and Android, which stylizes select major characters from the show as action figures that become playable only via a toys-to-life NFC system.
Each copy of the game comes with the playset, "Twilight of the Republic", which is an alternate storyline set during the Clone Wars era, along with two starting characters, Anakin and Ahsoka.
Other characters from the show also appear, although most of them are not playable or are fought as bosses.
Characters and locations from the show have also appeared in the following Star Wars games:
Star Wars: Galactic Defense, a now-defunct tower defense game released on iOS and Android by DeNA, in which a number of playable champions include characters from the show.
Several levels in the main campaign also take place on the planet Felucia, a major Clone Wars hotspot featured in some episodes.

Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes, a turn-based RPG also released on iOS and Android by Electronic Arts, where some levels take place on planets depicted in the show (such as Dathomir) and a number of collectible, playable characters are from the show.

Star Wars:
Force Arena, an online MOBA game released on iOS and Android by Netmarble, where an August 2017 update allowed players to recruit characters, vehicles and battle units from the series, as well as battle on planets like Felucia.

Star Wars Battlefront II, a video game available on Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4 and Xbox One, in which players can battle on or directly above planets like Ryloth and Kamino, where some battles in the series were fought.
Wood, Taylor, Lanter and Burton also reprise their voice roles for four new playable heroes (General Grievous, Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker and Count Dooku, respectively) being added to the game's third season in late 2018, themed after the Clone Wars.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at StarWars.com
The Clone Wars Legacy at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at The Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Endor (designated: IX3244-A) is a fictional moon in the Star Wars universe, known for its endless forests, savannahs, grasslands, mountain ranges, and a few oceans.
The moon was the site of a pivotal battle depicted in Return of the Jedi.
Homeworld of the sentient Dulok, Ewok, and Yuzzum species, as well as the semi-sentient Gorax and Wistie species.
The Endor solar cycle was 402 GSC days orbital, with a breathable earth-like atmosphere conducive for humans and 8% surface water.
It is where Darth Vader's funeral was held.

The moon orbits Tana—
the Ewokese word for Endor's host planet—a gas giant located in the Endor system, a star system positioned in the Moddell sector of the galaxy's Outer Rim Territories.
Located in grid square H-16 on the Standard Galactic Grid, it was connected to Cerea and Bakura by a hyperspace route.
The planet was orbited by nine moons, the largest of which was known as the Forest Moon of Endor or "Sanctuary Moon".
The ocean moon of Kef Bir was also one of these moons, and is the location where the second Death Star crashed after it exploded over Endor in Return of the Jedi.
It also had two suns:
Endor Prime I and Endor Prime II.
==
Description ==
The Forest Moon of Endor first appears in Return of the Jedi, in which it is the body in whose orbit the second Death Star is constructed, and is the home of a race of furry aliens called Ewoks.
The moon later appears in the original Star Tours Disney theme park attraction, Ewok TV movies
The Ewok Adventure and Ewoks:
The Battle for Endor, as well as the animated Ewoks and its Marvel Comics tie-in series.

Various descriptions of the Endor system exist in various media.
Special effects storyboards for Return of the Jedi
refer to a distant orb in the system as "Planet Endor".
According to the Return of the Jedi novelization, the planet disappeared in an ancient cataclysm.
The Ewok television films depict a gas giant in the sky, and novels such as The Truce at Bakura and Dark Apprentice also mention a planet visible from the moon.
The planet is called "Tana" in the Ewoks animated series, which depicts a binary star system (while other sources depict only one sun).
According to the Star Wars Databank, this "can be attributed to Ewok lore and myth".
In a Star Wars Tales comic entitled Apocalypse Endor, an Imperial veteran of Endor refers to the moon being devastated by the impact of falling debris from the Death Star, which was blown up while in orbit around the moon.
However, another character dismisses this as a myth, saying that most of the Death Star's mass was obliterated in the explosion, and that the Rebels "took care of the rest".
The Rise of Skywalker depicts the wreckage of the second Death Star in a watery location, named Kef Bir, an ocean moon featured in the film that orbits the same gas giant as the forest moon.
Wicket W. Warrick and his son Pommet appear briefly at the end of The Rise of Skywalker, at the sky after the destruction of a Resurgent-class Star Destroyer.

==
Filming ==
Scenes set on Endor were filmed on private logging company land that was shortly thereafter clearcut near the town of Smith River, California; the speeder chase scene was filmed at the Chetham Grove section of Grizzly Creek Redwoods State Park.
near the "Avenue of the Giants" in Humboldt Redwoods State Park.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Cavelos, Jeanne (2007).
The Science of Star Wars:
An Astrophysicist's Independent Examination of Space Travel, Aliens, Planets, and Robots as Portrayed in the Star Wars Films and Books.
Macmillan.
pp.
29–32.
ISBN 978-1-4299-7176-8.
==
External links ==
Endor at the Star Wars Databank
Endor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Endor 'Holocaust' at Star Wars Technical Commentaries
Angry Birds Star Wars II was a puzzle video game, a crossover between Star Wars and the Angry Birds series, that was released on September 18, 2013.
The game is the eighth Angry Birds game and the second where players can play as pigs (the first is the original game in King Pig Mode), developed by Rovio Entertainment.
The game is a prequel to Angry Birds Star Wars and is based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy, as well as the television show Star Wars Rebels.
Angry Birds Star Wars II was discontinued on February 3, 2020 along with Angry Birds Star Wars and Angry Birds Rio.
==
Gameplay ==
In Angry Birds Star Wars II, players must destroy targets fortified in or out of their created fortresses including various bosses, depending on the side they are in (Bird or Pork side).
Players also earn up to 3 stars, as of other games in the series.
The game features over 56 playable characters.
The game differs from the other Angry Birds games because the player can summon a specific bird/pig instead of the pre-determined selection.
This summoning can be done to replace each bird/pig.

===
Telepods ===
The game is compatible with Hasbro Telepod technology, which is similar in concept to the "Portal of Power" from the Skylanders video game series, allowing the player to summon a specific character into the game via its QR code; this summon is once per level, but the player can use multiple Telepod summons per level.
Each Telepod can be used on up to 15 separate devices and one must rescan the Telepod to get access to the particular bird/pig if the game is fully closed.

As of December 2013, Hasbro has sold over 1 million Angry Birds Star Wars II Telepods, like Darth Vader, Yoda, General Grievous, C-3PO, and more.
===
Shop ===
The player can via in-app purchase or through achievement rewards, have the use of certain birds or pigs during gameplay.
With the Rise of the Clones following up with the Revenge of the Pork and the TV show Rebels update, the former Watto's shop, which was a separate area of the game to buy usable birds/pigs, was removed and was merged within the character swap menu.

==
Characters ==
In Angry Birds Star Wars II, birds and pigs play the roles of characters from the Star Wars prequel trilogy.
Characters from the original trilogy and the television show Star Wars Rebels also make appearances in bird/pig form.
In official books and annuals, characters' names are changed to fit whether they are portrayed by bird or pig.
(
e.g. Boba Fett becomes Boba Fatt).

==
Release ==
The game was released on September 18, 2013.
PC and Mac
OS X versions of the game were announced and the Windows PC version was released on October 24.
The Mac version's release plan was discontinued, and on November 13, 2014, the Windows PC version was no longer available for purchase or download and will not be updated.

== Reception ==
The game has received generally favorable reviews with a Metacritic score of 77/100 based on 24 reviews.
While the game continues the gameplay of its predecessor with fun new ideas, some reviewers have noted that the increase in the number of playable characters may make the levels unbalanced due to characters having different powers.
Some reviewers did not like the numerous microtransactions but found the game fun.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed is an action-adventure game developed by LucasArts and part of The Force
Unleashed  multimedia project.
It was initially developed for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Wii, and Xbox 360 consoles and on iOS, second-generation N-Gage, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, and Java-equipped mobile phone handhelds.
The game was released in North America on September 16, 2008, in Australia and Southeast Asia on September 17, and in Europe on September 19.
LucasArts released downloadable content for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles.
An Ultimate Sith Edition of the game, containing both new and previously released downloadable content, was released in November 2009, and later ported to the macOS and Microsoft Windows.

The project bridges
the first two Star Wars trilogies, acting as an origin story for both the united Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Civil War depicted in the original trilogy.
The game introduces a new protagonist named "Starkiller", a powerful Force user trained as Darth Vader's secret apprentice, who is tasked with hunting down Jedi survivors of the Great Jedi Purge while trying to keep his existence a secret.
However, after he is tasked with planting the seeds of what would become the Rebel Alliance, which Vader plans to take advantage of to overthrow the Emperor, Starkiller begins to question his own morality and to slowly redeem himself.
Following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in 2012, the game became part of the non-canonical Star Wars Expanded Universe (also known as Star Wars Legends), and an alternative origin for the Rebel Alliance and the Galactic Civil War was given in other pieces of Star Wars media.

Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed received generally mixed to positive reviews from critics, with praise for its story, voice acting, physics, art and soundtrack, but criticism for its linear gameplay and technical issues.
The game was a bestseller in the United States and Australia, with over one million copies sold its debut month.
As of February 2010, the game had sold over seven million copies, and was the fastest-selling Star Wars video game of its time.
A sequel, Star Wars: The Force Unleashed II, was released in October 2010.

==
Gameplay ==
The Force Unleashed is a third-person action game in which the player's character's weapons are the Force and a lightsaber.
Developers treated the main character's lightsaber like another Force power, and wanted to ensure "something visceral and cool" happened with each button-push.
The game has a combo system for stringing lightsaber attacks and for combining lightsaber attacks with Force powers.
Experience points earned by killing enemies and finding artifacts can be used to increase Starkiller's powers and traits.
The gameplay is intended to be easy to learn; the development team included "horrible" gamers to help ensure the game's accessibility.
Players can casually run and gun through the game, but the game rewards those who take a stealthy, more tactical approach.
The game includes enemies that are easy to overcome; game difficulty arises from presenting these enemies in large numbers that can wear down the player's character.
Additionally, enemies learn from the player's character's attacks; using the same attack on different characters can sometimes lead to the player's character doing less damage.
The enemies, which number over 50, have various strengths and weaknesses; developers faced the difficulty of effectively placing them throughout the game's varied environments.

===
Version differences ===
The Force Unleashed has different features across platforms.

The PlayStation 3 and Xbox
360 versions, powered by the Ronin engine, utilize high-definition graphics and advanced dynamic destruction effects.

These versions also support downloadable content in the form of two expansions that expand upon the game's plot.

The Nintendo versions use motion controls to implement Starkiller's attacks, with the Wii version using the Wii Remote to execute lightsaber attacks and the Nunchuk to wield Force powers, while the Nintendo DS version utilizes the touchscreen to execute attacks, where single actions can be executed by tapping a certain region of the screen (with each region corresponding to a particular action, such as jumping or Force pushing), while more advanced attacks can be performed by dragging the stylus across neighboring regions of the screen.
The PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions are identical in content to the Wii version, which is different than the PS3 and Xbox 360 version due to these three systems lacking their horsepower.

Since these versions do not support or use downloadable content, they exclusively intersperse certain levels with three of the five Jedi trials that Starkiller completes at the Jedi temple in Coruscant to further hone his abilities, which are all included in a DLC pack for the PS3 and Xbox
360 versions.

The PSP version also exclusively features five additional "historical" bonus levels that re-enact pivotal scenes and duels throughout the Star Wars saga, as well as special scenarios that can be played with as different Star Wars characters who have the same abilities in the standard single-player mode.

The Nintendo DS version utilizes 3-D graphics like all other major versions, but lacks voice acting.

The Wii and handheld versions support multiplayer.

Two players duel against each other as famous Jedi and Sith in the Star Wars saga in the Wii version, while the handheld versions utilize wireless multiplayer for a four-player battle mode.

==
Plot ==
The game begins shortly after Revenge of the Sith, during the highest point of the Galactic Empire's rule.
After Imperial spies track down a Jedi survivor of the Great Purge named Kento Marek on the planet Kashyyyk, Darth Vader personally leads the search for him while overseeing the Imperial invasion of the planet.
During the first level, players control Vader as he fights his way through Wookiees to reach Marek, eventually finding and defeating him.
Before Vader can murder him, Marek's son Galen grabs his lightsaber with the Force.
Realizing the boy's strong connection to the Force, Vader finishes off Marek and takes Galen with him, raising him to become his apprentice, unbeknownst to the Emperor.

Years later, after Galen (given the alias "Starkiller" by Vader) reaches adulthood and completes his training, he is sent by his master to eliminate a select group of Jedi survivors across the galaxy as a final test to prepare him for Vader's ultimate goal: assassinating the Emperor so that Vader and Starkiller could rule the galaxy together.
Starkiller travels between missions aboard his personal ship, the Rogue Shadow, developing a close relationship with his crew:
lightsaber training droid PROXY (who is programmed to regularly attack him) and Imperial pilot Juno Eclipse.
Starkiller's targets include Rahm Kota, a Clone Wars veteran and leader of a small militia, who attacks a TIE fighter shipyard above Nar Shaadda to lure out Vader; Kazdan Paratus, who became insane after years of isolation on Raxus Prime; and Shaak Ti, who is hiding out on Felucia.
Before she dies, Shaak Ti warns Starkiller that he will eventually be betrayed.
Once all the Jedi have been killed, Vader brings Starkiller before the Emperor, only to swiftly impale him and hurl him through a window into space to prove his loyalty to his master.
Unbeknownst to the Emperor, Vader has Starkiller rescued and resuscitated, believing his apprentice still has his uses.

Vader sends Starkiller to foster a rebellion among the Empire's enemies, as part of his master plan to destabilize the Empire and create the proper conditions to depose the Emperor.
Although Vader orders him to cut his ties to his past, Starkiller rescues Juno, who was arrested and branded a traitor to the Empire, and escapes with her and PROXY.
Looking for allies to aid his mission, Starkiller approaches Kota on Cloud City, who survived their previous encounter, but was blinded and reduced to alcoholism, and rescues him from Imperial forces and an Emperor's Shadow Guard.
The group then travels to Kashyyyk to rescue Princess Leia Organa, who was arrested by the Empire, but Starkiller temporarily abandons his quest to visit his old home, where he meets his father's spirit and discovers his true identity  After liberating the enslaved Wookiees and killing Captain Ozzik Sturn, Starkiller earns Leia's gratitude, who agrees to join the rebellion.
Afterward, learning Leia's adoptive father, Senator Bail Organa, went missing on Felucia, Starkiller goes to find him, discovering Organa was captured by Shaak Ti's former apprentice Maris Brood, who, like the other inhabitants, succumbed to the Dark Side after her master's death.
After defeating Brood and her pet Bull Rancor, Starkiller spares her life and convinces Organa to join the rebellion.

To convince more senators to do the same, Vader suggests that Starkiller attack a Star Destroyer facility on Raxus Prime to show that the Empire is vulnerable.
Juno learns Starkiller is still working for Vader and chastises him, but agrees to keep silent.
During his mission, Starkiller is attacked by PROXY, who attempts to fulfill his programming by killing him, but Starkiller defeats him, destroys the facility, and pulls a Star Destroyer out of the sky using the Force .
Following this, Organa meets with fellow senators Mon Mothma and Garm Bel Iblis on Corellia to formally organize a rebellion, only for Vader to come and arrest them and Kota.
After overpowering Starkiller, Vader explains that he was merely a tool to lure out and destroy the Empire's enemies, and that his plans to overthrow the Emperor never included him.

Surviving thanks to PROXY sacrificing himself to distract Vader, Starkiller vows to rescue the senators and Kota, and uses the Force to ascertain their location: the Death Star.
After sharing a goodbye kiss with Juno, Starkiller battles his way through the station to reach the Emperor's throne room.
Vader confronts him on the way there, but Starkiller defeats him and faces the Emperor, who tries to goad him into finishing off his former master so Starkiller can take his place.
While the Emperor is distracted, Kota steals the Emperor's lightsaber and tries to attack him from behind, but is subdued with Force lightning.
At this point, the player must choose between saving Kota (Light Side) or killing Vader (Dark Side).

If the player chooses the Light Side, Starkiller defeats the Emperor, but spares him at Kota's urging.
The Emperor unleashes more Force lightning, but Starkiller absorbs it, sacrificing himself to allow Kota and the senators escape on the Rogue Shadow.
Later, the Emperor and Vader look over Starkiller's corpse, concerned that he has become a martyr to inspire the newly formed Rebel Alliance.
On Kashyyyk, the senators decide to proceed with the rebellion and Leia chooses Starkiller's family crest as their symbol.
Outside, Juno talks to Kota, who tells her that among Starkiller's dark thoughts, Juno herself was one bright spot that he held onto right until his death.
This is the canonical ending of the game, as confirmed by its novelization.

If the player chooses the Dark Side, Starkiller finishes off Vader and is congratulated by the Emperor, who commands him to kill Kota to sever his ties to the Jedi and become a Sith Lord.
Instead, Starkiller attacks the Emperor, who blocks the attack and crushes him with the Rogue Shadow, severely injuring Starkiller and killing Juno, Kota, and the senators.
Starkiller later awakens to find his broken body being grafted with armor so that he could continue serving the Emperor, though he assures Starkiller that he, like Vader, will be replaced once he finds a new, more promising apprentice.

===
Downloadable content ===
Three downloadable content (DLC) levels for the game were released.
The first one is set during the events of the main story and explores more of Starkiller's background, while the second and third ones expand upon the non-canonical Dark Side of the game, taking place in their own alternate timeline.
In the Coruscant level, Starkiller, at some point before traveling to Kashyyyk, decides to visit the abandoned Jedi Temple to learn more about his identity and connection to the Force.
After fighting his way past the Imperial security forces, he reaches the old Council Chambers, where Kento Marek's spirit appears before him and tells him that he needs to pass the Jedi trials of mind, body, and spirit.
Upon doing so, Starkiller is faced with a mysterious Sith warrior, revealed to be a dark reflection of himself created by his own fear.
Following his defeat, Starkiller finds a holocron left by Marek, who reveals himself as his father and tells him it's not too late to return to the light side.
Having finally received the closure he sought, Starkiller returns to the Rogue Shadow to resume his current mission.

The Tatooine and Hoth levels are set during alternate depictions of A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back, respectively, and present Starkiller as the Emperor's trusted assassin, referred to as "Lord Starkiller".
In the Tatooine mission, called A Fragile Hope, he is tasked with retrieving the Death Star plans stolen by the Rebel Alliance, which have been tracked to Tatooine.
He decides to visit Jabba the Hutt, who has knowledge on the plans' whereabouts, revealing they are in the possession of two droids at Mos Eisley.
However, when Starkiller refuses to work for him, Jabba tries to have him be eaten by his rancor.
Killing the beast, Starkiller escapes from Jabba's palace after massacring his men, including Boba Fett.
At Mos Eisley, Starkiller kills Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi after a duel that allows the droids to board the Millennium Falcon, though Starkiller manages to place a tracking device on the ship before it takes off.
In the Hoth mission, called Wrath of the Empire, Starkiller partakes in the Battle of Hoth, where the Empire attacks the weakened Rebel Alliance's base on Hoth to crush it once and for all.
During the battle, Starkiller infiltrates the base with special orders to capture Luke Skywalker, who began training as a Jedi.
He eventually finds and defeats Skywalker in the base's hangar, severing his right hand.
When the Falcon tries to take off, Starkiller seizes the ship with the Force while goading Skywalker to give into the Dark Side to rescue his friends.
Skywalker attacks Starkiller with Force lightning, causing him to let go of the ship and congratulate Skywalker for embracing the Dark Side, planning to make him his apprentice the same way Vader did to him.

== Cast and characters ==
Sam Witwer as Galen Marek/Starkiller — The forbidden child of a Jedi, Starkiller was adopted by his father's killer, Darth Vader, who, aware of his strong connection to the Force, raised him to be his secret apprentice.
Once his training is complete, Starkiller is dispatched by his master to kill several prominent Jedi who survived the Great Jedi Purge.
Although initially acting as a villain, Starkiller is "really just [a] damaged kid."
Developers decided not to give Starkiller a name in the game, but the novelization reveals his real name as "Galen Marek".
Although Starkiller starts as Vader's apprentice, a focus of the game is to allow the character to evolve into "something more heroic, something greater."
Audio director David Collins saw a resemblance between Starkiller concept art and his friend, Witwer; Collins asked for Witwer's headshot and an audition reel, and a few weeks later Witwer sat for a 45-minute audition.
Witwer secured the role by demonstrating to developers his deep understanding of the character; in portraying Starkiller, Witwer brought many new ideas about the character and imbued him with a sense of humanity.
Developers tried not to make Starkiller so evil that players would have difficulty connecting to him, aiming to strike a balance between loyalty to his master and his growing sense of disillusionment with the Empire.
The character's name is an homage to "Anakin Starkiller," the original name of the character that eventually became Luke Skywalker.

Matt Sloan as Darth Vader — A powerful Dark Lord of the Sith, high-ranking enforcer of the Empire, and Starkiller's master, who discovers Starkiller as a child and trains him.
In training Starkiller by having him hunt the few remaining Jedi survivors, Vader intends to prepare him to overthrow the Emperor, although there are "twists and turns" in this scheme.
The events depicted in The Force Unleashed are pivotal to Darth Vader's history and development, depicting him as being largely responsible for the events leading to the Galactic Civil War, depicted in the original Star Wars trilogy.

Nathalie Cox as Juno Eclipse — Rogue Shadow’s pilot and Starkiller's love interest.
Eclipse was not originally part of the game; early concepts had the apprentice as an older character who develops a connection with a young Princess Leia.
Star Wars creator George Lucas, uncomfortable with this idea, encouraged the developers to create a love interest.
The apprentice, who has had limited interaction with women when the game begins, does not at first know how to act around her.
Her introduction early in the game allows the relationship with Starkiller to develop, and her inclusion helps "recapture that rich ensemble feel of the original Star Wars".
According to Sean Williams, who wrote the novelization, the romantic storyline is the key to The Force Unleashed.
The name "Juno Eclipse" was originally proposed as a name for the character eventually called "Asajj Ventress" — it was ultimately rejected as insufficiently villainous.
The Force Unleashed project lead
Haden Blackman brought the name back for the mythic quality of the name "Juno" and the duality suggested by an "eclipse."
Cox, in addition to strongly resembling the character's concept art, had "integrity and poise" appropriate to Juno Eclipse that helped the actor secure the role.

Cully Fredricksen as General Rahm Kota —
A Jedi Master and Clone Wars veteran who provides Starkiller with additional insight into the Force and helps connect him to his Jedi heritage.
Developers realized early that Starkiller would require insight into the Force from someone other than Darth Vader; after rejecting the idea of this coming from the spirit of Qui-Gon Jinn or some version of Darth Plagueis, they decided to fill this role with one of Starkiller's Jedi opponents.
The character was conceived as a "tough-as-nails" contrast to the more traditional image of a Jedi represented by Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Senior concept artist Amy Beth Christianson drew upon samurai influences for Kota's appearance.
The character changed little after being conceived; Fredricksen's own traits made the character tougher.
Fredricksen was the first actor cast for the project.

Adrienne Wilkinson as Maris Brood —
A Zabrak survivor of the Jedi Purge and Shaak Ti's apprentice.
After her master's death at Starkiller's hands, Brood falls to the dark side and uses Felucia's inhabitants to wage war on the Imperial forces trying to occupy the planet.
The character was originally conceived as a pirate captain, and Christianson's early art included Brood's distinctive lightsaber tonfas.
Wilkinson brought strength to her performance, leading to an expansion of the role with more dialogue.

David W. Collins as PROXY — Starkiller's droid sidekick,
designed to constantly test his lightsaber and Force abilities, as well as deliver important messages through holographic projection.
Collins said PROXY has C-3PO's innocence but also is "really dangerous."
The companion trade paperback describes the conflict between PROXY's primary programming to kill Starkiller and its self-imposed desire to help him; PROXY is eager to please Starkiller, but does not know how dangerous it can be or that there is a conflict between its programming and Starkiller's wishes.
Trying to avoid having PROXY's dialogue become too reminiscent of either C-3PO or the villainous HK-47 of Knights of the Old Republic, developers focused on PROXY's friendly naïvety.

Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa —
The Emmy Award-winning Smits voices the character he played in the Star Wars prequels: a Galactic Senator from Alderaan and Princess Leia's adoptive father who becomes a founding member of the Rebel Alliance.
Other performances include Tom Kane as Kento Marek and Captain Ozzik Sturn, Larry Drake as Kazdan Paratus, Susan Eisenberg as Shaak Ti, and Catherine Taber as Princess Leia Organa.
In addition to voicing Starkiller, Witwer also provided the voice of Emperor Palpatine.
R2-D2 also makes an appearance in the game alongside Leia.
The game's downloadable content features David W. Collins as Jabba the Hutt, Dee Bradley Baker as Boba Fett, Rob Rackstraw as Obi-Wan Kenobi, and Lloyd Floyd as Luke Skywalker.

==
Development ==


===
Concept ===
Game planning began in summer 2004.
Initially, about six developers started with a "clean slate" to conceptualize a new Star Wars game; the small group of engineers, artists, and designers spent more than a year brainstorming ideas for what might make a good game.
Over 100 initial concepts were whittled down to 20 to 25 that included making the game the third entry in the Knights of the Old Republic series or having the protagonist be a Wookiee "superhero", Darth Maul, a bounty hunter, a smuggler, a mercenary, or the last member of the Skywalker family.
The decision to focus on the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope helped energize the design team.
Consumer feedback helped the developers narrow in on seven concepts, and elements from those seven went into The Force Unleashed's overall concept.
Production was greatly aided by concept art, which was intended to visually bridge the two Star Wars trilogies, convey the impression of a "lived-in" universe, show how the galaxy changes under Imperial rule, and to seem familiar yet new.
An off-hand comment about the Force in the game being powerful enough "to pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky" inspired an image by senior concept artist Amy Beth Christenson that became an important part of the developers' idea pitches and evolved into a major moment in the game.
These illustrations also inspired the creation of dozens of simple, three-dimensional animations.
Eventually, a one-minute previsualization video highlighting the idea of "kicking someone's ass with the Force" helped convince the designers that The Force Unleashed would be "a great game";
George Lucas, upon seeing the one-minute video, told the designers to "go make that game".
Once the concept was solidified, the development team grew from ten to twenty people.
The idea of "reimagining" the Force as "amped up" in The Force Unleashed aligned with LucasArts' overall goal of harnessing the power of the latest video game consoles to "dramatically" change gaming, specifically through the use of simulation-based gameplay.

=== Story ===
In April 2005, after several months of planning, the LucasArts team received Lucas' encouragement to create a game centered on Darth Vader's secret apprentice in the largely unexplored period between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope,  drawing the two trilogies together.
LucasArts spent six months developing the story.
Lucas spent hours discussing with the developers the relationship between Darth Vader and Emperor Palpatine and provided feedback on what Vader would want out of and how he would motivate an apprentice.
Lucas Licensing reviewed many game details to ensure they fit into canon.
Focus group feedback indicated that, while hunting down Jedi at Vader's order would be fun, the character should be redeemed, in keeping with a major Star Wars motif.
Although the game introduces new characters, developers felt the presence of characters already part of Star Wars would help anchor the game within the official continuity.
Before the game's release, Lucasfilm claimed it would "unveil new revelations about the Star Wars galaxy" with a "redemption" motif.
The story progresses through a combination of scripted events, in-game cinematics, cutscenes, and dialogue.

===
Technology ===
During pre-production, about 30 people were on the project team.
LucasArts spent several years developing the tools and technology to create The Force Unleashed.
Prototyping, level construction, marketing, and public relations took about a year.
Until late 2006, the production team was ascertaining "how many polygons, lights, [and] characters" next-generation platforms supported; a year of full production began in early 2007.
A series of quickly-produced "play blast
" videos helped the developers focus on mechanics, the user interface, and finishing moves.
Development of the Xbox 360 version came first; PlayStation 3 development started when the production team had enough development kits.
Making the game run on both the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 was "a monumental task".
The game is based on LucasArts' proprietary "Ronin" game engine but also integrates third-party technology
: Havok for rigid body physics, Pixelux Entertainment's "Digital Molecular Matter" (DMM) for dynamically destructible objects, and NaturalMotion's Euphoria for realistic non-player character artificial intelligence.
LucasArts' programmers had to overcome technical hurdles to get
Havok-,
DMM- and Euphoria-coded components to interact.
Developers also had to strike a balance between realistic and entertaining physics.
LucasArts initially opted not to release a personal computer version of The Force Unleashed, stating that doing the game well would be too processor-intensive for typical PCs and that scaling down the game's procedural physics for the PC platform would "fundamentally" change The Force Unleashed's gameplay.
However, LucasArts later announced Windows and Mac versions of the game, developed in conjunction with Aspyr Media, for release in
Fall 2009.Lacking Havok, Euphoria, and DMM, Krome's Wii version relies on the company's in-house physics engine.
Some character animations may be ragdoll while others are preset; in developing the game, Krome tried to blur the distinction between the two.
The lighting system in the Wii version is more advanced than that in the PS2 version, which Krome also built; the PS2 includes more graphic details than their PSP version.

===
ILM collaboration and cast performance ===
The Force Unleashed is intended to make players think they are "actually, finally, in a Star Wars movie".
It is the first game on which LucasArts and Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) collaborated since they both relocated to the Letterman Digital Arts Center in San Francisco, California.
This collaboration allowed the companies to co-develop tools to make film-quality effects.
LucasArts worked with ILM's Zeno tool framework and helped ILM build its Zed game editor.
Lucas said having the two companies working together in the same building was "a great
collaboration".
It took Senior Manager of Voice and Audio Darragh O'Farrell four months to cast The Force Unleashed.
ILM's face- and motion-capture "CloneCam" technology recorded actors' voice and physical performances.
This led to a change in LucasArts' casting process: for the first time, actors needed to match characters' age and gender.
Actors performed their lines together, rather than in isolation, to better get the sense of their characters interacting with each other.
Consequently, the script's dialogue was reduced while reliance on characters' expressions — captured through the CloneCam — increased.
CloneCam technology had previously been used in producing the Pirates of the Caribbean movies.

===
Music ===
LucasArts music supervisor Jesse Harlin said the music matches the game's motif of redemption and goal of bridging the gap between Revenge of the Sith and
A New Hope:
We had to make sure that the game's score started off rooted within the Prequel Trilogy feel of ethnic percussion and sweeping themes that spoke to the nobility and grandeur of the old Jedi Order.

As the game progresses, however, the Empire gains more control, the Jedi are hunted, and the ordered control of the Prequels gives way to the more romantic temperament of the Original Trilogy.

The game's soundtrack includes material composed by John Williams for the films in addition to material created specifically for The Force Unleashed.
Jesse Harlin composed the game's main theme, while Mark Griskey composed the score.
Griskey made use of several motifs from the film scores as well as Harlin's main theme.
The 90-minute soundtrack was recorded by the Skywalker Symphony Orchestra and mixed at Skywalker Sound in Lucas Valley in September and October 2007.
During gameplay, a proprietary engine combines "musical elements according to the pace, plot, and environment of the game at any given moment", resulting in a unique musical experience.
A promotional soundtrack album was made available online through Tracksounds.com in 2008.

===
Expansion ===
Two weeks after the game's release, LucasArts announced development on two downloadable expansion packs for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game.
The first expansion added "skins" that allow the player's character to appear as Star Wars figures other than Starkiller, such as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Anakin Skywalker, Qui-Gon Jinn, Jango Fett, C-3PO, Luke Skywalker, Darth Maul, Darth Sion, Mace Windu, Plo Koon, Kit Fisto and Ki-Adi-Mundi.
The skins chosen to be part of the expansion were based in part on fans' feedback.
The second expansion pack added a new mission that expands on Starkiller's background.
Although a moment in the game's main story was considered as a "jumping off point" for the expansion, LucasArts decided instead to make the new mission instantly accessible to players.
The mission's location — the Jedi Temple on Coruscant — appears in the Wii, PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable versions of The Force Unleashed, but was cut during planning from the PS3 and Xbox 360 platforms.
The Tatooine Downloadable Content, released August 27, 2009, is the first of two expansions that occur in an "Infinities" storyline, an alternate history in which Starkiller kills Vader and becomes Palpatine's assassin.
The second Infinities expansion, which takes place on Hoth, was originally only available as part of the Ultimate Sith Edition, which also includes all previous downloadable content.
However, the Hoth expansion was later made available for download on the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live.

== Reception ==
1.738 million unit sales of The Force Unleashed across all platforms
made it the third best-selling game globally in the third quarter of 2008; as of July 2009, it had sold six million copies.
The Force Unleashed was both the fastest-selling Star Wars game and LucasArts' fastest-selling game.
The Force Unleashed won a Writers Guild of America award for Best Video Game Writing.

===
PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and PC ===
The Force Unleashed received mixed to fairly positive reviews.
Electronic Gaming Monthly said the game is "ambitious--yet dissatisfying"; however, GameSpot said the game "gets more right than it does wrong".
GameSpot said the PC port of the game retained all of the game's strengths and weaknesses, but that the port failed to take advantage of the PC platform.
GameSpot called the game's story "more intimate and more powerful" than the Star Wars franchise's prequel trilogy; X-Play identified the game's story as one of the game's "few bright spots" and said the game's visuals successfully convey Star Wars' "classic used universe" feel.
GamePro and GameSpot praised the game's art and physics, and GamePro also commended Starkiller's "cool powers".
IGN praised the game's voice acting, particularly Witwer's performance as Starkiller.
The Washington Times identified Mark Griskey's soundtrack as "another star" of the game, and Tracksounds called it "the most entertaining Star Wars score since Return of the Jedi".
Time called The Force Unleashed the seventh best video game of 2008.
The game received GameSpot's 2008 award for Best Use of a Creative License and was nominated for Best Voice Acting.
Gaming Target selected the game as one of their "40 Games
We'll Still Be Playing From 2008".
Conversely, Entertainment Weekly called The Force Unleashed the second-worst game of 2008 and
GameTrailers called it the most disappointing game that year; it was also a nominee for GameSpot's Most Disappointing Game recognition.
Official Xbox Magazine cited the game's linear gameplay and lack of multiplayer as reasons the game falls short of being "an all-engrossing Star Wars experience".
gamesTM suggested that allowing players to take a hack-and-slash approach means many "will never view the title's full potential".
IGN and X-Play criticized some boss battles and enemies' behavior; GamePro also faulted "disappointing" boss battles and the game's "uneven" combat.
Rather than feeling more powerful as the game progresses, GamePro felt that increases in Starkiller's powers were dampened by increasingly difficult enemy abilities and positions; X-Play commented that despite a good level-up system, Starkiller and his enemies are "pretty much on even ground most of the time".
Wired.com, X-Play, and GameSpot criticized the game's third-person camera and the sequence that requires the player to make Starkiller pull a Star Destroyer out of the sky.
Wired.com speculated that LucasArts could have recognized the frustration of the Star Destroyer sequence and removed it, but left it in because they hyped the sequence before the game's release.
Wired.com and GameSpot further criticized the load times and abrupt gameplay-cinematic transitions.
GameSpot also faulted "loose" targeting and some visual and audio glitches.
IGN, which also identified problems with targeting, speculated that DMM's processor intensiveness limited its use throughout the game, detracting from players' ability to feel immersed.
GameTrailers and IGN were disappointed with the lack of variety within and between levels.
X-Play, pointing to "Default Text" as the bonus objective description in the Xbox 360 version's final mission and other glitches, said it seems the developers one day "just stopped working on the game".
GameSpot cited the port's lack of visual options and poor framerate as evidence the PC edition had been rushed.
IGN described the Jedi Academy expansion as "pretty decent".
GameSpot said LucasArts seems to have acknowledged some of the game's criticisms in developing the Tatooine expansion, but IGN called the  level's boss fights "a joke" in light of the player's high Force powers.
IGN found the level design in The Ultimate Sith Edition's Hoth scenario uninteresting, and called the boss fight against Luke Skywalker tough but "not nearly as fun" as it could have been.
The demo was the fourth most-played Xbox Live game during the week of August 25, trailing Grand Theft Auto IV, Halo 3, and Call of Duty 4: Modern Warfare; it was the ninth most-played Xbox Live title throughout all of 2008.
The week it was released, The Force Unleashed was the sixth most-played game on Xbox Live, and it rose to fifth the following week.
In its first week on sale in Australia, the PS3 and Xbox
360 versions of The Force Unleashed were the top and second-best sellers, respectively.
In the United States, the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 version sold 325,000 and 610,000 copies, respectively, in September 2008; that month, the Xbox 360 version was the best-selling game and the PlayStation 3 version was the fifth best-selling game for their respective consoles.

===
Other platforms ===
Nintendo Power praised the story and the number of lightsaber combos but criticized the game's easiness and hack-and-slash gameplay.
It also praised the Wii version for its story and Force powers, but criticized the game's lightsaber controls and linear gameplay.
GameSpot noticed visual glitches and problematic audio compression that detracted from the Wii version's "mature and exciting" story, adding that the reduced number of Force-manipulable objects helps mitigate the targeting problems experienced on other platforms.
Referring to the Wii remote and nunchuck controls, GameSpot also speculated that The Force Unleashed is "possibly the most waggle-heavy" Wii game.
Zero Punctuation criticized the Wii version's graphics and compared lightsaber combat to "trying to follow an aerobics routine with both your arms tied to different windmills".
The ability to upgrade Starkiller's abilities in the PS2 version, according to IGN, is not as "robust" as it should be, and the game's targeting system is sometimes frustrating.
IGN said the PS2's real-time cutscene rendering made Starkiller seem emotionless, and that pre-rendered cutscenes would have been better.
GameSpot found the DS version's plot interesting but the storytelling itself "lackluster".
While the DS version is easy, with Starkiller killing enemies "like a hot knife through butter", GameSpot said the player's sense of power is not matched by a sense of freedom.
GameSpot called the PSP version's camera "unwieldy", but added that smaller and less cluttered environments make the targeting system less frustrating than on other platforms.

The Wii version was a nominee for multiple Wii-specific awards from IGN in its 2008 video game awards, including Best Story and Best Voice Acting.
In the week of its release, the Wii version was the sixth bestselling game in Australia and was second to Wii Fit among games for that platform.
The PS2 version was the eighth bestseller in Australia, and both the PS2 and PSP versions were the top sellers on their respective platforms.
The DS version was eighth most sold among DS games in Australia.
In the United States, the Wii version sold 223,000 copies in September 2008, making it the ninth best-selling game that month.
In the United States, the PlayStation 2 version was the 14th best-selling game in September 2008, selling over 100,000 copies.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed at MobyGames
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed at IMDb
Yoda () is a fictional character in the Star Wars universe, first appearing in the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back.
He is a small, green humanoid alien who is powerful with the Force and served as Grandmaster of the Jedi Order.
In The Empire Strikes Back, Yoda was voiced and puppeteered by Frank Oz, who reprised the role in Return of the Jedi, the prequel trilogy, and the sequel trilogy.
Outside of the films, the character has been mainly voiced by Tom Kane, starting with the 2003 Clone Wars animated television series.
Yoda has since become an iconic figure in popular culture due to his distinct pattern of speech and role as a wise mentor.

In his first appearance in the original trilogy, Yoda is described as the mentor of Obi-Wan Kenobi, and lives in exile on the swamp planet of Dagobah.
He trains Luke Skywalker in the ways of the Force until his death at the age of 900 in Return of the Jedi, though he later returns as a Force spirit.
In the prequel trilogy, Yoda leads the Jedi High Council and trains the young generations of Jedi until they are assigned to a master.
When the Clone Wars breaks out, he becomes a general in the Galactic Republic's army and leads several legions of clone troopers.
Yoda is one of the few Jedi to survive the events of Order 66 at the end of the war, and faces off against Emperor Palpatine, but is outmatched and forced to go into hiding.
Yoda's spirit appears again in the sequel trilogy, advising an older Luke and empowering Rey to face a revived Palpatine.

==
Concept and creation ==
Frank Oz provided Yoda's voice in each film and performed as lead puppeteer in the original trilogy, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace and Star Wars: The Last Jedi, as well as appearing for a vocal cameo in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.
For some walking scenes in The Empire Strikes Back and The Phantom Menace, dwarf actors Deep Roy and Warwick Davis appeared in costume as Yoda (though neither was credited).
While Frank Oz served as the primary performer, over the years he had been assisted by a multitude of other puppeteers, including: Kathryn Mullen (Ep.
V), Wendy Froud (Ep.
V), David Barclay (Ep.
V-VI), Mike Quinn (Ep.
VI), David Greenaway (Ep.
I & VI), Don Austen
(Ep.
I), Kathy Smee (Ep.
I), Dave Chapman (Ep.
VIII), Damian Farrell (Ep.
VIII), and Colin Purves (Ep.
VIII).
For the radio dramatizations of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, Yoda was voiced by John Lithgow while Tom Kane voiced him in the Clone Wars animated series and several video games.

The make-up artist Stuart Freeborn based Yoda's face on his own and Albert Einstein's.
In The Phantom Menace, he was redesigned to look younger.
He was computer-generated for two distant shots but remained mostly a puppet.
The puppet was re-designed by Nick Dudman from Stuart Freeborn's original design.

Rendered with computer animation in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, Yoda appeared in ways not previously possible, including his participation in elaborate fight scenes.
In Revenge of the Sith, his face appears in several big close-ups, demanding highly detailed CGI work.
His performance was deliberately designed to be consistent with the limitations of the puppet version, with some "mistakes" made such as the occasional ear-jiggling.
Rob Coleman was responsible for the character's new incarnation to the series.

Yoda was recreated in CGI for the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace.
A clip of the new CG Yoda from The Phantom Menace was first seen in the featurette The Chosen One, included in the 2005 DVD release of Revenge of the Sith.
The 2012 theatrical 3D release of The Phantom Menace also features the CG version of Yoda.

Series creator George Lucas has stated that he originally had Obi-Wan training Luke, but decided that it would not make sense to have him standing around watching Luke
do all the fighting in the films and not help him, so he killed him off in the first film.
He then created a new character, Yoda, to have someone train Luke.

===
Character overview ===
Grand Master Yoda is among the oldest, most stoic, and most powerful Jedi Masters in the Star Wars universe.
George Lucas opted to have many details of the character's life history remain unknown.
Yoda's race and home world have not been named in any official media, canonical or otherwise, and he is merely said to be of a "species unknown" by the Star Wars Databank.
Yoda's characteristic speech patterns were conceived by Lucas and Lawrence Kasdan, and developed by Oz.
Academic syntacticians have found them somewhat inconsistent, but have extrapolated that they possess object–subject–verb word order, making them anastrophic.

The films and Expanded Universe reveal that Yoda had a hand in training almost every Jedi Master in the galaxy.
In the Star Wars prequel films, he instructs several younglings in the Jedi Temple before they are assigned to a master.
In The Empire Strikes Back
he mentions that he had been training Jedi "for 800 years", which means he must have been a Master Jedi for quite some time before that.

===
Other members of species ===
Two other members of Yoda's unnamed alien species are known in current Star Wars canon:
Yaddle (who appears as a background female character in the prequel
trilogy film Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace as a Jedi master) and the character in The Mandalorian named Grogu (called "Baby Yoda" by fans and media).
Their respective relation (if any) to Yoda is unknown.

==
Appearances ==


===
Original trilogy ===


====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
====
Yoda makes his first film appearance in The Empire Strikes Back.
Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) arrives on Dagobah to seek his guidance, having been instructed to do so by the Force ghost of Obi-Wan Kenobi (Alec Guinness), who describes him as "the Jedi Master who instructed me."

Yoda does not initially identify himself to Luke and instead tests his patience by presenting himself as a comical backwater individual, deliberately provoking both Luke and R2-D2.
Luke is shocked when he finally discovers that this small, eccentric creature is the powerful Jedi Master he was seeking.
Finding that Luke has the same anger and recklessness which caused his father's downfall, Yoda is reluctant to teach him the ways of the Force and agrees only at Obi-Wan's behest.
Before finishing his training, Luke chooses to leave Dagobah in order to confront Darth Vader and save his friends on Bespin.
Yoda and Obi-Wan warn him that he is not ready to face Vader and is being lured into a trap but Luke leaves anyway.
When Obi-Wan laments that Luke is their "last hope," Yoda reminds him that "there is another."
=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
Yoda makes a brief appearance in Return of the Jedi, set a year after The Empire Strikes Back.
Now sick and frail, Yoda informs Luke that he has completed his training but will not be a Jedi until he confronts Darth Vader; he also confirms that Vader is Luke's father, something Vader had told Luke in the previous film.
Yoda then peacefully dies at the age of 900, his body disappearing as he becomes "one with the Force".
He leaves Luke with the knowledge that "there is another Skywalker.
"
Moments later, Obi-Wan's ghost helps Luke come to the realization that the "other" of whom Yoda spoke is his twin sister, Princess Leia.

In the film's final scene, after the Empire has been defeated, Luke sees Yoda's spirit looking upon him with pride alongside Obi-Wan and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker, Vader's former Jedi self.

===
Prequel trilogy ===


====
Episode
I: The Phantom Menace (1999) ====
Yoda returns as a younger version of himself in the prequel trilogy beginning with The Phantom Menace.
The film marked the final time Oz would portray the character as a puppet until the release of The Last Jedi (2017).
However, in the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, the Yoda puppet was replaced by a CGI character to match the later depiction of the character.
In the film, which is set 35 years before The Empire Strikes Back, Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn brings the young Anakin Skywalker to the Jedi Council.
Qui-Gon is convinced that Anakin is the "Chosen One" of Jedi prophecy who will bring balance to the Force and requests the boy be trained as a Jedi.
Yoda senses great fear in Anakin, especially in regards to his attachment to his mother Shmi, and foresees "grave danger" in his training.
The Council, led at the time by Yoda's former padawan Mace Windu, rejects Qui-Gon's request.

When Qui-Gon is mortally wounded in a duel with Sith Lord Darth Maul, his dying request to his Padawan Obi-Wan Kenobi (Ewan McGregor) is that Anakin be trained as a Jedi.
Obi-Wan, determined to fulfill his promise to his master, tells Yoda that he will train the boy, even without the Council's approval.
Yoda makes Obi-Wan a Jedi knight and reluctantly gives his blessing to Anakin's training.

====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002) ====
Yoda makes his first CGI appearance in Attack of the Clones, set a decade after The Phantom Menace.
Yoda, now in direct control of the Order's policy as Master of the High Council in addition to his traditional position as Grandmaster, is one of the many Jedi who are concerned about the emergence of the Confederacy of Independent Systems, a secessionist movement wanting independence from the Galactic Republic.
After the first attempted assassination of Senator Padmé Amidala, Chancellor Palpatine suggests that she be put under the protection of Obi-Wan, who is training Anakin.
In a deleted scene, a meditating Yoda senses Anakin slaughtering the Tusken Raiders who murdered his mother.

At the climax of the film, Yoda arrives in time to save Obi-Wan and Anakin from the Separatists and defeats his former apprentice, Count Dooku, the Separatists’ leader and a Sith lord, in a lightsaber duel.

====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005) ====
In Revenge of the Sith, Yoda leads the Jedi Council in pursuing the mysterious Sith Lord Darth Sidious.
Palpatine has by then amassed near-dictatorial emergency powers and begins interfering in Jedi affairs by appointing Anakin as his personal representative on the Council.
The Council grants Anakin a Council seat but denies him the rank of Master, feeling that doing so would amount to giving Palpatine a vote in the Council.
Additionally they order him to spy on Palpatine, whom Anakin considers a friend and mentor.

Anakin seeks Yoda's counsel about his prophetic visions that someone close to him will die.
Yoda, unaware that the person of whom Anakin speaks is Padmé, or that she is Anakin's wife and pregnant with his child, tells him to "train yourself to let go of everything that you fear to lose.
"
Unsatisfied, Anakin turns to Palpatine, who then reveals himself as Darth Sidious.
Sidious manipulates the young Jedi into becoming his Sith apprentice, Darth Vader, with the promise that the dark side of the Force holds the power to save Padmé from dying in childbirth.

Sidious later transforms the Republic into the tyrannical Galactic Empire, proclaiming himself emperor for life and ordering the clone troopers to kill their Jedi generals.
Yoda is on Kashyyyk, overseeing the battle between the Separatist forces and a combined command of clone troopers and Wookiees.
Through the Force, Yoda feels the deaths of each of the Jedi as they are assassinated by their own troops.
After swiftly killing the clone troopers instructed to kill him, he escapes with Wookiee leaders Tarfful and Chewbacca to Coruscant, where he and Obi-Wan fight their way into the Jedi Temple to stop a trap for all surviving Jedi.
Inside, they discover that all the Jedi inside, younglings included, have been slaughtered.
They then discover a holographic recording revealing Vader as the assassin.
Yoda decides to face Sidious, sending Obi-Wan to kill Vader.
When Obi-Wan protests, Yoda tells him that the Anakin he knew no longer exists, having been "consumed by Darth Vader.
"

Subsequently, Yoda battles Sidious in a lightsaber duel that damages the Senate Rotunda.
In the end, neither is able to overcome the other and Yoda is forced to retreat.
He goes into exile on Dagobah so that he may hide from the Empire and wait for another opportunity to destroy the Sith.
At the end of the film, it is revealed that Yoda has been in contact with Qui-Gon's spirit, learning the secret of immortality from him and passing it on to Obi-Wan.

Yoda is also instrumental in deciding the fate of the Skywalker children after Padmé dies in childbirth, recommending that Luke and Leia be hidden from Vader and Sidious; he sends Leia to be adopted by Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan, and Luke to Vader's stepfamily Owen and Beru Lars on Tatooine.
Other than the ancient Jedi Master, only the Organas, the Lars family, R2-D2 and Obi-Wan know of their true identities.

===
Sequel trilogy ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
In The Force Awakens, set 30 years after Yoda's death in Return of the Jedi, Yoda's voice is heard by the young scavenger Rey in a Force vision after she discovers Luke Skywalker's light saber under a castle owned by Maz Kanata.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
In The Last Jedi, Yoda appears to Luke as a Force spirit as he debates whether to burn down the tree storing the Sacred Texts of the Jedi.
As Luke makes his way to the tree, Yoda appears behind him and reminds him that a Jedi must always be sure of his path.
When Luke decides to burn down the tree, Yoda summons a lightning bolt and sets it ablaze.
When confronting Yoda as to why he did it, Yoda assures Luke that the books contained no knowledge that Rey didn't already possess.
He stressed that true Jedi knowledge was not found in books but within Jedi themselves--and it is their responsibility to pass that knowledge on, reminding him, "The greatest teacher, failure is."
As Luke takes in the message, he shares a quiet moment with his former master, who informs that the burden of all masters is being surpassed by their students.

Unlike in the prequels, where fight scenes necessitated the character be rendered in with computer-generated imagery, Yoda is once more portrayed using puppetry.

====
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker  (2019) ====
Yoda appeared in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker via voice-over as one of the voices of Jedi past who speak to Rey during her battle against Darth Sidious.
===
Animated series ===


====
Clone Wars (2003) ====
Yoda appears in the 2003 Cartoon Network 2D-animated television series Star Wars:
Clone Wars, voiced by Tom Kane.
In the show, Yoda is made a general, like many of the Jedi Knights and Masters.
Yoda escorts Padmé on their journey to an unspecified planet, but Yoda senses several Jedi in distress on Ilum.
Using the Jedi mind trick to convince Captain Typho to take them to Ilum, Yoda saves two Jedi Knights and finds a message from Count Dooku giving orders to destroy the Jedi Temple on Ilum.
In the animated series' final episode, Yoda fights side by side with Mace Windu to defend Coruscant, which is under attack from the Separatists.
The two Jedi Masters realize too late that the battle is a distraction; Separatist leader General Grievous truly intends to kidnap Palpatine.
The Jedi Master's effort to stop Grievous fails, and Palpatine is taken hostage, thus setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith.

In 2014, the series was deprecated from the Disney canon, in favor of the 3D CGI series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars.
====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008) ====
Yoda appears in The Clone Wars, again voiced by Tom Kane.
In the pilot film, Yoda assigns Anakin Skywalker his own padawan, Ahsoka Tano as he believes that she will help Anakin grow as a Jedi and as a person.
Throughout most of the series, Yoda spends his time on Coruscant with the Jedi Council but he occasionally leaves for certain tasks, such as negotiations with King Katuunko on Rugosa and a confrontation with Asajj Ventress's droid army.
Yoda also watches over Anakin and Ahsoka throughout the series, pleased that they are both maturing with each other's influence.
However, in the final arc of season five, Ahsoka is framed for a crime she didn't commit and Yoda and the Jedi Council turn her over to the Republic military.
Along with other members of the Council, Yoda observes Ahsoka's trial but Anakin bursts in with the true culprit, fallen Jedi Barriss Offee, before the verdict can be read.
Afterwards Yoda, Anakin, and the Council personally invite Ahsoka to rejoin the Order but she refuses and leaves.
According to show runner Dave Filoni, Yoda blames himself for Ahsoka's departure as he had made her Anakin's padawan in the first place.

In the final arc of the sixth season, Yoda hears Qui-Gon Jinn speaking to him from beyond the grave.
Yoda flees the Jedi Temple with R2-D2 to travel to Dagobah, his future home, to find answers.
Shown cryptic visions of the fall of the Jedi, Yoda learns he has been chosen to manifest his consciousness after death as a Force ghost.
Yoda is tested by a group of spirit priestesses in order to overcome trials and temptations on his pilgrimage; one of these tests is to face an illusion of ancient Sith lord Darth Bane.
Yoda's final test is to resist an attempt by Darth Sidious and Dooku to lure him to the dark side with a false vision of deceased Jedi Master Sifo Dyas.
Yoda engages in a metaphysical battle with Sidious and appears to sacrifice his life in order to save Anakin's–only to awaken and discover that the battle was merely a vision and that he has passed the test.
The priestesses inform Yoda that his training will resume in time.

====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Yoda was heard in the Star Wars Rebels episode "Path of the Jedi" with Frank Oz reprising the role for the first time since Revenge of the Sith.
He communicates with padawan Ezra Bridger and his master Kanan Jarrus during their experience in an ancient temple on Lothal, helping the pair do some soul-searching to analyze their true motivations.
He appears physically for the first time in the season two episode "Shroud of Darkness", in which he appears in a vision of Ezra's and reunites with Ahsoka.
His appearance in the series differs from his usual countenance as an homage to an early Ralph McQuarrie design for the character as well as a classic Kenner action figure.
This was justified by premise that Ezra is viewing the character through his own imagination, but the decision was confusing to many viewers.

===
Literature ===
Yoda appears extensively in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, mostly in works set during or before the prequel trilogy, including Sean Stewart's 2004 novel Yoda:
Dark Rendezvous, in which he sends an impersonator of himself to negotiate a potential treaty with Dooku, suspected his offer to be a feint.
He also appears as a supporting character in Dark Horse Comics' Republic, and various other Clone Wars-related titles.
In April 2014, following The Walt Disney Company's acquisition of Lucasfilm, all of these works were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
Since 2014, Yoda has also been featured in a number of canon books and other works, including Dooku: Jedi Lost and Master & Apprentice, which take place before The Phantom Menace.
He is set to appear in the upcoming The High Republic Adventures, set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.

==
In popular culture ==
In 1980, American musician and parody artist "Weird Al" Yankovic wrote and recorded a parody of the Kinks' "Lola", called "Yoda".
It was later rerecorded for his 1985 album
Dare to Be Stupid, after Yankovic was able to obtain permission from both George Lucas and the Kinks.
In 2007, Yoda was selected by Empire magazine as the "25th greatest movie character of all time."
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Yoda at number 60.Yoda
also appears in Disney's Star Tours:
The Adventures Continue attraction with his original voice actor, Frank Oz.
A life-size statue of Yoda greets visitors to Lucasfilm's Letterman Digital Arts Center in San Francisco's Presidio, the headquarters of Industrial Light and Magic.

Linguistics professor David Ager from Queen Mary University of London says Yoda's language most closely resembles the Hawaiian language.
In 2017, a photoshopped image of Yoda seated next to King Faisal at the signing of the Charter of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 was inadvertently printed in a social studies textbook.
The textbook was withdrawn once the error was discovered.
In 2019, discount store Poundland used the voice of Yoda at its self-service checkouts in stores across the United Kingdom.

===
Merchandising ===
TomTom has included a "Yoda" voice as one of the Celebrity GPS voicings in their "Star Wars" voice series.

====
Lego ====
Lego's Yoda minifigure was the first of their figures to be shorter than the other toys in the Lego Star Wars line; it has shorter legs than the other action figures.
Yoda appears in a television series based on the Lego Star Wars toys, including Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles and The New Yoda Chronicles, of which he is the focus, as well as The Padawan Menace and Droid Tales.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
See also ==
Yoda conditions – a style of writing conditionals in computer programming languages


=
=
References ==
Works cited


==
External links ==
Yoda in the StarWars.com Databank
Yoda on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Yoda on IMDb
Yoda title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D animated science fiction television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation and set in the Star Wars galaxy five years before the original Star Wars film.
It takes place during the dark times, when the Galactic Empire is hunting down the last of the Jedi while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is emerging.
The visual style of the series is inspired by the original Star Wars trilogy concept art by Ralph McQuarrie.
The series features new characters, along with some from the original trilogy and from the previous animated series, The Clone Wars.

The series premiered as a one-hour television film, Spark of Rebellion, on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channel prior to the premiere of the series on October 13 on Disney XD.
The second season premiered on June 20, 2015, with a one-hour television film, The Siege of Lothal.
The third season premiered on September 24, 2016, with the television film, Steps Into Shadow.
The fourth and final season premiered on October 16, 2017, with another one-hour television film, Heroes of Mandalore.
Its final episode aired on March 5, 2018.Dave Filoni, Simon Kinberg and Greg Weisman served as executive producers of the first season.
Weisman left the show after the first season.
Filoni was also the supervising director for the first two seasons, a role he relinquished after accepting a promotion that expanded his creative role into overseeing all Lucasfilm Animation projects; he chose Justin Ridge to succeed him for the third season.
Filoni assumed the role back for the fourth season.

The series has been generally well-received with several award wins and nominations.
Rebels garnered praise for its writing, characters, voice acting, score, and expansion of the franchise's mythology, although it received some criticism for its animation and perceived lack of depth.
The show was nominated for the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Animated Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program.
Rebels became the first recipient of the Saturn Award for Best Animated Series on Television, winning for its final two seasons.

A number of tie-in media have been released to expand upon the series' lore such as the comic book series Kanan, the novel A New Dawn, and the novel series Thrawn.
Characters, storylines, and elements introduced in the series would also appear in subsequent Star Wars media.

==
Premise ==
Fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order and the rise of the Galactic Empire depicted in Revenge of the Sith, a motley group of rebels unite aboard a freighter starship called the Ghost and begin to conduct covert operations against the Imperial garrison on and around the planet Lothal and other planets that are menaced by the Empire.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Taylor Gray as Ezra Bridger, a teenage con artist who is taken in by Kanan to be trained as a Jedi.

Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, formerly known as Jedi Padawan, Caleb Dume, who survived the events of Order 66.
He is Ezra's mentor and leader of the Ghost Crew.

Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla, a Twi’lek pilot turned Rebel Commander and the daughter of Ryloth freedom fighter Cham Syndulla.

Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren, a young Mandalorian warrior who's fixated on art.

Steven Blum as Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios, a former Lasat honor guard member who wants the Empire to pay for enslaving his people.

Dave Filoni as Chopper (
credited as "Himself" prior to the series finale), Hera's astromech droid who can be a bit reckless.

David Oyelowo as Agent Kallus, a member of the Imperial ground team tasked with overviewing Imperial activities.

Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex (seasons 2–4), a former high ranking Clone trooper, who served under Anakin Skywalker in the Clone Wars.

Sam Witwer as Maul (seasons 2–3), a former Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who is attempting to hunt down Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Lars Mikkelsen as Grand Admiral Thrawn (seasons 3–4), a powerful high-ranking officer within the Galactic Empire.
===
Recurring ===
Jason Isaacs as Grand Inquisitor, a former Jedi Temple Guard who turned to the dark side and was tasked with hunting down surviving Jedi.

James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, an evil Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who was once Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.

Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Knight who became Darth Vader.

Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, the former Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, who aids the rebellion with pivotal assets.

Stephen Stanton as Grand Moff Tarkin, an Imperial officer who oversees many of the Empire's activities.

Sam Witwer and Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the ruler of the galaxy and also known as Darth Sidious, Sith master of Darth Vader.

Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Governor Arihnda Pryce, a high-ranking officer of the Galactic Empire and Governor of the Lothal sector.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a Rebel extremist and a former freedom fighter.

Genevieve O'Reilly as Mon Mothma, the leader of the Rebel Alliance.
===
Guest appearances ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a protocol droid who assists allies in the rebellion.

James Arnold Taylor and Stephen Stanton as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Knight in exile on Tatooine.

Frank Oz as Yoda, the wise and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi who is exiled on the planet Dagobah.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, a smuggler in the underworld.

Nathan Kress as Wedge Antilles, a former Imperial TIE fighter pilot, who defects to the rebellion.

==
Episodes ==


==
Release ==


=== Broadcast ===
The first two episodes, titled Spark of Rebellion, premiered on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channels worldwide and on Family Channel in Canada.
In Australia, the series premiered on October 17 on Disney XD.
The Siege of Lothal premiered on June 28, 2015, and the second season debuted on October 18.
In Canada, the series premiered on October 19 on the DHX-owned Disney XD.
However, due to DHX Media losing the rights to Disney content, the show was later moved to Disney Channel.
The second season premiered on November 7, and it was moved to the Corus-owned Disney XD channel on December 1.In
the Middle East and Africa, Spark of Rebellion premiered on October 11 and the series debuted on October 18 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 10, followed the official season premiere on October 17.
In Southeast Asia, Spark of Rebellion premiered on Disney XD on October 4 and the series officially started on November 29.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 3 on Disney XD and Disney Channel, and the second season was released on October 24.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series debuted on October 16 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on July 18, 2015, followed by the second-season debut on October 17.
===
Home media ===
Star Wars Rebels:
Spark of Rebellion was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD in the US at all retailers on October 14, 2014.
DVD bonus features include character shorts, a 3D model kit of the Ghost ship, and a preview of season 1.The
Complete Season
One of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 1, 2015, in America, and in Germany on September 10, 2015.
The Season 1 collection contains the expanded version of Spark of Rebellion with the Darth Vader/Grand Inquisitor prologue shown on ABC-TV.
The Complete Season Two of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on August 30, 2016, in North America.
The Complete Season Three of Star Wars Rebels was released on DVD and Blu-Ray on August 29, 2017.
The Complete Season Four is announced to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 15, 2018, in Germany, and July 31, 2018, in the United States.
The series is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===
In the United States, the one-hour special garnered 2.74 million viewers on Disney Channel and 2.40 million viewers on ABC.
Worldwide, it delivered a total of 6.5 million viewers.
On Disney Channel, the first and second episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92 million viewers, respectively.
The third and fourth episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60 million viewers, respectively.
The eighth and ninth episodes got 1.92 and 1.44 million viewers, respectively.
In Canada, the second episode was watched by 274,500 viewers, making it the most-watched broadcast ever on the network.
In the United Kingdom, the film was the highest-rated broadcast that week, with 81,000 viewers.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has received a 92% positive score, based on 12 reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a 100% score based on 6 reviews for season 2, 6 reviews for season 3, and 10 reviews for season 4, with an average rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 4 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
IGN and Variety in particular had strong praise for the pilot film, Spark of Rebellion, with their only criticism being the appearance of the Wookiees in the film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the rest of the animation.
SyFy Wire calls the series "Pure fun", further stating that it "captures the awe and joy of A New Hope" and is "thematically ambitious" with a "dramatic edge".

===
Accolades ===


==
Other media ==


===
Films ===
Chopper and the Ghost appear in the 2016 film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
Hera's surname is called on a loudspeaker at the Rebel base on Yavin IV, where Chopper can briefly be seen.
In addition, the Ghost takes part in the climactic battle over Scarif.
The Ghost also appears in the 2019 film Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker during the final battle over Exegol.
The voice of Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus can also be heard in the film as one of the voices of Jedi past who provide Rey with encouragement to defeat Emperor Palpatine.

===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel by John Jackson Miller telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met (set about six years before the series).
One of the first canon Star Wars novels to be released by Disney, it also introduces Imperial captain Rae Sloane, who is later a grand admiral in the Aftermath trilogy (2015–2017).
It includes a foreword by Dave Filoni.

In 2017, a new novel, entitled Thrawn, was released.
The book marked the entrance of Grand Admiral Thrawn into the current canon.
It was written by the character's original creator, Timothy Zahn.

A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released on July 24, 2018.

It explored Thrawn's partnerships with Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker.
Another Thrawn novel, Thrawn: Treason was released on July 23, 2019.
It takes place during the events of Rebels' fourth season.
Hera Syndulla would go on to appear in Alexander Freed's Star Wars:
Alphabet Squadron novel trilogy, as a general of the recently christened New Republic's eponymous starfighter squadron in the final days of the Galactic Civil War, hunting down the weakened Imperial forces after the battle of Endor and the death of Emperor Palpatine.

===
Comics ===
From April 1, 2015, through March 16, 2016, Marvel Comics published a 12-issue comic series, titled Kanan, and set during the events of the first season.
Written by former executive producer of the series Greg Weisman and illustrated by Pepe Larraz, Jacopo Camagni and Andrea Broccardo, the story is centered on Kanan having flashbacks to his days as a Padawan in the Jedi Temple and the Clone Wars.
The other members of the Ghost crew also appear.
In the summer of 2017, Marvel announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Zahn's Thrawn novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with new issues being released over the following five months.

A few days after the series finale was aired, IDW Publishing released the seventh issue of the long-running Star Wars Adventures multi-era comic book series, which contained the first of a two-part comic arc, set between the second and third season, in which the Spectres embark on a mission to save a rare endangered bird from Imperial custody.

The second part appeared in the next issue, which was released on March 28, 2018.

===
Video games ===
A side-scrolling run-and-gun game based on the show's first season, titled Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions, was released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android, and Windows Store in early 2015, before being discontinued on July 28, 2016, due to the limitations of the support team.
Ezra Bridger is the only playable character, with other characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early access to most of the game's levels in the mobile versions and are required to play the full campaign in the Windows Store version.

Additionally, several of the characters from the series are playable in other games such as Disney Infinity 3.0, Angry Birds Star Wars II, Roblox (as virtual accessories and gears), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (as downloadable content only),
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense, Star Wars:
Force Arena and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.

Vanessa Marshall reprises her role as Hera Syndulla for the 2020 video game Star Wars:
Squadrons, providing voice work and motion capture for the character.

==
Themes ==


===
Historical influences ===
Characters in Star Wars Rebels have taken influence from Biblical, Hebrew, and Greco-Roman mythological names.
Star Wars writers have often used biblical names for Jedi while giving galactic Imperial characters Roman names.
In 2015 an interview was conducted with Dave Filoni and Simon Kinberg where Kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the original films by using the biblical naming scheme seen in the films.

Both Caleb and Ezra are historically Hebrew names with Ezra translating to "Helper".
Characters with Roman names include Clone Captain Rex which translates to "King" in Latin along with Sabine Wren, Admiral Brom Titus and Admiral Kassius Konstantine.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
See also ==
2015 in science fiction


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels at StarWars.com
Star Wars Rebels at IMDb
DK Publishing for Star Wars Rebels
Star Wars Rebels on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Racer Arcade is a 2000 arcade racing game developed by AM5 and LucasArts and is the final Star Wars game released by Sega
It is based on the Podrace scenes in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
==
Gameplay ==
Racer Arcade features four tracks: Tatooine Bantha Tracks (Easy), Etti IV Smuggler's Cove (Normal), Malastare Pixelito Challenge (Hard), which has four laps, and Tatooine Boonta Eve Classic (Expert), which has three laps.
Four Podracer pilots are playable: Anakin Skywalker, Ben Quadinaros, Gasgano and Sebulba.
The player controls the podracer via two handheld throttle controls, similar to how pods are controlled in the film.

Unlike the home console video game Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer, the player's podracer is indestructible, although it can suffer slowdown from collision damage, and it is possible, yet difficult, to destroy opposing podracers.

==
Development and release ==
The game was unveiled at ATEI in London in 2000.

It was available in multiple configurations, one of which was a twin type; two individual games joined in the center.
The deluxe cabinet featured a 50" screen and was molded to appear like the cockpit of Anakin Skywalker's podracer.
Up to four cabinets could be linked for multiplayer.

== Reception ==
In Japan, Game Machine listed Star Wars: Racer Arcade on their August 15, 2000 issue as being the fifth most-successful dedicated arcade game of the year.
In a 2020 retrospective, Kotaku's Lewis Packwood called the arcade game a "beefier, fancier-looking version of Episode I: Racer."
==
See also ==
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade
Star Wars Battle Pod


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars Racer Arcade at the Killer List of Videogames
Star Wars (retroactively titled Star Wars:
Episode IV  –
A New Hope) is a 1977 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by 20th Century Fox.
It stars Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Peter Cushing, Alec Guinness, David Prowse, James Earl Jones, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Peter Mayhew.
It is the first installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, the first of the franchise to be produced, and the fourth episode of the "Skywalker saga".

Lucas had the idea for a science-fiction film in the vein of Flash Gordon around the time he completed his first film, THX 1138 (1971) and began working on a treatment after the release of American Graffiti (1973).
Star Wars focuses on the journey of Luke Skywalker (Hamill), who along with the wizened Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi (Guinness), smuggler Han Solo (Ford), and his Wookiee companion Chewbacca (Mayhew), attempts to free Princess Leia (Fisher) from the clutches of the tyrannical Galactic Empire.
At the same time, the heroes try to deliver the plans for the Empire's planet-destroying space station, the Death Star, which are carried by the droids R2-D2 (Baker) and C-3PO (Daniels), to the Rebel Alliance, but face opposition from the Sith Lord Darth Vader (Prowse, voiced by Jones).

After a turbulent production, Star Wars was released in a limited number of theaters in the United States on May 25, 1977, and quickly became a blockbuster hit, leading to it being expanded to a much wider release.
The film opened to critical acclaim, most notably for its groundbreaking visual effects.
It grossed a total of $775 million (over $550 million during its initial run), surpassing Jaws (1975) to become the highest-grossing film at the time until the release of E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982).
When adjusted for inflation, Star Wars is the second-highest-grossing film in North America (behind Gone with the Wind) and the fourth-highest-grossing film in the world.
It received ten Oscar nominations (including Best Picture), winning seven.
In 1989, it became one of the first 25 films that was selected by the U.S. Library of Congress for preservation in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
At the time, it was the most recent film in the registry and the only one chosen from the 1970s.
In 2004, its soundtrack was added to the U.S. National Recording Registry, and was additionally listed by the American Film Institute as the best movie score of all time a year later.
Today, it is widely regarded by many in the motion picture industry as one of the greatest and most important films in film history.

The film has been reissued multiple times with Lucas's support—most significantly with its 20th-anniversary theatrical "Special Edition"—incorporating many changes including modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, re-edited shots, remixed soundtracks and added scenes.
The film became a pop-cultural phenomenon and launched an industry of tie-in products, including novels, comics, video games, amusement park attractions, and merchandise including toys, games, clothing and many other spin-off works.

The film's success led to two critically and commercially successful sequels, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983), and later to a prequel trilogy, a sequel trilogy, two anthology films and various spin-off TV series.

==
Plot ==
Amid a galactic civil war, Rebel Alliance spies have stolen plans  to the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a massive space station capable of destroying an entire planet.
Imperial Senator Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan, secretly one of the Rebellion's leaders, has obtained its schematics, but her starship is intercepted by an Imperial Star Destroyer under the command of the ruthless Darth Vader.
Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory of astromech droid R2-D2, who flees in an escape pod to the nearby desert
planet Tatooine accompanied by protocol droid C-3PO.

The droids are captured by Jawa traders, who sell them to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars and their nephew Luke Skywalker.
While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he discovers a holographic recording of Leia requesting help from an Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Later, after Luke finds R2-D2 missing, he is attacked by scavenging Sand People while searching for him, but is rescued by elderly hermit "Old Ben" Kenobi, an acquaintance of Luke's, who reveals that "Obi-Wan" is his true name.
Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as one of the Jedi Knights, the former peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who drew mystical abilities from a metaphysical energy field known as "the Force", but were ultimately hunted to near-extinction by the Empire.
Luke learns that his father fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight during the Clone Wars until Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil, turned to the dark side of the Force and murdered him.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's old lightsaber, the signature weapon of Jedi Knights.

R2-D2 plays Leia's full message, in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to her home planet of Alderaan and give them to her father, a fellow veteran, for analysis.
Although Luke initially declines Obi-Wan's offer to accompany him to Alderaan and learn the ways of the Force, he is left with no choice after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have killed his aunt and uncle and destroyed their farm in their search for the droids.
Traveling to a cantina in Mos Eisley to search for transport, Luke and Obi-Wan hire Han Solo, a smuggler with a price on his head due to his debt to local mobster Jabba the Hutt.
Pursued by stormtroopers, Obi-Wan, Luke, R2-D2 and C-3PO flee Tatooine with Han and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca on their ship the Millennium Falcon.

Before the Falcon can reach Alderaan,
Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin destroys the planet in a show of force after interrogating Leia for the location of the Rebel Alliance's base.
Upon arrival, the Falcon is captured by the Death Star's tractor beam, but the group manages to evade capture by hiding in the ship's smuggling compartments.
As Obi-Wan leaves to disable the tractor beam, Luke persuades Han and Chewbacca to help him rescue Leia after discovering that she is scheduled to be executed.
After disabling the tractor beam, Obi-Wan sacrifices his life in a lightsaber duel with Vader, allowing the rest of the group to escape the Death Star with Leia.
Using a tracking device, the Empire tracks the Falcon to the hidden Rebel base on Yavin IV.

Leia's schematics reveal a hidden weakness in the Death Star's thermal exhaust port, which could allow the Rebels to trigger a chain reaction in its main reactor with a precise proton torpedo strike.
While Han abandons the Rebels after collecting his reward for rescuing Leia, Luke joins their starfighter squadron in a desperate attack against the approaching Death Star.
In the ensuing battle, the Rebels suffer heavy losses as Vader leads a squadron of TIE fighters against them, but Han and Chewbacca unexpectedly return to aid them in the Falcon, narrowly managing to save Luke before Vader can shoot him down.
Guided by the disembodied voice of Obi-Wan's spirit, Luke uses the Force to aim his torpedoes into the exhaust port, destroying the Death Star moments before it fires on the Rebel base.
In a triumphant ceremony at the base, Leia awards Luke and Han medals for their heroism.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A young adult raised by his aunt and uncle on Tatooine, who dreams of something more than his current life and learns the way of the Jedi.
Lucas favored casting young actors who lacked long experience.
To play Luke (then known as Luke Starkiller), Lucas sought actors who could project intelligence and integrity.
While reading the script, Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts.
He chose to simply read it sincerely, and he was cast instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Brian De Palma's Carrie (Lucas shared a joint casting session with De Palma, a longtime friend).

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A cynical smuggler hired by Obi-Wan and Luke
to take them to Alderaan in his ship, the Millennium Falcon, co-piloted with Chewbacca.
Lucas initially rejected casting Ford for the role, as he "wanted new faces"; Ford had previously worked with Lucas on American Graffiti.
Instead, Lucas asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading.
Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte, Sylvester Stallone, Bill Murray, Christopher Walken, Burt Reynolds, Jack Nicholson, Al Pacino, Steve Martin, Chevy Chase, or Perry King (who later played Han Solo in the radio plays).

Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia: A member of the Imperial Senate and one of the many Leaders of the Rebel Alliance.
Many young Hollywood actresses auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Amy Irving, Terri Nunn (also a singer), Cindy Williams, Karen Allen, and Jodie Foster.
Foster, for one, turned down the role because she was already under contract with Disney and working on two films at the time.
Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds (4.5 kg) for the role.

Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: Commander of the Death Star.
Lucas originally had Cushing in mind for the role of Obi-Wan Kenobi, but Lucas believed that "his lean features" would be better employed in the role of Grand Moff Tarkin instead.
Lucas commended Cushing's performance, saying "[He] is a very good actor.
Adored and idolized by young people and by people who go to see a certain kind of movie.
I feel he will be fondly remembered for the next 350 years at least.
"
Cushing, commenting on his role, joked: "I've often wondered what a 'Grand Moff' was.
It sounds like something that flew out of a cupboard."

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
An aging Jedi Master and former mentor of Darth Vader who introduces Luke to the Force.
Lucas' decision to cast "unknowns" was not taken favorably by his friend Francis Ford Coppola and the studio.
Lucas felt Obi-Wan Kenobi should be played by an established actor.
Producer Gary Kurtz said, "The Alec Guinness role required a certain stability and gravitas as a character... which meant we needed a very, very strong character actor to play that part."
Before Guinness was cast, Japanese actor Toshiro Mifune (who starred in many Akira Kurosawa films) was considered for the role.
According to Mifune's daughter, Mika Kitagawa, her father turned down Lucas' offers for Kenobi and Darth Vader because "he was concerned about how the film would look and that it would cheapen the image of samurai...
At the time, sci-fi movies still looked quite cheap as the effects were not advanced and he had a lot of samurai pride.
"
Guinness was one of the few cast members who believed that the film would be successful; he negotiated a deal for 2.25% of the one-fifth gross royalties paid to Lucas, which made him quite wealthy in later life.
He agreed to take the part of Kenobi on the condition that he would not have to do any publicity to promote the film.
Lucas credited him with inspiring the cast and crew to work harder, saying that Guinness contributed significantly to the completion of the filming.
Harrison Ford said, "It was, for me, fascinating to watch Alec Guinness.
He was always prepared, always professional, always very kind to the other actors.
He had a very clear head about how to serve the story."

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A protocol droid who is "fluent in over six million forms of communication".
Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a Ralph McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face.
Initially, Lucas did not intend to use Daniels' voice for C-3PO.
Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid.
According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia.
When filming was underway in London, where additional casting took place, Baker, performing a musical comedy act with his acting partner Jack Purvis, learned that the film crew was looking for a small person to fit inside a robot suit and maneuver it.
Baker, who was 3 feet 8 inches (1.12 m) tall, was cast immediately after meeting George Lucas.
He said, "He saw me come in and said 'He'll do' because I was the smallest guy they'd seen up until then."
He initially turned down the role three times, hesitant to appear in a film where his face would not be shown and hoping to continue the success of his comedy act, which had recently started to be televised.
R2-D2's recognizable beeps and squeaks were made by sound designer Ben Burtt imitating "baby noises", recording this voice as it was heard on an intercom, and creating the final mix using a synthesizer.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca "Chewie":
A 200-year-old Wookiee, Han Solo's sidekick, and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.
Mayhew learned of a casting call for Star Wars, which was being shot in London, and decided to audition.
The 7-foot-3-inch (2.21 m)
tall actor was immediately cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas.
He recounted, "I sat down on one of the sofas, waiting for George.
Door opened, and George walked in with Gary behind him.
So, naturally, what did I do?
I'm raised in England.
Soon as someone comes in through the door, I stand up.
George goes 'Hmm [looked up].'
Virtually turned to Gary, and said 'I think we've found him.'
As a result of his height, Mayhew was eligible for either the role of Chewbacca or Darth Vader, ultimately choosing the former because he wanted to play a hero in the story.
Mayhew modeled his performance of Chewbacca after the mannerisms of animals he saw at public zoos.
David Prowse as Darth Vader: A Sith lord of the Galactic Empire who aims to destroy the Rebel Alliance.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.
Lucas originally intended for Orson Welles to voice the character after dismissing Prowse due to his West Country English accent (which led to him being nicknamed, within the cast, as "Darth Farmer").
However, determining that Welles' voice would be too familiar to audiences, Lucas instead cast then-relatively less recognizable Jones.
Other actors include Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser as Luke's Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru; Jack Purvis, Kenny Baker's partner in his London comedy act, as the Chief Jawa in the film; and Eddie Byrne as Vanden Willard, a Rebel general.
Denis Lawson and Garrick Hagon played rebel pilots Wedge Antilles and Biggs Darklighter (Luke's childhood friend), respectively.
Don Henderson and Leslie Schofield appear as Imperial Generals Cassio Tagge and Moradmin Bast, respectively, and Richard LeParmentier plays Admiral Motti.
Alex McCrindle portrays General Jan Dodonna, Alfie Curtis portrays Dr. Evazan, and Peter Geddis portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Michael Leader plays a minor role as a Stormtrooper known for accidentally hitting his helmet against a door.
Heavily synthesised audio recordings of John Wayne from earlier films were used as the voice of the Imperial spy Garindan.
Robert Clarke plays Wulff Yularen, an Imperial officer known more for his appearance in the Clone Wars.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Lucas had the idea for a space-fantasy film in 1971, after he completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138.
Originally, Lucas wanted to adapt the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials into his own films, having been fascinated by them since he was young.

He later said:

I especially loved the Flash Gordon serials ...
Of course I realize now how crude and badly done they were ...
loving them that much when they were so awful, I began to wonder what would happen if they were done really well.

At the Cannes Film Festival following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas pushed towards buying the Flash Gordon rights, but they were already tied-up with Dino De Laurentiis.
Lucas later recounted:

I wanted to make a Flash Gordon movie, with all the trimmings, but I couldn't obtain the rights to the characters.
So I began researching and went right back and found where Alex Raymond (who had done the original Flash Gordon comic strips in newspapers) had got his idea from.
I discovered that he'd got his inspiration from the works of Edgar Rice Burroughs (author of Tarzan) and especially from his John Carter of Mars series books.
I read through that series, then found that what had sparked Burroughs off was a science fantasy called Gulliver on Mars, written by Edwin Arnold and published in 1905.
That was the first story in this genre that I have been able to trace.
Jules Verne had got pretty close, I suppose, but he never had a hero battling against space creatures or having adventures on another planet.
A whole new genre developed from that idea.

Director Francis Ford Coppola, who accompanied Lucas in trying to buy the Flash Gordon rights, recounted in 1999: "
[George] was very depressed because he had just come back
and they wouldn't sell him Flash Gordon.
And he says, 'Well, I'll just invent my own.'"
He secured a two-film development deal with United Artists; the two films were American Graffiti and a space opera, tentatively titled "The Star Wars" and inspired by Flash Gordon.
Lucas would later claim that he had the idea for an original space opera long before 1971, and that he even tried to film it before American Graffiti.
Believing that the bleak tone of THX 1138 led to its poor reception, Lucas chose to make Star Wars more optimistic; this is what led to its fun and adventurous tone.

Lucas went to United Artists and showed them the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film, which was then picked up by Universal Pictures.
United Artists also passed on Lucas' space-opera concept, which he shelved for the time being.
After spending the next two years completing American Graffiti, Lucas turned his attention to his space opera.
He drew inspiration from politics of the era, later saying, “It was really about the Vietnam War, and that was the period where Nixon was trying to run for a [second] term.
"Lucas began writing in January 1973, "eight hours a day, five days a week", by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations.
Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels.
He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled Journal of the Whills, which told the tale of the training of apprentice CJ Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy.
Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called The Star Wars on April 17, 1973, which had narrative parallels with Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress.
While impressed with the "innocence of the story, plus the sophistication of the world" of the film, United Artists declined to budget the film.
Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz presented the film treatment to Universal Pictures, the studio that financed American Graffiti; while they agreed it could be "a very commercial venture", they had doubts about Mr. Lucas' ability to pull it all off," and said that Lucas should follow American Graffiti with more consequential themes.
Coppola brought the project to a division of Paramount Pictures he ran with fellow directors Peter Bogdanovich and William Friedkin, but Friedkin questioned Lucas' ability to direct the film and he, along with Bogdanovich, declined to back it.
Walt Disney Productions also turned down the film.

Lucas said, "I've always been an outsider to Hollywood types.
They think I do weirdo films."
According to Kurtz, Lew Wasserman, the studio's head, "just didn't think much of science fiction at that time, didn't think it had much of a future then, with that particular audience."
He said that "science fiction wasn't popular in the mid-'70s ...
what seems to be the case generally is that the studio executives are looking for what was popular last year, rather than trying to look forward to what might be popular next year."
Kurtz said, "Although Star Wars wasn't like [then-current science fiction] at all, it was just sort of lumped into that same kind of category.
"Lucas explained in 1977 that the film is not "about the future" and that it "is a fantasy much closer to the Brothers Grimm than it is to 2001."
He added: "My main reason for making it was to give young people an honest, wholesome fantasy life, the kind my generation had.
We had Westerns, pirate movies, all kinds of great things.
Now they have The Six Million Dollar Man and Kojak.
Where are the romance, the adventure, and the fun that used to be in practically every movie made?"
Lucas would later recontextualize the discussion around the film, saying it was born out of research into "psychological underpinings of mythology", a claim that had been dismissed by Kurtz as self-aggrandizing: "
The whole idea of Star Wars as a mythological thing, I think came about because of [later Lucas] interviews that tied it to The Hero with a Thousand Faces" and by Steven Hart and Michael Kaminski: "It is here that the true origin of Star Wars comes from -- not from myth and legend, but from the 'schlock' sold on newspapers stands and played in matinees.
"There were also concerns regarding the project's potentially high budget.
Lucas and Kurtz, in pitching the film, said that it would be "low-budget, Roger Corman style, and the budget was never going to be more than—
well, originally we had proposed about 8 million, it ended up being about 10.
Both of those figures are very low budget by Hollywood standards at the time."
After Disney rejected the project, Lucas and Kurtz persisted in securing a studio to support the film because "other people had read it and said, 'Yeah, it could be a good idea.'
"
Lucas pursued Alan Ladd Jr., the head of 20th Century-Fox, and in June 1973 completed a deal to write and direct the film.
Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented.
Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie."
The deal gave Lucas $150,000 to write and direct the film.
American Graffiti's positive reception afforded Lucas the leverage necessary to renegotiate his deal with Ladd and request the sequel rights to the film in August 1973.
For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars's potential sequels and most of the merchandising profits.

===
Writing ===
Since commencing his writing process in January 1973, Lucas had done "various rewrites in the evenings after the day's work."
He would write four different screenplays for Star Wars, "searching for just the right ingredients, characters and storyline.
It's always been what you might call a good idea in search of a story.
"
By May 1974, he had expanded the treatment for The Star Wars into a rough draft screenplay, adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a general by the name of Annikin Starkiller.
He changed Starkiller to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the general into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs.
Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills.
He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana (whom he would later use as eponym for his character Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.
Lucas completed a second draft in January 1975 as Adventures of the Starkiller, Episode One: The Star Wars, making heavy simplifications and introducing the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller.
Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight.
"
The Force" was also introduced as a mystical energy field.
This draft still had some differences from the final version in the characters and relationships.
For example, Luke had several brothers, as well as his father, who appears in a minor role at the end of the film.
The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the action/adventure of the previous versions.
This version ended with another text crawl, previewing the next story in the series.
This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side: the draft included a historical Jedi who was the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it.
The script would introduce the concept of a Jedi Master and his son, who trains to be a Jedi under his father's friend; this would ultimately form the basis for the film and, later, the trilogy.
However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film.
Han Solo and Chewbacca's identities closely resembled those seen in the finished film.
According to Lucas, the second draft was over 200 pages long, and led him to split up the story into multiple films spanning over multiple trilogies.
Lucas began to rewrite this draft, creating a synopsis for the third draft.
During work on this rewrite, Lucas began researching the science-fiction genre by watching films and reading books (including J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit) and comics.
He also claims to have read scholastic works like Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, James George Frazer's The Golden Bough, and even Bruno Bettelheim's The Uses of Enchantment.
These claims are doubted by Michael Kaminski and Chris Taylor, with Kaminski pointing out that Bettelheim's book would not come out until after Star Wars was filmed and adding that "the original trilogy-Campbell connection is greatly exaggerated and practically non-existent", noting that, in fact, the second draft is "even closer to Campbell's structure" than the third.
According to Lucas, he wrote a rough draft of about 250–300 pages long, which contained the outline for the entire original Star Wars trilogy.
He realized that it was too long for a single film, and decided to subdivide it into a trilogy.
Lucas stated that the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [in 1983] ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday."
He later described that, having split the script into three episodes, "the first part didn't really work", so he had to take the ending off of Episode VI and put it in the original Star Wars, which resulted in a Death Star being included in both films.

In 1975 Lucas suggested he could make a trilogy, which "ends with the destruction of the Empire" and a possible prequel "about the backstory of Kenobi as a young man."
After the film's smash success, Lucasfilm announced that Lucas had already written "twelve stories in the Adventures of Luke Skywalker" which, according to Kurtz, were set to be "separate adventures rather than direct sequels.
"During
the writing of the third draft, Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes, several of which Lucas included with his screenplay when he delivered it to 20th Century-Fox.
On February 27, the studio granted a budget of $5 million; this was later increased to $8.25 million.
Subsequently, Lucas started writing with a budget in mind, conceiving the cheap, "used" look of much of the film, and (with Fox having just shut down its special effects department) reducing the number of complex special effects shots called for by the script.

The third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller.
This third draft had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings.
The draft characterized Luke as an only child, with his father already dead, replacing him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi.
This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976, as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars.
Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.
Lucas finished writing his script in March 1976, when the crew started filming.
He said, "What finally emerged through the many drafts of the script has obviously been influenced by science-fiction and action-adventure
I've read and seen.
And I've seen a lot of it.
I'm trying to make a classic sort of genre picture, a classic space fantasy in which all the influences are working together.
There are certain traditional aspects of the genre I wanted to keep and help perpetuate in Star Wars."
During production, he changed Luke's name from Starkiller to Skywalker and altered the title to The Star Wars and later Star Wars.
He would also continue to tweak the script during filming, including adding the death of Obi-Wan after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.
For the film's opening crawl, Lucas originally wrote a composition consisting of six paragraphs with four sentences each.
He said, "The crawl is such a hard thing because you have to be careful that you're not using too many words that people don't understand.
It's like a poem.
"
Lucas showed his draft to his friends.
Director Brian De Palma, who was there, described it: "
The crawl at the beginning looks like it was written on a driveway.
It goes on forever.
It's gibberish."
Lucas recounted what De Palma said the first time he saw it: "George, you're out of your mind!
Let me sit down and write this for you."
De Palma and Jay Cocks helped edit the text into the form used in the film.
===
Design ===
George Lucas recruited many conceptual designers, including Colin Cantwell, who worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), to conceptualize the initial spacecraft models; Alex Tavoularis to create the preliminary conceptual storyboard sketches of early scripts; and Ralph McQuarrie to visualize the characters, costumes, props and scenery.
McQuarrie's pre-production paintings of certain scenes from Lucas's early screenplay drafts helped 20th
Century-Fox visualize the film, which positively influenced their decision to fund the project.
After McQuarrie's drawings for Lucas's colleagues Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins (who were collaborating for a film) caught his interest, Lucas met with McQuarrie to discuss his plans for the untitled space fantasy film he wanted to make.
Two years later, after completing American Graffiti, Lucas approached McQuarrie and asked him if he would be interested "in doing something for Star Wars."
McQuarrie produced a series of artworks from simple sketches; these set a visual tone for the film, and for the rest of the original trilogy.

The film was ambitious as Lucas wanted to create fresh prop prototypes and sets (based on McQuarrie's paintings) that had never been realized before in science fiction films.
He commissioned production designers John Barry and Roger Christian, who were working on the sets of the film Lucky Lady (1975) when Lucas first approached them, to work on the production sets.
Christian recounted in 2014: "George came to the set I was doing, it was an old salt factory design
and he helped me shovel salt, just like two students in plaid shirts and sneakers.
And we spoke and he looked at the set and couldn't believe it wasn't real.
"
They had a conversation with Lucas on what he would like the film to appear like, with them creating the desired sets.
Christian said that Lucas "didn't want anything [in Star Wars] to stand out, he wanted it [to look] all real and used.
And I said, 'Finally somebody's doing it the right way.
'"Lucas described a "used future" concept to the production designers in which all devices, ships, and buildings to do with Tatooine or the Rebels looked aged and dirty, as opposed to the sleeker designs of the Empire.
Lucas also wanted the spaceships to look "cobbled together, as opposed to a sleek monoshape."
Barry said that the director "wants to make it look like it's shot on location on your average everyday
Death Star or Mos Eisley Spaceport or local cantina.
"
Lucas believed that "what is required for true credibility is a used future", opposing the interpretation of "future in most futurist movies" that "always looks new and clean and shiny."
Christian supported Lucas's vision, saying "All science fiction before was very plastic and stupid uniforms and Flash Gordon stuff.
Nothing was new.
George was going right against that.
"The
designers started working with the director before Star Wars was approved by 20th Century-Fox.
For four to five months, in a studio in Kensal Rise, England, they attempted to plan the creation of the props and sets with "no money."
Although Lucas initially provided funds using his earnings from American Graffiti, it was inadequate.
As they could not afford to dress the sets, Christian was forced to use unconventional methods and materials to achieve the desired look.
He suggested that Lucas use scrap in making the dressings, and the director agreed.
Christian said, "I've always had this idea.
I used to do it with models when I was a kid.
I'd stick things on them and we'd make things look old."
Barry, Christian, and their team began designing the props and sets at Elstree Studios.
According to Christian, the Millennium Falcon set was the most difficult to build.
Christian wanted the interior of the Falcon to look like that of a submarine.
He found scrap airplane metal "that no one wanted in those days and bought them."
He began his creation process by breaking down jet engines into scrap pieces, giving him the chance to "stick it in the sets in specific ways.
"
It took him several weeks to finish the chess set (which he described as "the most encrusted set") in the hold of the Falcon.
The garbage compactor set "was also pretty hard, because I knew I had actors in there
and the walls had to come in, and they had to be in dirty water
and I had to get stuff that would be light enough so it wouldn't hurt them but also not bobbing around.
"
A total of 30 sets consisting of planets, starships, caves, control rooms, cantinas, and the Death Star corridors were created; all of the nine sound stages at Elstree were used to accommodate them.
The massive rebel hangar set was housed at a second sound stage at Shepperton Studios; the stage was the largest in Europe at the time.

===
Filming ===
In 1975, Lucas formed his own visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century-Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded.
ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys.
Most of the visual effects used pioneering digital motion control photography developed by John Dykstra and his team, which created the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras.
George Lucas tried "to get a cohesive reality" for his feature.
However, since the film is a fairy tale, as he had described, "I still wanted it to have an ethereal quality, yet be well composed and, also, have an alien look."
He designed the film to have an "extremely bizarre, Gregg Toland-like surreal look with strange over-exposed colors, a lot of shadows, a lot of hot areas.
"
Lucas wanted Star Wars to embrace the combination of "strange graphics of fantasy" and "the feel of a documentary" to impress a distinct look.
To achieve this, he hired the British cinematographer Gilbert Taylor.
Originally, Lucas's first choice for the position was Geoffrey Unsworth, who also provided the cinematography for Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey.
Unsworth was interested in working with the director, and initially accepted the job when it was offered to him by Lucas and Kurtz.
However, he eventually withdrew to work on the Vincente Minnelli-directed A Matter of Time (1976)
instead, which "really annoy[ed]" Kurtz.
Lucas called up for other cinematographers, and eventually chose Taylor, basing his choice on Taylor's cinematography for Dr. Strangelove and A Hard Day's Night (both 1964).
On his decision, Lucas said: "I thought they were good, eccentrically photographed pictures with a strong documentary flavor.
"Taylor said that Lucas, who was consumed by the details of the complicated production, "avoided all meetings and contact with me from day one, so I read the extra-long script many times and made my own decisions as to how I would shoot the picture."
Taylor also said, "I took it upon myself to experiment with photographing the lightsabers and other things onstage before we moved on to our two weeks of location work in Tunisia.
"
Taylor was aware of the "enormous amount of process work" to follow principal photography and believed "a crisp result would help.
"During production, Lucas and Taylor—whom Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety"—had disputes over filming.
With a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself.
His lighting suggestions were rejected by Taylor, who believed that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions, sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself.
Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look.
Kurtz stated that "In a couple of scenes ... rather than saying, 'It looks a bit over lit, can you fix that?', [
Lucas would] say, 'turn off this light, and turn off that light.'
And Gil would say, 'No, I won't do that
, I've lit it the way I think it should be—tell me what's the effect that you want, and I'll make a judgment about what to do with my lights.'"

Originally, Lucas envisioned the planet of Tatooine, where much of the film would take place, as a jungle planet.
Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines to scout locations; however, because of the idea of spending months filming in the jungle would make Lucas "itchy", the director refined his vision and made Tatooine a desert planet instead.
Kurtz then researched all American, North African, and Middle Eastern deserts, and found Tunisia, near the Sahara desert, as the ideal location.
Lucas later stated that he had wanted to make it look like outer space.
When principal photography began on March 22, 1976, in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on Tatooine, the project faced several problems.
Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to malfunctioning props and electronic breakdowns.
Moreover, a rare Tunisian rainstorm struck the country, which further disrupted filming.
Taylor said, "you couldn't really see where the land ended and the sky began.
It was all a gray mess, and the robots were just a blur.
"
Given this situation, Lucas requested heavy filtration, which Taylor rejected, who said: "I thought the look of the film should be absolutely clean ...
But George saw it differently, so we tried using nets and other diffusion.
He asked to set up one shot on the robots with a 300mm, and the sand and sky just mushed together.
I told him it wouldn't work, but he said that was the way he wanted to do the entire film, all diffused.
"
This difference was later settled by 20th Century-Fox executives, who backed Taylor's suggestion.
Filming began in Chott el Djerid, while a construction crew in Tozeur took eight weeks to transform the desert into the desired setting.
Other locations included the sand dunes of the Tunisian desert near Nafta, where a scene featuring a giant skeleton of a creature lying in the background as R2-D2 and C-3PO make their way across the sands was filmed.
When actor Anthony Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time in Tunisia, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him.
He also could not see through his costume's eyes, which was covered with gold to prevent corrosion.
Abnormal radio signals caused by the Tunisian sands made the radio-controlled R2-D2 models run out of control.
Kenny Baker, who portrayed R2-D2, said: "I was incredibly grateful each time an [R2] would actually work right."
After several scenes were filmed against the volcanic canyons outside Tozeur, production moved to Matmata to film Luke's home on Tatooine.
Lucas chose Hotel Sidi Driss, which is larger than the typical underground dwellings, to shoot the interior of Luke's homestead.
Additional scenes for Tatooine were filmed at Death Valley in North America.

After two-and-a-half weeks of filming in Tunisia, production moved to Elstree Studios, near London, to film interior scenes.
Elstree was chosen as a studio over other options in Hollywood or elsewhere.
Star Wars required the use of nine different sound stages simultaneously, which most studios couldn't accommodate.
Because of stricter working conditions, filming in Britain had to finish by 5:30 pm, unless Lucas was in the middle of a scene.
Despite Lucas's efforts, his crew had little interest in the film.
Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.
Actor Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure.
Harrison Ford found it strange that "there's a princess with weird buns in her hair", and called Chewbacca a "giant in a monkey suit.
"The
Elstree sets designed by John Barry, according to Gilbert Taylor, "were like a coal mine."
He said that "they were all black and gray, with really no opportunities for lighting at all."
To resolve the problem, he worked the lighting into the sets by chopping in its walls, ceiling and floors.
This would result in "a 'cut-out' system of panel lighting", with quartz lamps that could be placed in the holes in the walls, ceiling and floors.
His idea was supported by the Fox studio, which agreed that "we couldn't have this 'black hole of Calcutta.'
"
The lighting approach Taylor devised "allowed George to shoot in almost any direction without extensive relighting, which gave him more freedom."
In total, the filming in Britain took 14-and-a-half weeks.

Lucas commissioned computer programmer Larry Cuba to create the animated Death Star plans shown at the rebel base on Yavin 4.
This was written with the GRASS programming language, exported to a Vector General monitor and filmed on 35 mm to be rear-projected on the set.
It is the only computer animation in the original version of the film.
The Yavin scenes were filmed in the Mayan temples at Tikal, Guatemala.
Lucas selected the location as a potential filming site after seeing a poster of it hanging at a travel agency while he was filming in Britain.
This inspired him to send a film crew to Guatemala in March 1977 to shoot scenes.
While filming in Tikal, the crew paid locals with a six-pack of beer to watch over the camera equipment for several days.
While shooting, Lucas rarely spoke to the actors, who believed that he expected too much of them while providing little direction.
His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense".
Kurtz stated that "it happened a lot where he would just say, 'Let's try it again a little bit faster.'
That was about the only instruction he'd give anybody.
A lot of actors don't mind—
they don't care, they just get on with it.
But some actors really need a lot of pampering and a lot of feedback, and if they don't get it, they get paranoid that they might not be doing a good job."
Kurtz has said that Lucas "wasn't gregarious, he's very much a loner and very shy, so he didn't like large groups of people
, he didn't like working with a large crew, he didn't like working with a lot of actors.
"Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts.
Initially, Fox approved $8 million for the project; Gary Kurtz said: "we proceeded to pick a production plan and do a more final budget with a British art department and look for locations in North Africa, and kind of pulled together some things.
Then, it was obvious that 8 million wasn't going to do it—they had approved 8 million."
After requests from the team that "it had to be more," the executives "got a bit scared.
"
For two weeks, Lucas and his crew "didn't really do anything except kind of pull together new budget figures.
"
At the same time, after production fell behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas he had to finish production within a week
or he would be forced to shut down production.
Kurtz said that "it came out to be like 9.8 or .9 or something like that, and in the end they just said, 'Yes, that's okay
, we'll go ahead.'
"
The crew split into three units, with those units led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts.
Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.
During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile, as he often appeared depressed.
At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level.
Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century-Fox.
Moreover, Mark Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which restricted re-shoots.

===
Post-production ===
Star Wars was originally slated for release on Christmas 1976; however, its production delays pushed the film's release to mid-1977.
Editor John Jympson began cutting the film together while Lucas was still filming in Tunisia; as Lucas noted, the editor was in an "impossible position" because Lucas had not explained any of the film's material to him.
When Lucas watched Jympson's rough cut for the first time, he disliked what he saw.
J. W. Rinzler wrote that "Jympson's selection of takes was questionable, and he seemed to be having trouble doing match-cuts.
"
Lucas was prepared to give Jympson more time; Jympson disliked Lucas' working style.
As production went on, Lucas still disapproved of Jympson's cut and fired him halfway through the film's production.
He commented: "Unfortunately it didn't work out.
It's very hard when you are hiring people to know if they are going to mesh with you
and if you are going to get what you want.
In the end, I don't think he fully understood the movie and
what I was trying to do.
I shoot in a very peculiar way, in a documentary style, and it takes a lot of hard editing to make it work."
After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch, Richard Chew and his then-wife, Marcia Lucas, who was also cutting the film New York, New York (1977) with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese.
Richard Chew considered the film to  have been cut in a slow, by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage.
He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts.
Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously.
Jympson's original assembly contained a large amount of footage which differed from the final cut of the film, including several alternate takes and a number of scenes which were subsequently deleted to improve the narrative pace.
The most significant material cut was a series of scenes from the first part of the film which introduced Luke Skywalker.
These early scenes, set in Anchorhead on the planet Tatooine, presented the audience with Luke's everyday life among his friends as it is affected by the space battle above the planet; they also introduced the character of Biggs Darklighter, Luke's closest friend who departs to join the rebellion.
Chew explained the rationale behind removing these scenes as a narrative decision: "In the first five minutes, we were hitting everybody with more information than they could handle.
There were too many story lines to keep straight: the robots and the Princess, Vader, Luke.
So we simplified it by taking out Luke and Biggs.
"
In an examination of this early cut, which has come to be called the "Lost Cut", David West Reynolds noted the film adopted a "documentary-like" approach that emphasized "clarity, especially in geographic and spatial relationships" over "dramatic or artistic concerns".
As a result, the film was more "leisurely paced".
Reynolds estimated this early cut contained "30-40%" different footage from the final cut, with most of the differences coming from extended cuts or alternate takes rather than deleted scenes.
After viewing a rough cut, Alan Ladd likened the early Anchorhead scenes to "American Graffiti in outer space.
"
Lucas was looking for a way of accelerating the storytelling, and removing Luke's early scenes would distinguish Star Wars from his earlier teenage drama and "get that American Graffiti feel out of it."
Lucas also stated that he wanted to move the narrative focus to C-3PO and R2-D2: "At the time, to have the first half-hour of the film be mainly about robots was a bold idea.
"Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects.
The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable.
With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months.
Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.
Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack."
Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck.
The lightsaber sound effect was developed by Burtt as a combination of the hum of idling interlock motors in aged movie projectors and interference caused by a television set on a shieldless microphone.
Burtt discovered the latter accidentally as he was looking for a buzzing, sparking sound to add to the projector-motor hum.
For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers, and walruses to create phrases and sentences.
Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer.
Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone, which began the idea of Vader having been a burn-victim, which was not the case during production.
In February 1977, Lucas screened an early cut of the film for Fox executives, several director friends, along with Roy Thomas and Howard Chaykin of Marvel Comics who were preparing a Star Wars comic book.
The cut had a different crawl from the finished version and used Prowse's voice for Darth Vader.
It also lacked most special effects; hand-drawn arrows took the place of blaster beams, and when the Millennium Falcon fought TIE fighters, the film cut to footage of World War II dogfights.
The reactions of the directors present, such as Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, disappointed Lucas.
Spielberg, who said he was the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects.
Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film.
In contrast, Ladd and the other studio executives loved the film; Gareth Wigan told Lucas: "This is the greatest film I've ever seen" and cried during the screening.
Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before.
The delays increased the budget from $8 million to $11 million.
With the project $2 million over budget, Lucas was forced to make numerous artistic compromises to complete Star Wars.
Ladd reluctantly agreed to release an extra $20,000 funding and in early 1977 second unit filming completed a number of sequences including exterior desert shots for Tatooine in Death Valley and China Lake Acres in California, and exterior Yavin jungle shots in Guatemala, along with additional studio footage to complete the Mos Eisley Cantina sequence.

Lucas had to write around a scene featuring a human Jabba the Hutt, which was scrapped due to not being in focus.
Lucas would later claim he wanted to superimpose a stop-motion creature over the actor - which he did in the 1997 Special Edition with a computer-generated version of Jabba.
However, all the script drafts (with the exception of one that Lucas doctored after the fact) describe Jabba as humanoid, the notion of him being an alien not having come up until work on the 1979 re-release, and scrapped until the Special Edition.

==
Soundtrack ==
On the recommendation of his friend Steven Spielberg, George Lucas hired composer John Williams.
Williams had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award.
Lucas originally hired Williams to consult on music editing choices and to compose the source music for the music, telling Williams that he intends to use extant music.
Lucas believed that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that the musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity; he wanted a grand musical sound for Star Wars.
Therefore, Lucas assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified, having viewed Lucas' music choices as a temp track.
However, a few of Williams' eventual pieces were influenced by the temp track: the "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold; and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack of Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini.
Lucas would later deny having ever conceived using extant music for the film.
In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in 12 days.
The original soundtrack was released as a double LP in 1977 by 20th Century Records.
20th Century Records also released The Story of Star Wars that same year, a narrated audio drama adaptation of the film utilizing some of its original music, dialogue, and sound effects.
The American Film Institute's list of best film scores ranks the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.

==
Cinematic and literary allusions ==
According to George Lucas, different concepts of the film were inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and religion.
Lucas had originally intended to remake the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials, but was unable to obtain the rights; thus, he resorted to drawing from Akira Kurosawa's 1958 film The Hidden Fortress and, allegedly, Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces.
Star Wars features many elements derived from Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between rebels and Imperial Forces, the wipes between scenes, the fusion of futuristic technology and traditional mythology, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film.
The film has also been compared to The Wizard of Oz.
The influence of The Hidden Fortress can be seen in the relationship between C-3PO and R2-D2, which evolved from the two bickering peasants, Tahei and Matashichi, and a Japanese family crest seen in the earlier film is similar to the Imperial Crest.
Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo (1961).
In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging about how wanted they are by the authorities, and have an arm being cut off by a blade; Kuwabatake Sanjuro (played by Toshiro Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan.
"
Its sequel Sanjuro (1962) also inspired the hiding-under-the-floor trick featured in the film.
Another source of influence was Lawrence of Arabia (1962), which inspired the film's visual approach, including long-lens desert shots.
There are also thematic parallels, including the freedom fight by a rebel army against an empire, and politicians who meddle behind the scenes.
Tatooine is similar to the desert planet of Arrakis from Frank Herbert's Dune series.
Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity spice; Star Wars makes references to spice in "the spice mines of Kessel", and a spice freighter.
Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia, and Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by the Bene Gesserit.
In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "moisture farmers"; in Dune, dew collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water."
Frank Herbert reported that "David Lynch, [director of the 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune.
"
The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe.
"The
Death Star assault scene was modeled after the World War II film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim bouncing bombs at dams, in order to cripple the heavy industry of Germany's Ruhr region.
Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters.
In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964), directed by Walter Grauman, in which RAF de Havilland Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point, while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters.
Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence.
There are also similarities in the Death Star trench sequence to the bridge attack scene in The Bridges at Toko-Ri.
The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a reference to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey.
The earlier big-budget science fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors.
The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001.
Although golden and male, C-3PO was inspired by the silver female robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis.

==
Marketing ==
While the film was in production, a logo was commissioned from Dan Perri, a title sequence designer who had worked on the titles for films such as The Exorcist (1973) and Taxi Driver (1976).
Perri devised a foreshortened STAR WARS logotype consisting of block-capital letters filled with stars and skewed towards a vanishing point.
This logo design was originally conceived to follow the same perspective as the film's opening crawl.
In the end, Perri's logo was not used for the film's opening title sequence, although it was used widely on pre-release print advertising and on cinema marquees.
The logotype eventually selected for on-screen use originated in a promotional brochure that was distributed by Fox to cinema owners in 1976.
This brochure was designed by Suzy Rice, a young art director at the Los Angeles advertising agency Seiniger Advertising.
On a visit to ILM in Van Nuys, Rice was instructed by Lucas to produce a logo that would intimidate the viewer, and he reportedly asked for the logo to appear "very fascist" in style.
Rice's response to her brief was to use an outlined, modified Helvetica Black.
After some feedback from Lucas, Rice decided to join the S and T of STAR and the R and S of WARS.
Lucas signed off on the brochure in between takes while filming inserts for the Mos Eisley Cantina scene.
Gary Kurtz was impressed with Rice's logo and selected it over Perri's design for the film's opening titles, after modifying the letter W to flatten the pointed tips originally designed by Rice.
This finalized the design of one of the most recognizable logos in cinema design, although Rice's contribution was not credited in the film.
For the US release in 1977, 20th Century-Fox commissioned a promotional film poster from the advertising agency Smolen, Smith and Connolly.
They used the freelance artist Tom Jung who was given the brief of "good over evil."
His poster, known as Style ‘A’, depicted Luke Skywalker standing in a heroic pose, brandishing a shining lightsaber above his head, with Princess Leia below him, and a large, ghostly image of Darth Vader's helmet looming behind them.
Some Fox executives considered this poster "too dark" and commissioned the Brothers Hildebrandt, a pair of well-known fantasy artists, to rework the poster for the UK release.
When the film opened in British theaters, the Hildebrandts' Style ‘B’ poster was used in cinema billboards.
Fox and Lucasfilm subsequently decided that they wanted to promote the new film with a less stylized and more realistic depiction of the lead characters.
Producer Gary Kurtz turned to the film poster artist Tom Chantrell, who was already well known for his prolific work for Hammer horror films, and commissioned a new version.
Two months after Star Wars opened, the Hildebrandts' poster was replaced by Chantrell's Style ‘C’ poster in UK cinemas.
Charles Lippincott was the marketing director for Star Wars.
As 20th Century-Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere.
He secured deals with Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation, and with Del Rey Books for a novelization.
A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within science-fiction fandom.

==
Release ==
While initially being released only in a limited theatrical run, Star Wars was an unprecedented success for 20th Century-Fox, soon becoming a blockbuster hit and expanding to a much wider release.
It would eventually see many theatrical and home video re-releases.

===
Premiere and initial release ===
Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century-Fox moved the release date to May 25, the Wednesday before Memorial Day.
However, fewer than 40 theaters ordered the film to be shown.
In response, the studio demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted the eagerly anticipated The Other Side of Midnight based on Sidney Sheldon's 1973 novel by the same name.

Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in fewer than 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday.
Kurtz said in 2002, "That would be laughable today.
"
It immediately broke box office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release.
Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be.
After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg film Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office.
Spielberg disagreed, and believed Star Wars would be the bigger hit.
Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films; Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.
Amidst Fox pessimism, Lucas elected to forgo his option to an extra $500,000 fee for directing Star Wars, in exchange for obtaining the merchandising and sequel rights for the movie from Fox.
The Other Side of Midnight was supposed to be the studio's big summer hit, while Lucas's movie was considered the "B track" for theater owners nationwide.
While Fox requested Mann's Chinese Theatre, the studio promised that the film needed only two weeks.

Fearing that the film would fail, Lucas had made plans to be in Hawaii with his wife Marcia.
Having forgotten that the film would open that day, he spent most of Wednesday in a sound studio in Los Angeles.
When Lucas went out for lunch with Marcia, they encountered a long line of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars.
He was still skeptical of the film's success, even with enthusiastic reports from Ladd and the studio.
While in Hawaii, it was not until he watched Walter Cronkite discuss the gigantic crowds for Star Wars on the CBS Evening News that Lucas realized he had become very wealthy.
Francis Ford Coppola, who needed money to finish Apocalypse Now, sent a telegram to Lucas's hotel asking for funding.
Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names; when Ford visited a record store to buy an album, enthusiastic fans tore half his shirt off.
The film was a huge success for 20th Century-Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price had doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century-Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan.
After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful.
Ladd was reassured by his local contacts that this was a positive reaction considering that in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film, and the subsequent strong box office returns confirmed its popularity.
After two weeks William Friedkin's Sorcerer replaced Star Wars at Mann's Chinese Theatre because of contractual obligations; Mann Theatres moved the film to a less-prestigious location after quickly renovating it.
When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977, after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2 and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.
At that time Star Wars was playing in 1,096 theaters in the United States.
Approximately 60 theaters played the film continuously for over a year; in 1978, Lucasfilm distributed "Birthday Cake" posters to those theaters for special events on May 25, the one-year anniversary of the film's release.
Star Wars premiered in the UK on December 27, 1977.
News reports of the film's popularity in America caused long lines to form at the two London theaters that first offered the film; it became available in 12 large cities in January 1978, and other London theaters in February.

===
Theatrical re-releases ===
Star Wars was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981 and 1982, with the subtitle Episode IV – A New Hope being added in 1981.
The film was digitally remastered with some altered scenes in 1997 for a theatrical rerelease, dubbed the "Special Edition."

Since its original release, the film has also been dubbed and subtitled into numerous languages.

In 2010, Lucas announced that all six previously released Star Wars films would be scanned and transferred to 3D for a theatrical release, but only 3D versions of the prequel trilogy were completed before the franchise was sold to Disney in 2012.

In 2013, Star Wars was dubbed into Navajo, making it the first major motion picture translated into a Native American language.
The texts Episode IV and A New Hope were first published on a title page for the film's script in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars, in what Kaminski calls "outright forgery", remarking that "the script itself wasn't even the authentic revised fourth draft, but more like a transcription of the finished film, edited and combined with the real fourth draft.
"
The title was changed when the film entered re-releases.
Official sources state that the change was made at the theatrical re-release of April 10
, 1981.The retronymic inclusion of subtitles brought the film into line with the introduction to its sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, which was reconcieved during rewrites as "Episode V" and eventually released as such in 1980.
Lucas claims this was intended from the beginning, and was only dropped to avoid confusing audiences: "
Star Wars was the fourth story in the saga and was to have been called 'Star Wars, Episode Four:
A New Hope'.
"
In 2014, Kurtz recalled they had toyed with the idea "of calling it Episode III, IV, or V.
" Hamill recalls having asked Lucas "Why are we doing episode four?"
and being answered that Lucas wanted "to give the audience a feeling that they'd missed something and that they were coming into the middle of this story" or that it was "the most commercial section" of the overriding story.
Kaminski, however, points out that all early drafts carry an "Episode One" subtitle, and that even early drafts of the sequel are called "Episode II."
====
Special Edition ====
After ILM used computer-generated effects for Steven Spielberg's 1993 film Jurassic Park, Lucas decided that digital technology had caught up to his "original vision" for Star Wars.
For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, Star Wars was digitally remastered with some altered scenes and re-released to theaters, along with The Empire
Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi
, under the campaign title Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
This version of the film runs 124 minutes.

The Special Edition contains visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original release due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involves a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt.
The process of creating the new visual effects for Star Wars was featured in the documentary film, Special Effects:
Anything Can Happen, directed by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Although most changes are minor or cosmetic in nature, many fans and critics believe that Lucas degraded the film with the additions.
A particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts bearing the phrase "Han Shot First.
"Star
Wars required extensive recovery of misplaced footage and restoration of the whole film before Lucas's Special Edition modifications could be attempted.
It was discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used Color Reversal Internegative (CRI) film, a reversal stock subsequently discontinued by Kodak.
CRI proved to deteriorate faster than negative stocks did, although it theoretically was of higher quality, as it saved two generations (an interpositive followed by an internegative), where employed.
Because of this, the entire composited negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI portions cleaned separately from the negative portions.
Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration.
In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements.
Digital compositing technology allowed the restorers to correct for problems such as misalignment of mattes and "blue-spill.
"In
1989
, the 1977 theatrical version of Star Wars was selected for preservation by the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
By 2015, this copy had been transferred to a 2K scan, now available to be viewed by appointment.

===
Home media ===
In the United States, France, West Germany, Italy and Japan, parts of or the whole film were released on Super 8.
The whole film was released for all these countries (including subtitled silent editions and an American Spanish-language edition), except for Italy, where the film (titled "Guerre stellari") was released by IE International as eight brief scenes: Battaglia spaziale ("Space battle", the Battle of Yavin), Duello col laser ("Duel with the laser", Obi-Wan and Darth Vader's duel), La cattura dell'astronave
("The capture of the spaceship"), La liberazione di Leia ("Leia's liberation", the adventure on the Death Star), Messaggio dallo spazio ("Message from space", Leia giving R2-D2 the plans), SOS nella galassia ("SOS in the galaxy") and Trappola mortale ("Deadly trap", the Falcon being captured by the Death Star).
A full Super 8 version of the film was only made available in Italy as a pirate six-reel set.
Star Wars debuted on Betamax, CED, LaserDisc, Video 2000, and VHS between the 1980s and 1990s by CBS/Fox Video.
The final issue of the original theatrical release (pre-Special Edition) to VHS format occurred in 1995, as part of "Last Chance to Own the Original" campaign, available as part of a trilogy set and as a standalone purchase.
The film was released for the first time on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by Lucas.
The DVD features a commentary track from Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher.
The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teasers, theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a making-of documentary on the Episode III video game.
The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc limited edition boxed set without the bonus disc.
The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc limited edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a limited edition tin box set on November 4, 2008; the original versions of the films were added as bonus material.
The release was met with criticism as the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic LaserDisc masters and were not re-transferred using modern video standards.
The transfer led to problems with colors and digital image jarring.
All six Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy and with all six films on Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features.
The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set.
New changes were made to the films, provoking mixed responses.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Fox released A New Hope for digital download on April 10, 2015.
In December 2016, Rogue One director Gareth Edwards revealed that Lucasfilm had recently completed a 4K restoration of Star Wars, but did not elaborate on whether the restored version was based on the 1977 original or a subsequent re-release.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued the film on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time.
The film opened on a Wednesday in 32 theaters expanding to 43 screens on the Friday and earning $2,556,418 in its first six days to the end of the Memorial Day weekend ($10.8 million in 2019 dollars).
Per Variety's weekly box office charts, the film was number one at the US box office for its first three weeks.
It was replaced by The Deep but gradually added screens and returned to number one in its seventh week, building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($29.5 million in 2019 dollars) and remained number one for the next 15 weeks.
It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release, eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($928 million in 2019 dollars).
Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one, earning $410 million in total.
Its biggest international market was Japan, where it grossed $58.4 million.
On July 21, 1978 while still in current release in 38 theaters in the U.S., the film expanded into a 1,744 theater national saturation windup of release and set a new U.S. weekend record of $10,202,726.
The gross prior to the expansion was $221,280,994.
The expansion added a further $43,774,911 to take its gross to $265,055,905.
Reissues in 1979 ($22,455,262), 1981 ($17,247,363), and 1982 ($17,981,612) brought its cumulative gross in the U.S and Canada to $323 million, and extended its global earnings to $530 million.
The film remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.The release of the Special Edition in 1997 was the highest-grossing reissue of all-time with a gross of $138.3 million, bringing its total gross in the United States and Canada to $460,998,007, reclaiming the all-time number one spot.
Internationally, the reissue grossed $117.2 million, with $26 million from the United Kingdom and $15 million from Japan.
In total, the film has grossed over $775 million worldwide.
Adjusted for inflation, it had earned over $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, which saw it ranked as the third-highest-grossing film at the time, according to Guinness World Records.
At the North American box office, it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.

===
Critical response ===
The film was met with critical acclaim upon its release.
In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "an out-of-body experience," compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative."
Vincent Canby of The New York Times called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure" and "the most elaborate, most expensive, most beautiful movie serial ever made."
A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as "magnificent" and said George Lucas had succeeded in his attempt to create the "biggest possible adventure fantasy" based on the serials and older action epics from his childhood.
Writing for The Washington Post, Gary Arnold gave the film a positive review, writing that the film "is a new classic in a rousing movie tradition: a space swashbuckler."
However, the film was not without its detractors: Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized Star Wars, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip."
John Simon of New York magazine also panned the film and wrote, "Strip Star Wars of its often striking images and its highfalutin scientific jargon, and you get a story, characters, and dialogue of overwhelming banality."
Stanley Kauffmann, reviewing the film in The New Republic, opined that it "was made for those (particularly males) who carry a portable shrine within them of their adolescence, a chalice of a Self that was Better
Then, before the world's affairs or—in any complex way—sex intruded.
"When
Star Wars opened in the UK, stating that Lucas's earlier films were better, Derek Malcolm of The Guardian concluded that it "plays enough games to satisfy the most sophisticated."
The Daily Telegraph's science correspondent Adrian Berry said that Star Wars "is the best such film since 2001 and in certain respects it is one of the most exciting ever made."
He described the plot as "unpretentious and pleasantly devoid of any 'message.'"

A few critics found fault in the lack of representation of African Americans in the space fantasy, with a writer for New Journal and Guide calling it "one of the most racist movies ever produced", pointing out that "the force of evil ... is dressed in all black and has the voice of a black man."
Lucas felt hurt at the accusations.
The film continues to receive critical acclaim from modern critics.
The film review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes indicates a 92% approval rating based on 125 reviews with an overall rating of 8.81/10.
Its consensus states in summary, "A legendarily expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga
, George Lucas opened our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster filmmaking and things have never been the same."
Metacritic reports a weighted average score of 90 out of 100 based on 24 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim.
"
In his 1997 review of the film's 20th anniversary release, Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune gave the film four out of four stars, saying, "A grandiose and violent epic with a simple and whimsical heart."
A San Francisco Chronicle staff member described the film as "a thrilling experience."

In 2001 Matt Ford of the BBC awarded the film five out of five stars and wrote, "Star Wars isn't the best film ever made, but it is universally loved."
CinemaScore reported that audiences for Star Wars's 1999 re-release gave the film a "A+" grade.
Gene Siskel, writing for the Chicago Tribune in 1999, said, "What places it a sizable cut above the routine is its spectacular visual effects, the best since Stanley Kubrick's 2001."
Andrew Collins of Empire magazine awarded the film five out of five and said, "Star Wars' timeless appeal lies in its easily identified, universal archetypes—goodies to root for, baddies to boo, a princess to be rescued and so on—and if it is most obviously dated to the 70s by the special effects, so be it."
In his 1977 review, Robert Hatch of The Nation called the film "an outrageously successful, what will be called a 'classic,' compilation of nonsense, largely derived but thoroughly reconditioned.
I doubt that anyone will ever match it, though the imitations must already be on the drawing boards.
"
In a more critical review, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."
Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said, "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."
===
Accolades ===
The film garnered numerous accolades after its release.
Star Wars won six competitive Academy Awards at the 50th Academy Awards: Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound and Best Visual Effects.
A Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to sound designer Ben Burtt and a Scientific and Engineering Award went to John Dykstra for the development of the Dykstraflex Camera (shared with Alvah J. Miller and Jerry Jeffress, who were both granted for the engineering of the Electronic Motion Control System).
Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, which went to Jason Robards for Julia and George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which were instead awarded to Woody Allen's Annie Hall.
At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score.
It received six British Academy Film Awards nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories.
John Williams's soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program, and the film attained the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, winning nine:
Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction and Best Writing for George Lucas, Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, Best Music for John Williams, Best Costume for John Mollo, Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn, Best Special Effects for John Dykstra and John Stears, and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew.
==
Legacy ==
Star Wars launched the careers of many of the film's actors: Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), Harrison Ford (Han Solo), Carrie Fisher (Princess Leia), Peter Mayhew (Chewbacca), Anthony Daniels (C-3PO), and James Earl Jones (voice of Darth Vader).
Ford, who subsequently starred in the Indiana Jones series (1981–present), Blade Runner (1982), and Witness (1985) after working on the film, told the Daily Mirror that Star Wars "boosted my career", and said, "I think the great luck of my career is that I've made these family movies which are introduced to succeeding generations of kids by their families at the time it seems appropriate.
"The
film has spawned a series of films consisting of three trilogies (including the original film), anthology films and an extensive media franchise called the Star Wars expanded universe including books, television series, computer and video games, and comic books.
The original Star Wars trilogy is considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
All of the main films have been box office successes, with the overall box office revenue generated by the Star Wars films (including the animated The Clone Wars) totaling over $10.1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film series as of 2019.The film also spawned the Star Wars Holiday Special, which debuted on CBS on November 17, 1978 and is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it.
The special has never been aired after its original broadcast, and it has never been officially released on home video.
However, many bootleg copies exist, and the special has consequently become something of an underground legend.
A radio drama adaptation of the film was broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981.
The adaptation was written by Brian Daley and directed by John Madden, and was produced with cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR.
John Williams's music and Ben Burtt's sound design were retained for the show, and Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Anthony Daniels (C-3PO) reprised their roles.
The radio drama narrative began with a version of the backstory to the film which relates Princess Leia's acquisition of the secret Death Star plans.
It also featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Darth Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia.
The radio version was originally considered to be part of the official Star Wars canon, but has since been supplanted by revised canonical narratives.

===
In popular culture ===
Star Wars and its ensuing film installments have been explicitly referenced and satirized across a wide range of media.
Hardware Wars, released in 1978, was one of the first fan films to parody Star Wars.
It received positive critical reaction, went to earn over $1 million, and is one of Lucas's favorite Star Wars spoofs.
Writing for The New York Times, Frank DeCaro said, "Star Wars littered pop culture of the late 1970s with a galaxy of space junk."
He cited Quark (a short-lived 1977 sitcom that parodies the science fiction genre) and Donny & Marie (a 1970s variety show that produced a 10-minute musical adaptation of Star Wars guest starring Daniels and Mayhew) as "television's two most infamous examples."
Mel Brooks's Spaceballs, a satirical comic science fiction parody, was released in 1987 to mixed reviews.
Lucas permitted Brooks to make a spoof of the film under "one incredibly big restriction: no action figures.
"Contemporary animated comedy TV series Family Guy, Robot Chicken, and
The Simpsons have produced episodes satirizing the film series.
Star Wars, together with Lucas, is the subject of the 2010 documentary film
The People vs. George Lucas that details the issues of filmmaking and fanaticism pertaining to the film franchise and its creator.
Many elements of the film have also endured presence in popular culture.
The iconic weapon of choice of the Jedi, the lightsaber, was voted as the most popular weapon in film history in a survey of approximately 2,000 film fans.
Characters such as Darth Vader, Han Solo, and Yoda have become iconic, and all three were named in the top twenty of the British Film Institute's "Best Sci-Fi Characters of All-Time" list.
The expressions "Evil empire" and "May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
A pun on the latter phrase has led to May 4 being regarded by many fans of the franchise as an unofficial Star Wars Day.
To commemorate the film's 30th anniversary in May 2007, the United States Postal Service issued a set of 15 stamps depicting the characters of the franchise.
Approximately 400 mailboxes across the country were also designed to look like R2-D2.
===
Cinematic influence ===
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include James Cameron, J.J. Abrams, Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Gareth Edwards, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Peter Jackson, Joss Whedon, Christopher Nolan, Ridley Scott, John Singleton, and Kevin Smith.
Scott, Cameron, and Jackson were influenced by Lucas's concept of the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for their films, such as Scott's science fiction films Alien (1979) and Blade Runner (1982), Cameron's acclaimed sequel Aliens (1986) and his earlier breakthrough film
The Terminator (1984).
Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability.
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film, Inception.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars, as well as Jaws, for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.
On a late 1977 episode of Sneak Previews, Gene Siskel expressed concern that, "It's so successful and so mindless fun
that I hope Hollywood doesn't forget that there are people who like to see serious pictures too.
"
Another critic, Peter Biskind, later complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth."
===
Recognition ===
In its May 30, 1977 issue, the film's year of release, Time magazine named Star Wars the "Movie of the Year.
"
The publication said it was a "big early supporter" of the vision which would become Star Wars.
In an article intended for the cover of the issue, Time's Gerald Clarke wrote that Star Wars is "a grand and glorious film that may well be the smash hit of 1977, and certainly is the best movie of the year so far.
The result is a remarkable confection: a subliminal history of the movies, wrapped in a riveting tale of suspense and adventure, ornamented with some of the most ingenious special effects ever contrived for film.
"
Each of the subsequent films of the Star Wars saga has appeared on the magazine's cover.

Star Wars was voted the second most popular film by Americans in a 2008 nationwide poll conducted by the market research firm, Harris Interactive.
Star Wars has also been featured in several high-profile audience polls: in 1997, it ranked as the 10th Greatest American Film on the Los Angeles Daily News Readers' Poll; in 2002, the film and its sequel
The Empire Strikes Back were voted as the greatest films ever made in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll; in 2011, it ranked as Best Sci-Fi Film on Best in Film:
The Greatest Movies of Our Time, a primetime special aired by ABC that counted down the best films as chosen by fans, based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine; in 2014 the film placed 11th in a poll undertaken by The Hollywood Reporter, which balloted every studio, agency, publicity firm, and production house in the Hollywood region.
Reputable publications also have included Star Wars in their best films lists: in 2008, Empire magazine ranked Star Wars at No.
22 on its list of the "500 Greatest Movies of All Time"; in 2010, the film ranked among the "All-Time 100" list of the greatest films as chosen by Time magazine film critic Richard Schickel; the film was also placed on a similar list created by The New York Times, "The New York Times Guide to the Best 1,000 Movies
Ever Made"; in 2012, the film was included in Sight & Sound's prestigious decennial critics poll "Critics' Top 250 Films", ranking at 171st on the list, and in their directors poll at 224th.
Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.
In 1989, the United States Library of Congress named Star Wars among its first selections to the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"; at the time, it was the most recent film to be selected and it was the only film from the 1970s to be chosen.
Although Lucas declined to provide the Library with a workable copy of the original film upon request (instead offering the Special Edition), a viewable scan was made of the original copyright deposit print.
The soundtrack was added to the United States National Recording Registry 15 years later (in 2004).
The lack of a commercially available version of the 1977 original theatrical edit of the film since early '80s VHS releases has spawned numerous restorations by disgruntled fans over the years, such as Harmy's Despecialized Edition.
In addition to the film's multiple awards and nominations, Star Wars has also been recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists.
The film ranks first on 100 Years of Film Scores, second on Top 10 Sci-Fi Films, 15th on 100 Years...
100 Movies (ranked 13th on the updated 10th anniversary edition), 27th on 100 Years...100 Thrills, and 39th on 100 Years...
100 Cheers.
In addition, the quote "May the Force be with you" is ranked eighth on 100 Years...
100 Movie Quotes, and Han Solo and Obi-Wan Kenobi are ranked as the 14th and 37th greatest heroes respectively on 100 Years...
100 Heroes & Villains.
==
Merchandising ==
Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut, as only Kenner Products had accepted marketing director Charles Lippincott's licensing offers.
Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign.
Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for four action figures between February and June 1978.
Jay West of the Los Angeles Times said that the boxes in the campaign "became the most coveted empty box[es] in the history of retail.
"
In 2012, the Star Wars action figures were inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame.
The novelization of the film was published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker in December 1976, six months before the film was released.
The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
Marketing director Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976.
By February 1977, a half million copies had been sold.
Foster also wrote the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978) to be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was not a financial success.
Marvel Comics also adapted the film as the first six issues of its licensed Star Wars comic book, with the first issue sold in April 1977.
Roy Thomas was the writer and Howard Chaykin
was the artist of the adaptation.
Like the novelization, it contained certain elements, such as the scene with Luke and Biggs, that appeared in the screenplay but not in the finished film.
The series was so successful that, according to Jim Shooter, it "single-handedly saved Marvel.
"
In 2013, Dark Horse Comics published a comic adaption of the original screenplay's plot.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33⅓ rpm 7-inch phonograph record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content was copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars."
The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film.
The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne.
The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.
An audio CD boxed set of the Star Wars radio series was released in 1993, containing the original 1981 radio drama along with the radio adaptations of the sequels
, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel
, The Empire Strikes Back, was released in 1980.
In 1983, the final installment of the trilogy, Return of the Jedi, was released.
A prequel trilogy was released between 1999 and 2005, and following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, a sequel trilogy was released between 2015 and 2019.
Spin-off films Rogue One and Solo
: A Star Wars Story are set before and explore the backstory to the original film.
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==


==
Further reading ==
Paul Duncan (2020): The Star Wars Archives.
1977–1983, Taschen GmbH
; Anniversary edition, ISBN 978-3836581172
George Lucas (Alan Dean Foster), Donald F. Glut & James Kahn (2017): Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (Novelizations), Arrow, ISBN 978-1784759384
J. W. Rinzler (2007).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film, Quarto Publishing, ISBN 978-1781311905
Bailey, T. J. (2005).
Devising a Dream:
A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline.
Louisville, KY:
Wasteland Press.
ISBN 1-933265-55-8.

Blackman, W. Haden (2004).
The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars).
New York: Del Rey.
ISBN 0-345-44903-7.

Steven A. Galipeau (2001).
The Journey of Luke Skywalker:
An Analysis of Modern Myth and Symbol, Open Court, ISBN
978-0812694321
Sansweet, Stephen (1992).
Star Wars:
From Concept to Screen to Collectible.
San Francisco:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.
==
External links ==
Star Wars essay [1] by Matt Zoller Seitz at National Film Registry
Star Wars essay
[2] by Daniel Eagan in America's Film Legacy:
The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry, A&C Black, 2010 ISBN 0826429777,
pages 740 & 741
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars at AllMovie
Star Wars at the American Film Institute Catalog
Star Wars, Episode IV:
A New Hope (1977) at Filmsite.org
Star Wars at IMDb
Star Wars at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars:
Episode IV
A New Hope on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars is an American 3D CGI animated television series created by Lucasfilm Animation, Lucasfilm Animation Singapore, and CGCG Inc.
On August 15, 2008, the debut film was released in theaters; it served as the introduction of the series.
The series made its debut on the American Cartoon Network on October 3, 2008.
It is set in the fictional Star Wars galaxy during the three-year interim between Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (the same time period as the previous 2003 Clone Wars series).
Each episode has a running time of 22 minutes, filling a half-hour time slot.
Star Wars creator George Lucas originally claimed that at least 100 episodes would be produced.
During the course of the series, 133 episodes of Star Wars: The Clone Wars were released over seven seasons, between October 3, 2008, and May 4, 2020.

On March 11, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that The Clone Wars would be "winding down", effectively canceling the series as Lucasfilm ended its contract with Cartoon Network following its acquisition by Disney.
The unreleased episodes that had already been produced were referred to at the time as "bonus content".
On January 16, 2014, the German television network Super RTL announced their plans to air these episodes as a sixth season, which consisted of 13 episodes.
Season 6, along with the other seasons and the feature film, were made available on Netflix on March 7, 2014.In July 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes on Disney+.
The new episodes served as the series' final season, which premiered on February 21, 2020 and concluded the series on May 4, 2020.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Film (2008) ===
As a lead-in to the TV series of the same name, the film was released theatrically on August 15, 2008, and was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
Though critical reception was negative, the film was a box-office success and grossed $68.3 million worldwide against an $8.5 million budget.

===
Season 1 (2008–09) ===
The premiere episodes of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars aired on October 3, 2008, and set a new record with Cartoon Network as their most-watched series premiere, attracting 3.992 million total viewers.
The season finale, "Hostage Crisis", was broadcast on March 20, 2009, and the original broadcast received 3.297 million viewers.
Season 1 depicted the attempts of the Republic and the Separatists to gain the allegiance of many planets and moons.

===
Season 2:
Rise of the Bounty Hunters (2009–10) ===
The season two premiere, "Holocron Heist", was broadcast on October 2, 2009 and attracted 2.581 million viewers.
Episode 15 was first released in Canada.
Episodes 16–21 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
In season 2, the Sith resort to hiring bounty hunters and mercenaries to steal objects and intel or to assassinate targets for them.
Meanwhile, the Jedi lead the Republic forces in an assault on the primary battle droid manufacturing facility.

The one-hour season finale combined of "R2 Come Home" and "Lethal Trackdown" was broadcast on April 30, 2010 and the original broadcast received 2.756 million viewers.

===
Season 3
: Secrets Revealed (2010–11) ===
The season three premiere, consisting of "Clone Cadets" and "ARC Troopers," was broadcast on September 17, 2010, attracting 2.42 million viewers.
These episodes, and certain others in this season, cover events from previous seasons.
Episodes 21 and 22 were released in the UK before airing in the US.
The season finale, consisting of "Padawan Lost" and "Wookiee Hunt", was broadcast on April 1, 2011, attracting 2.31 million viewers.

=== Season 4:
Battle Lines (2011–12) ===
The season four premiere, consisting of "Water War" and "Gungan Attack", was broadcast on September 16, 2011, and attracted 1.93 million viewers, the lowest premiere viewing of all seasons.
The season finale, "Revenge" was broadcast on March 16, 2012, attracting 2.03 million viewers.

===
Season 5 (2012–13) ===
The season five premiere, "Revival", was broadcast on September 29, 2012, and attracted 1.94 million viewers.
Season five consisted of 20 episodes instead of the normal 22 episode count.
The season five finale, "The Wrong Jedi", was broadcast on March 2, 2013, and attracted 2.18 million viewers.
Unlike the first four seasons, the episodes of the fifth season were released to DVD and Blu-ray in chronological order as opposed to broadcast order.

===
Season 6:
The Lost Missions (2014) ===
The sixth season was released in its entirety on March 7, 2014 on Netflix.
The season had already premiered in Germany on February 15, 2014 on Super RTL.
===
Season 7:
The Final Season (2020) ===
On July 19, 2018, Lucasfilm announced at San Diego Comic-Con that The Clone Wars would return with 12 new episodes to be released on Disney+
during the service's first year.
The seventh and final season premiered on February 21, 2020.
===
Chronological order ===
While the series is designed to be an anthology of both standalone episodes and small story arcs, various events throughout inform stories, characters, and relationships to create a recognizably continuous narrative.
On March 17, 2014, in recognition of the release of the complete series on Netflix, StarWars.com released the official chronological episode order for the first six seasons; this was later updated to include links to the episodes on Disney+.
Regarding the seventh and final season, StarWars.com revealed that episodes five through eight are set before the season premiere "The Bad Batch".

==
The Clone Wars Legacy ==
At the time of cancellation in March 2013, there were still many episodes in development.
Thirteen of these episodes were finished to become part of Season 6:
The Lost Missions
but there were still additional arcs that were never released.
In September 2014, Lucasfilm released details of multiple story arcs from the unfinished episodes.
The Bad Batch was eventually completed and aired as the first arc of season 7.
===
Print ===


====
Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir ====
A four-episode arc continued the story of Darth Maul following the events of the season 5 episode "The Lawless".
The four episodes were titled: "The Enemy of My Enemy", "A Tale of Two Apprentices", "Proxy War", and "Showdown on Dathomir" (original production codes: 6.21–6.24).
According to Dave Filoni, the four scripts "came out of one of our story conferences with George Lucas".
The scripts and designs for the arc were adapted into a four-issue comic book titled Darth Maul: Son of Dathomir, released in August 2014 by the publisher Dark Horse Comics.
The comic was the last Star Wars comic published by Dark Horse before Lucasfilm transferred the license to Marvel Comics in 2014 and was collected into a trade paperback by Marvel in 2018.The plot follows Darth Maul, who has been captured by Darth Sidious.
He is tortured by Count Dooku for information about the Shadow Collective and the allies Maul has made.
Maul escapes and heads to Zanbar to command the Death Watch army, but is followed by General Grievous and his droids.
They battle Maul and the Mandalorians, who are soon overwhelmed by the droids.
Maul flees and confers with Mother Talzin, who is revealed to be his biological mother, and plots to draw out Sidious by capturing Dooku and Grievous.
The scheme works, and Talzin is able to restore herself to her physical form, but sacrifices herself to save Maul and is killed by Grievous.
Although Maul escapes with a company of loyal Mandalorians, the Shadow Collective has fallen apart due to the conflict with Sidious, as the Hutts, Pykes, and Black Sun have all abandoned Maul.

====
Dark Disciple ====
An eight-episode arc with Asajj Ventress and Jedi Quinlan Vos was adapted into a novel by Christie Golden titled Dark Disciple, released on July 7, 2015.
The eight episodes were titled: "Lethal Alliance", "The Mission", "Conspirators", "Dark Disciple", "Saving Vos, Part I", "Saving Vos, Part II", "Traitor", and "The Path" (original production codes: 6.13–6.16 and 7.05–7.08).
The story follows Vos partnering up with Ventress, hoping to execute Count Dooku.
Eric Goldman of IGN gave the book an 8 out of 10, saying it was great.

===
Story reels ===


====
Crystal Crisis on Utapau ===
=
In September 2014, four unfinished episodes were released in completed story reel format, titled: "
A Death on Utapau," "In Search of the Crystal," "Crystal Crisis,” and "The Big Bang" (original production codes: 6.01–6.04).
The arc takes place on Utapau with Obi-Wan and Anakin investigating an arms deal involving the Separatists and a kyber crystal.
The arc also deals with Anakin's feelings after Ahsoka left the Jedi Order.
It was included in the season 6 Blu-ray.

====
The Bad Batch ====
The story reels for this four-episode arc were screened on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim, and were released on the official Star Wars website on April 29, 2015.
Scripted by Brent Friedman, the four episodes were later completed and aired as the first arc of season 7 (with some changes from the original story reels).
On July 13, 2020, a spin-off sequel series titled Star Wars: The Bad Batch was announced; it will follow the titular group of clones working as mercenaries in the immediate aftermath of the Clone Wars.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars:
Clone Wars episodes
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (film)


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars at IMDb
Skymovies.com
Episode Guide
The Clone Wars section on StarWars.com
CartoonNetwork.com
Schedule
Chronological order on StarWars.com
The Empire Strikes Back, also known as Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back, is a 1980 American epic space opera film directed by Irvin Kershner and written by Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan, based on a story by George Lucas.
The second installment in the original Star Wars trilogy, as the sequel to Star Wars (1977), it is the second film in the franchise to be produced, and the fifth episode of the "Skywalker saga".
The story is set three years after the events of the first film, as the Galactic Empire hunts the scattered Rebel Alliance throughout the galaxy.
While Darth Vader relentlessly pursues Luke Skywalker's friends—Han Solo, Princess Leia, and Chewbacca—Luke studies the Force under Jedi Master Yoda to prepare himself for his upcoming confrontation with Vader.

The film is produced by Lucasfilm.
The ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Harrison Ford, Carrie Fisher, Billy Dee Williams, Anthony Daniels, David Prowse, Kenny Baker, Peter Mayhew, and Frank Oz.
Following the success of Star Wars, Lucas hired Brackett to write the sequel; following her death in 1978, he outlined the Star Wars saga as a whole and wrote the next draft himself, before hiring Kasdan.
Lucas chose not to direct due to his obligations at Industrial Light & Magic and handling the financing, and passed the duty to Kershner, his former professor.
Filmed from March to September 1979, The Empire Strikes Back faced a difficult production that included actor injuries, the death of writer Leigh Brackett, a set fire, and fines from the Writers and Directors Guilds of America.
The initial budget was $18 million, but ballooned to $33 million by the time production concluded, making it one of the most expensive films ever made at the time.

The Empire Strikes Back premiered at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. on May 17, 1980, and was released in the United States on May 21, 1980.
The film became the highest-grossing film of 1980 with $440 million.
Initially being met with mixed critical reviews, it is now hailed by many as the best film in the Star Wars saga and one of the greatest films ever made.
The film has grossed over $550 million worldwide from its original run and several re-releases.
Adjusted for inflation, it is the second-highest-grossing sequel of all time and the thirteenth highest-grossing film of all time in North America.
In 2010, the film was selected for preservation in the United States' National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".
The Empire Strikes Back had a significant impact on filmmaking and popular culture, being regarded as a rare example of a sequel that transcends the original.
The climax, in which Vader reveals to Luke that he is his father, is often cited as one of the greatest plot twists in film history.
The final installment of the original Star Wars trilogy, Return of the Jedi, followed in 1983.

==
Plot ==
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, the Imperial fleet, led by Darth Vader, dispatches probe droids across the galaxy to locate the Rebel Alliance led by Princess Leia.

One such probe locates the base on the ice planet Hoth.
While investigating the probe, Luke Skywalker is captured by a wampa, but escapes using the Force and his lightsaber.
As Luke starts succumbing to hypothermia, the Force spirit of Obi-Wan Kenobi, Luke's deceased mentor, instructs him to go to the swamp planet Dagobah to train under Jedi Master Yoda.
Han Solo discovers Luke and insulates him against the weather until they are rescued the next morning.

Alerted to the Rebels' location, the Empire launches a large-scale attack using AT-AT walkers to capture the base, forcing the Rebels to evacuate.
Han and Leia escape with C-3PO and Chewbacca on the Millennium Falcon, but the ship's hyperdrive malfunctions.
They hide in an asteroid field, where Han and Leia grow closer amidst the tensions.
Vader summons several bounty hunters, including Boba Fett, to locate the Falcon.

Meanwhile, Luke travels with R2-D2 in his X-wing fighter to Dagobah, where he crash-lands.
He meets Yoda, a diminutive creature who reluctantly accepts Luke as his Jedi apprentice after conferring with Obi-Wan's spirit.
After evading the Imperial fleet, Han's group travels to the floating Cloud City on the planet Bespin, which is governed by his old friend Lando Calrissian.
Fett tracks them to the city and Vader forces Lando to hand the group over to the Empire.
Vader uses the group to lure Luke, intending to recruit him by turning him to the dark side of the Force.
Luke experiences a premonition of Han and Leia in pain and, against Obi-Wan and Yoda's protestations, abandons his training to rescue them.

Vader intends to hold Luke in suspended animation by imprisoning him in carbonite and tests the process on Han.
He survives and is given to Fett who intends to collect his bounty from Jabba the Hutt.
Lando frees Leia and Chewbacca, but they are too late to stop Fett's departure.
The group fights their way back to the Falcon and flees the city.
Luke arrives and engages Vader in a lightsaber duel over the city's central air shaft.
Vader severs Luke's right hand and tempts him to embrace his anger and join the dark side.
Luke refuses to join his father's murderer, but Vader reveals that he is Luke's father.
Desperate, Luke drops into the air shaft and is ejected beneath the floating city, latching onto an antenna.
He reaches out through the Force to Leia, and the Falcon returns to rescue him.
The group is pursued by TIE fighters and almost cornered by Vader on his Star Destroyer until R2-D2 repairs the Falcon's hyperdrive, allowing them to escape.

Aboard the Rebel fleet, Luke's hand is replaced with a robotic prosthesis.
He, Leia, C-3PO, and R2-D2 observe as Lando and Chewbacca depart on the Falcon to find Han.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: A former moisture farmer, an X-wing fighter pilot in the Rebel Alliance, and Jedi in training.

Harrison Ford as Han Solo: A former smuggler, the captain of the Millennium Falcon, and an Alliance general.

Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa: The princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan, and one of the Alliance's leaders.

David Prowse as Darth Vader: A powerful Sith Lord and chief enforcer of the Galactic Empire.

James Earl Jones as the voice of Darth Vader.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian: The administrator of Cloud City, an old friend of Han's, and the previous owner of the Millennium Falcon.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: A humanoid protocol droid serving the Alliance, and R2-D2's longtime companion.

Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca: Han's loyal Wookiee friend and co-pilot.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2:
An astromech droid series in service of the Alliance; Luke's friend and C-3PO's longtime companion.

Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi:
Luke's deceased Jedi mentor, who retruns as a Force spirit after being killed by his former pupil, Vader, in the first film.

Frank Oz as Yoda: A diminutive, centuries-old Jedi Master living in self-imposed exile who reluctantly trains Luke.

While Oz provided the voice and puppetry for Yoda, Kathryn Mullen, David Barclay, Wendy Froud, and Deep Roy served as assistant puppeteers.
Denis Lawson reprises his role as Wedge Antilles, one of the Rebel Alliance's top X-wing pilots, from the first film.
John Hollis plays Lobot, Lando's personal aide.
Julian Glover appears as General Veers, the commander of the Empire's forces during the battle of Hoth.
Kenneth Colley portrays Admiral Piett, the Empire's top admiral and commander of Vader's personal flagship, Executor.
Michael Sheard portrays Admiral Ozzel, Vader's previous admiral, who is killed for his incompetence.
Michael Culver appears as Captain Needa, one of the Empire's captains who fails to catch the Millennium Falcon and is executed by Vader as a result.
John Ratzenberger portrays Major Derlin, one of the officers who leads the Rebels in the Battle of Hoth.
Bruce Boa appears as General Rieekan, Princess Leia's military advisor on Hoth.
Christopher Malcolm plays Rebel snowspeeder pilot Zev Senesca, who finds Skywalker and Solo on the surface of Hoth.
John Morton portrays Dak Ralter, Luke's gunner in the battle of Hoth who is crushed by an AT-AT.
Richard Oldfield plays Rebel pilot Hobbie Klivian.
Morris Bush, Alan Harris, Chris Parsons, and Cathy Munro appear as the bounty hunters Dengar, Bossk, 4-LOM, and Zuckuss, respectively.

Jeremy Bulloch portrays Boba Fett, a bounty hunter hired by Vader to track down the Millennium Falcon; the character is voiced by Jason Wingreen, and was originally introduced in the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
Multiple actors have portrayed the Emperor, the evil ruler of the Galactic Empire and Vader's Sith master, who appears via hologram.
Clive Revill provides his voice, while actress Marjorie Eaton portrays him physically, wearing a mask.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
George Lucas's Star Wars, released in May 1977, was an unexpected box office success and quickly became a pop-culture phenomenon.
Lucas, who did not expect the success, stopped doing publicity after a while because it became too overwhelming, and had flown to Hawaii with friend Steven Spielberg to begin conceptualising their next blockbuster franchise, Indiana Jones.
The success of Star Wars and its licensing opportunities meant that a sequel was inevitable.
Sequels were generally not well regarded at the time and Lucas was not ready to commit, as the production of the original film "had been a four-year horrific seat-of-the-pants experience"—one
that Lucas never wanted to experience again.
However, the film did not represent what he had envisioned, and he knew that a sequel would allow him to finish the story.
Additionally, Lucas had already established the Star Wars universe, so he figured a sequel would provide an opportunity to introduce more ideas and adventures.
"
I always felt if I could go back to those environments using the same characters, I could make a helluva better movie," he said.
Lucas hired Alan Dean Foster, the ghostwriter of the Star Wars novelization, to write the sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye
so it could be adapted as a low-budget film if Star Wars was a box-office failure, but by August 1977 Star Wars was still the number-one film in cinemas, motivating Lucas to continue the saga.
Before production on the sequel, then titled Star Wars: Chapter II, could begin, Lucas had to sort out various problems that had arisen.
His special effects company, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), no longer had any employees, as many of them had left to form Apogee and work on Battlestar Galactica.
Galactica became a "thorn in [Lucas's] side," as the project bore a strong resemblance to Star Wars to the point that production illustrator Ralph McQuarrie called it a "rip-off."
Lucas hired some of the Galactica crew back, but had to replace others—most notably John Dykstra, with whom he'd had a hard time working on Star Wars.
Lucas had almost fired Dykstra during the production of the first film but did not because Dykstra had close friends on the crew, so Lucas also chose not to hire them back as well.
One of Lucas's new hirees was Brian Johnson, who had worked on 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) and turned down an opportunity to work on the first film.
Lucas also had to build his studio, Lucasfilm, which similarly had few employees.
Distributor 20th Century Fox had tried to sell Star Wars to other studios because it feared it would lose money on the overbudget production, but following the film's success, by September 1977 it was eager to make a deal with Lucas on the sequel.
Unlike the prolonged negotiations of Star Wars, which took years, Lucas was able to strike a deal with Fox swiftly, partially because he planned to finance the sequel himself with $33 million from loans and the previous film's earning.
Lucas hoped to become independent from the Hollywood film industry and went against the principles of many Hollywood producers, who believe in never investing one's own money.
Similar to how he set up The Star Wars Corporation for the first film, Lucas created a subsidiary, The Chapter II Company, to help minimize the financial risks.
By the end of September, the contract had been signed: the "negative cost" of the sequel was set at $8 million, Lucas would receive final cut privilege, and Lucasfilm was guaranteed 77.5% of the profits if the film grossed over $100 million.
Under the contract, by July 1978 Lucasfilm subsidiary Black Falcon Ltd. would gain control of licensing, marketing, and merchandise, and the profit split would be 80% for Lucasfilm and 20% for Fox.
The contract made it clear that Fox would have no creative control over the film, set a January 1979 start date for filming, and a May 1, 1980 release date.
Now fully in control of the Star Wars enterprise, Lucas chose not to direct the sequel because of his other production roles, including overseeing ILM and handling the financing.
Lucas offered the role of director to Irvin Kershner, one of his former professors at the USC School of Cinematic Arts.
Kershner was known for smaller character-driven films, but had more recently directed the true-life drama Raid on Entebbe (1977) and the thriller Eyes of Laura Mars (1978).
Kershner initially turned Lucas down, citing his belief that a sequel would never meet the quality or originality of Star Wars.
He called his agent, who immediately demanded that he take the job.
In November 1977, Lucas hired science-fiction author Leigh Brackett to write the screenplay.
Lucas had written the original Star Wars only out of necessity, which had been challenging since he had to create the world.
Since the Star Wars universe had been established, he chose to collaborate with Brackett and give her ideas for the script.

===
Writing ===
Lucas began outlining the film around August 1977, introducing ideas such as the Emperor and the notion that Luke Skywalker had a long-lost sister.
Lucas also started considering ways to explain Luke actor Mark Hamill's facial scars (which he suffered in a January 1977 automobile crash) within the context of the Star Wars universe.
According to Hamill, Lucas told him that, had Hamill died in the accident, he would have replaced Luke with a new character.
This led to the creation of the Wampa, a monster that dwelled on the planet Hoth that mauls Luke in the opening scenes of the film.
Story conferences began on November 28, 1977, after Lucas hired Brackett.
The two held story conferences until early December, and Brackett wrote her draft while McQuarrie began to paint concept art.
Lucas and Brackett discussed including the planet of the Wookiees (which had been considered for the first film), a new alien species, and two new characters—the Emperor and a gambler from Han Solo's past.
Lucas also decided early on that they needed to introduce a new teacher for Luke, since Obi-Wan had been killed off in the first film.
Lucas's initial treatment, partly inspired by Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces, contained a few key scenes that made the final film: Luke would study the Force under a Jedi master (then named Minch Yoda) before dueling Vader and ending up hanging from the bottom of a floating city, and the gambler would betray Han to Vader.
As Harrison Ford had not agreed to appear in a third film, the character of Han Solo was written out of the ending by having him go off to secure funding for the Rebellion.
During his discussions with Brackett, Lucas conceived the title, The Empire Strikes Back, and the idea to have it follow a structure akin to his film American Graffiti (1973)—one main plot with three subplots.
Lucas envisioned 60 scenes, a script around 100 pages, and a roughly two-hour runtime.
The two laid out the film's basic plot, but also discussed expanding the character of Han—with Lucas suggesting that he met Chewbacca because he was raised by Wookiees—and Luke's lost twin sister.
Brackett and Lucas came up with various ideas for subplots, including a love triangle (Lucas compared Han to Rhett Butler, Leia to Scarlett O'Hara, and Luke to Ashley Wilkes in Gone with the Wind), the reintroduction of Obi-Wan as a ghost, an arctic world inspired by Flash Gordon (1939–1940) and The Thing from Another World (1951), further development of the Force, and the new Jedi master being an elderly, froglike alien.
They also conceived new aliens, planets, and the notion that the Emperor, not Darth Vader, is the true villain.
Brackett's treatment, delivered on February 21, 1978, was similar to the final film, but with Anakin Skywalker appearing as a ghost to instruct Luke and Vader as a separate character.
Lucas was disappointed with Brackett's draft, but he was unable to discuss it with her, as she died soon after.
Without Brackett, Lucas had to write the next draft himself.
It was this draft where Lucas first made use of the "Episode" numbering for the films; The Empire Strikes Back became Episode II.
He also used the plot twist that Darth Vader was Luke's father.
According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the yearlong struggles writing the first film, and quickly wrote two more drafts, all in April 1978.Lucas outlined a new backstory:
Anakin Skywalker had been Ben Kenobi's brilliant student, and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by the Emperor (who was really a Sith Lord).
Anakin battled Kenobi on the site of a volcano and was horribly wounded, but was resurrected as Darth Vader (this idea would later be realised on screen over 25 years later in Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith).
Meanwhile, Kenobi hid Luke on Tatooine while the Republic became the Empire and Vader systematically hunted down the Jedi.
With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that The Empire Strikes Back would be the second film of two trilogies, designating it Episode V by the fifth draft.
Lawrence Kasdan had just completed writing Raiders of the Lost Ark, and Lucas hired him to write the next drafts with input from director Irvin Kershner.
Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult film, helped by the new, darker storyline, and developed the series from the light adventure roots of the first film.

===
Filming ===
Filming began in Norway, at the Hardangerjøkulen glacier near the town of Finse, on March 5, 1979.
Like the filming of Star Wars, where the production in Tunisia coincided with the area's first major rainstorm in fifty years, the weather was against the film crew.
While filming in Norway, they encountered the worst winter storm in fifty years.
Temperatures dropped to −20 °F (
−29 °C), and 5.5 metres (18 ft) of snow fell.
On one occasion, the crew were unable to exit their hotel.
They achieved a shot involving Luke's exit of the Wampa cave by opening the hotel's doors and filming Mark Hamill running out into the snow while the crew remained warm inside.
Mark Hamill's face was scarred in a motor accident that occurred between filming of Star Wars and
The Empire Strikes Back.
Despite reports to the contrary, the scene in which Luke is knocked unconscious by the Wampa was not added specifically to explain this change to Hamill's face.
Lucas admitted that the scene "helped" the situation, though he felt that Luke's time fighting in the rebellion was sufficient explanation.
The production moved to Elstree Studios near London on March 13, where over 60 sets were built, more than double the number used in the previous film.
A fire in January on Stage 3 (during filming of Stanley Kubrick's The Shining) forced the budget to be increased from $18.5 million to $22 million, and by July the budget increased $3 million more.

Filming finished on September 24, 1979.The script contained a scene in which Princess Leia professed her love to Han Solo, with Han replying "I love you too."
Harrison Ford felt the characterization was not being used effectively, and Kershner agreed.
After several takes, the director told the actor to improvise on the spot, and Ford changed Solo's line to "
I know.
"During
production, great secrecy surrounded the fact that Darth Vader was Luke's father.
Like the rest of the crew, Prowse—who spoke all of Vader's lines during filming—was given a false page that contained dialogue with the revelatory line being, "No.
Obi-Wan killed your father.
"
Hamill was informed just moments before cameras rolled on his close-up by director Irvin Kershner, and was told that he would be one of only three people to know the twist (the other two being Kershner and Lucas); therefore, if the news were to leak, they would know the source was Hamill.
Hamill did not tell anyone, including his wife; according to Hamill, Ford did not learn the truth until he watched the film.
To preserve the dramatic opening sequences of his films, Lucas wanted the screen credits to come only at the end.
While this practice has become more common over the years, this was relatively unusual at the time.
The Writers and Directors Guilds of America had no problem allowing it on Star Wars, back in 1977, because the writer-director credit (George Lucas) matched the company name.
However, when Lucas did the same thing for the sequel, it became an issue because they viewed the company credit (Lucasfilm) as displaying Lucas' name at the start of the film, while the director and writers had theirs on the end.
The guilds fined him over $250,000 and attempted to pull Empire out of theatres.
The DGA also attacked Kershner and fined him $25,000; to protect his director, Lucas paid all the fines to the guilds.
Due to the controversy, he left the Directors and Writers guilds, and the Motion Picture Association.
The initial production budget of $18 million was 50 percent more than that of the original.
After the various increases in budget, The Empire Strikes Back became one of the most expensive films of its day, costing $33 million, and after the bank threatened to call in his loan, Lucas was forced to approach 20th Century Fox.
Lucas made a deal with the studio to secure the loan in exchange for paying the studio more money, but without the loss of his sequel and merchandising rights.
After the film's box office success, unhappiness within the studio over the deal's generosity to Lucas caused studio president Alan Ladd, Jr. (who had supported the deal) to quit.
The departure of his longtime ally caused Lucas to take Raiders of the Lost Ark to Paramount Pictures.

=== Effects ===
After the release of Star Wars, ILM grew from a struggling company and moved to Marin County, California.
The Empire Strikes Back provided the company with new challenges.
Whereas Star Wars mostly featured space sequences, The Empire Strikes Back featured not only space dogfights but also an ice planet battle opening sequence and elements of cities that floated among the clouds.
For the battle scenes on the ice planet Hoth, the initial intent was to use bluescreen to composite the Imperial walkers into still-shots from the original set.
Instead, an artist (Michael Pangrazio) was hired to paint landscapes, resulting in the Imperial walkers being shot using stop motion animation in front of the landscape paintings.
The original designs for the AT-ATs were, according to Phil Tippett, "big armored vehicles with wheels".
Many believe the finished design was inspired by the Port of Oakland container cranes, but Lucas denied this.
In designing the Jedi Master Yoda, Stuart Freeborn used his own face as a model and added the wrinkles of Albert Einstein for the appearance of exceptional intelligence.
Sets for Dagobah were built five feet (1.52m) above the stage floor, allowing puppeteers to crawl underneath and hold up the Yoda puppet.
The setup presented communication problems for Frank Oz, who portrayed Yoda, as he was underneath the stage and unable to hear the crew and Mark Hamill above.
Hamill later expressed his dismay at being the only human character on set for months; he felt like a trivial element on a set of animals, machines, and moving props.
Kershner commended Hamill for his performance with the puppet.

===
Music ===
The musical score of The Empire Strikes Back was composed and conducted by John Williams, and it was performed by the London Symphony Orchestra at a cost of about $250,000.
In 1980, the company RSO Records published this film's original musical score as both a double LP album and as an 8-track cartridge in the United States.
Its front cover artwork features the mask of Darth Vader against a backdrop of outer space, as seen on the advance theatrical poster for the film.

In 1985, the first compact disc (CD) issue of the film score was made by the company Polydor Records, which had absorbed both RSO Records and its music catalog.
Polydor Records used a shorter, one compact-disc edition of the music as their master.
In 1993, 20th Century Fox Film Scores released a special boxed set of four compact discs: the Star Wars Trilogy: The Original Soundtrack Anthology.
This anthology included the film scores of all three members of the original Star Wars Trilogy in separate CDs, even though there was significant overlap between the three (such as the Star Wars theme music).In 1997, the record company RCA Victor released a definitive two-CD set to accompany the publications of all three of the Special Editions of the films of the Star Wars Trilogy.
This original limited-edition set of CDs featured a 32-page black booklet that was enclosed within a protective outer slip-case.
The covers of the booklet and of the slip-case have selections from the poster art of the Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition.
All of the tracks have been digitally re-mastered supposedly for superior clarity of sound.

RCA Victor
next re-packaged the Special Edition set later on in 1997, offering it in slim-line jewel case packaging as an unlimited edition, but without the packaging that the original "black booklet" version offered.
In 2004, the Sony Classical Records company purchased the sales rights of the original trilogy's musical scores—primarily because it already had the sales rights of the music from the trilogy of prequels: The Phantom Menace, Attack of the Clones, and Revenge of the Sith.
Hence in 2004, the Sony Classical company began manufacturing copies of the film-score CDs that RCA Victor had been making since 1997, including the one for The Empire Strikes Back.
This set was made with new cover artwork similar to that of the film's first publication on DVD.
Despite the digital re-mastering by Sony Classical, their CD version made and sold since 2004 is essentially the same as the version by RCA Victor.

==
Release ==
The world premiere of The Empire Strikes Back was held on May 17, 1980, at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. (as a special Children's World Premiere event).
The film had a Royal Charity Premiere in London at the Odeon Cinema in Leicester Square on May 20.
The special event was dubbed "Empire Day", a playful take on the British Commonwealth Day holiday (known as Empire Day prior to 1958), where legions of stormtroopers were unleashed across the city.
A series of other charity benefit premieres were held in numerous locations on May 19 and 20.
The film went on to official general release in North America and the U.K. on May 21, 1980.
The first wave of release included 126 70 mm prints, before a wider release in June 1980 (which were mostly 35 mm prints).
Lucas added three shots to the film's ending before the latter release.
During the initial theatrical run in Europe and Australia, the short film Black Angel by Star Wars art director Roger Christian was shown before the feature.

Prior to its opening crawl, the film began in a similar way to the original Star Wars film with a presentation of both the "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away...."
text and with the Star Wars logo receding into a starscape background.

The crawl then appeared with the plain text headings "Episode V" and
"The Empire Strikes Back".

Trailer and poster promotions for the film generally read "Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back" without the episode number.
Like A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back was rated PG by the Motion Picture Association of America, and certificate U in the United Kingdom.

===
Box office ===
The Empire Strikes Back opened mid-week across 126 theaters prior to the three-day Memorial Day holiday weekend.
Compared to Star Wars $1.5 million Memorial Day opening weekend, The Empire Strikes Back earned $4.9 million during the weekend—an average of $38,972 per theater.
This figure increased a further $1.5 million during the holiday Monday to a total of $6.4 million—an average of $50,919 per theater—making it the number one film of the weekend, ahead of counterprogrammed debuting films, the comedy The Gong Show Movie ($1.5 million) and psychological horror
The Shining ($600K).After four weeks on release, it expanded to 824 screens and grossed $10.8 million for the weekend setting a new weekly record of $20.4 million.
Within three months of the release of The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas had recovered his $33 million investment and distributed $5 million in bonuses to employees.
It earned $181.4 million during its first run in the United States and Canada.

It was re-released on July 31, 1981 and grossed a further $26.8 million and again on November 19, 1982 with a gross of $14.5 million to bring its gross to $222.7 million.
When The Empire Strikes Back returned to cinemas in 1997, it grossed $22 million in its first weekend of re-release.
As of 2007, the film has grossed $290.5 million domestically and $547.9 million worldwide.
35 years after the film's initial release, it re-entered the UK box office at number 9 grossing $470,000 from June 4–7, 2015.In commemoration for its 40th anniversary, the film was given a limited re-released into 411 theaters on July 10, 2020.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic closing most theaters worldwide and limiting what films played, Empire grossed $611,000 and topped the box office.

===
Critical response ===
Initial critical reception of The Empire Strikes Back was divided, with some critics dismissing the film and others celebrating it.
For example, Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote a largely dismissive review of the film, saying "it is nice and inoffensive and, in a way that no one associated with it need be ashamed of, it's also silly.
Attending to it is a lot like reading the middle of a comic book.
"
David Denby of New York magazine called the film "a Wagnerian pop movie—grandiose, thrilling, imperiously generous in scale, and also a bit ponderous".
Judith Martin of The Washington Post criticized the film's "middle-of-the-story" plot, which she claimed had no particular beginning or end.
However, this was a concept that Lucas had intended.
James Harwood of Variety wrote, "'The Empire Strikes Back' is a worthy sequel to 'Star Wars,' equal in both technical mastery and characterization, suffering only from the familiarity with the effects generated in the original and imitated too much by others."
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and stated that although the film "has some poor special effects" and that Lando Calrissian "isn't given enough screen time to develop into anyone special," he found these weaknesses "trivial compared to the strengths of the film, which are considerable and sometimes even majestic.
"Charles
Champlin of the Los Angeles Times stated that the film "seems to me a hugely accomplished and exciting follow-on to 'Star Wars'," adding that "I wish it were a handful of minutes shorter
but this is my single caveat about another richly imaginative, engrossing and spectacular motion picture from the redoubtable George Lucas."
Roger Angell of The New Yorker reported, "I had a great time at 'The Empire Strikes Back,' and although I did not find it as consistently pleasing and exciting as its predecessor, I felt stretched and terrifically entertained—and convinced, as I was at 'Star Wars,' that I was watching a first-class kids' movie."
Richard Combs of The Monthly Film Bulletin was negative, writing, "That story counts for less than gimmicks, and characters less than both, might be judged from the lack of resonance in the one narrative revelation, concerning Darth Vader and Luke Skywalker."
Bruce McCabe of The Boston Globe said, "This is a respectable sequel to 'Star Wars' but not as good," explaining that "[t]he sequel is more calculated.
The spontaneous energy of the original, which grew out of the arcane riskiness of the project, is missing."
In Ares Magazine issue 3, Christopher John wrote that "George Lucas has produced a better film than the original, though many feared he would not even be able to equal it."
===
Accolades ===
At the 53rd Academy Awards, The Empire Strikes Back won the award for Best Sound, which was awarded to Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, and Peter Sutton.
In addition, the film received the Special Achievement Academy Award for Best Visual Effects that was awarded to Brian Johnson, Richard Edlund, Dennis Muren, and Bruce Nicholson.
Composer John Williams was also nominated for Best Original Score, and Norman Reynolds, Leslie Dilley, Harry Lange, Alan Tomkins, and Michael Ford were nominated for Best Art Direction.
In addition, John Williams was awarded the British Academy Film Award for his compositions: the Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music.
The Empire Strikes Back also received British Academy Film Award nominations for Best Sound and Best Production Design.
Williams was also nominated for a Grammy Award and a Golden Globe Award for his musical score of the film.
The Empire Strikes Back received four Saturn Awards, for Mark Hamill as Best Actor, Irvin Kershner for Best Director, Brian Johnson and Richard Edlund for Best Special Effects, and the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film.
The Empire Strikes Back won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.
The film was nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.
The Empire Strikes Back was awarded the Golden Screen Award in Germany.

==
Post-release ==


===
Thematic analysis ===
Like its predecessor, The Empire Strikes Back draws from several mythological stories and world religions.
It also includes many elements from 1930s film serials such as a childhood favorite of Lucas', Flash Gordon, which similarly featured a city afloat in the sky.

===
Special Edition and other changes ===
As part of Star Wars's 20th anniversary celebration in 1997, The Empire Strikes Back was digitally remastered and re-released along with Star Wars and Return of the Jedi under the title
Star Wars Trilogy:
Special Edition.
Lucas took this opportunity to make several minor changes to the film.
These included explicitly showing the Wampa creature on Hoth in full form, creating a more complex flight path for the Falcon as it approaches Cloud City, digitally replacing some of the interior walls of Cloud City with vistas of Bespin, and replacing certain lines of dialogue.
A short sequence was also added depicting Vader's return to his Super Star Destroyer after dueling with Luke, created from alternate angles of a scene from Return of the Jedi.
Most of the changes were small and esthetic.
Some fans believe that the changes to the film were less detrimental than that of the other two entries in the trilogy.
The film was also resubmitted to the MPAA for rating; it was again rated PG, but under the Association's new description nomenclature, the reason given was for "sci-fi action/violence".
This version of the film runs 127 minutes.

The 2004 release, among other changes replaced Jason Wingreen's voicework as Boba Fett with Temuera Morrison, who portrayed the character's father Jango Fett in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
Similarly, the Emperor, as voiced by Clive Revill and portrayed by Marjorie Eaton, was replaced by Ian McDiarmid, who portrayed the character in later films.

===
Home media ===
When the film debuted on television, it was preceded by a second-person introduction by Darth Vader, framed as an interruption of the Earth broadcast by the Galactic Empire.
The film was released on CED in 1984 and on VHS and Laserdisc several times during the 1980s and 1990s.
The Empire Strikes Back was released on DVD in September 2004, bundled in a box set with A New Hope,
Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of extra features.
The films were digitally restored and remastered, with additional changes made by George Lucas.
The bonus features include a commentary by George Lucas, Irvin Kershner, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher, as well as an extensive documentary called Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy.
Also included are featurettes, teasers, trailers, TV spots, still galleries, video game demos, and a preview of Revenge of the Sith.
For the DVD release, Lucas and his team made changes that they stated would ensure continuity between The Empire Strikes
Back and the then-recently released prequel trilogy films.
The most noticeable of these changes was replacing the stand-in used in the holographic image of the Emperor (with Clive Revill providing the voice) with actor Ian McDiarmid providing some slightly altered dialogue.
With this release, Lucas also supervised the creation of a high-definition digital print of The Empire Strikes Back and the original trilogy's other films.
It was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc "limited edition" boxed set that did not feature the bonus disc.
The film was reissued again on a separate two-disc Limited Edition DVD for a brief time from September 12, 2006, to December 31, 2006, this time with the film's original, unaltered version as bonus material.
It was also re-released in a trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.
There was controversy surrounding the initial release, because the DVDs featured non-anamorphic versions of the original films based on LaserDisc releases from 1993 (as opposed to newly remastered, film-based, high-definition transfers).
Since non-anamorphic transfers fail to make full use of the resolution available on widescreen televisions, many fans were disappointed with this choice.
On August 14, 2010, George Lucas announced that all six Star Wars films in their Special Edition form would be released on Blu-ray Disc in Fall 2011.
On January 6, 2011, 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment announced the Blu-ray release for September 2011 in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
The Empire Strikes Back was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued The Empire Strikes Back on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.
===
Radio ===
A radio play adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back was written by Brian Daley, and was produced for and broadcast on the National Public Radio network in the U.S. during 1983.
It was based on characters and situations created by George Lucas, and on the screenplay by Leigh Brackett and Lawrence Kasdan.
Its director was John Madden, with sound mixing and post-production work done by Tom Voegeli.
Mark Hamill, Billy Dee Williams, and Anthony Daniels reprised their roles as Luke Skywalker, Lando Calrissian, and C-3PO respectively, with John Lithgow voicing Yoda.
This radio play was designed to last for five hours of radio time, usually presented in more than one part.
Radio agencies estimate that about 750,000 people tuned in to listen to this series radio play beginning on February 14, 1983.
In terms of the canonical Star Wars story, this radio drama has been given the highest designation, G-canon.
==
Legacy ==
The film was selected in 2010 to be preserved by the Library of Congress as part of its National Film Registry.
35 mm reels of the 1997 Special Edition were initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possessed a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical release.
===
Modern reception ===
Although The Empire Strikes Back received mixed reviews from critics at the time of its release, the film has since grown in esteem; it is now widely heralded as the best film in the Star Wars saga and one of the greatest films ever made.
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 94% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 102 reviews, with an average rating of 8.97/10.
The site's critics consensus reads: "Dark, sinister, but ultimately even more involving than A New Hope, The Empire Strikes Back defies viewer expectations and takes the series to heightened emotional levels."
At Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 82 out of 100 based on 25 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Bob Stephens of the San Francisco Examiner described The Empire Strikes Back as "the greatest episode of the Star Wars Trilogy" in 1997.
In 2016, James Charisma of Playboy ranked the film #3 on a list of 15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals.
Roger Ebert described the film as the strongest and "most thought-provoking" film of the original trilogy.
Ian Nathan of Empire magazine gave the film a perfect five-star rating, proclaiming "it's generally agreed that The Empire Strikes Back is the best film of George Lucas' initial trilogy (despite a latter-day shift toward the original's storytelling purity).
Not a sequel as such, but the next part of a continuing story
, Empire marks enormous progression both in terms of the mythos of the series and in the filmmaking quality itself.
"
In 2014, the magazine's readers voted for the film as the greatest movie ever made, based on 250,000 votes.
Chuck Klosterman suggested that while "movies like Easy Rider and Saturday Night Fever painted living portraits for generations they represented in the present tense, The Empire Strikes Back might be the only example of a movie that set the social aesthetic for a generation coming in the future."

===
Cultural impact ===
In the 2014 Empire Magazine list, "The 301 Greatest Movies of All Time" voted by fans, The Empire Strikes Back was named as the greatest film ever made.
It was listed at number 2 on Empire's 2017 list of the 100 Greatest Movies.

===
Merchandise ===


====
Comics ====
A comic book adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back was released by Marvel Comics in 1980.
It was written by Archie Goodwin and illustrated by Al Williamson and Carlos Garzon.
It was published simultaneously in four formats: as a magazine (Marvel Super Special #16), an oversized tabloid edition
(Marvel Special Edition
Featuring Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back), as part of a serialized comic book series, and as a paperback pocket book.
It has been noted by comic book historians and industry professionals that Marvel's Star Wars comics published prior to the release of The Empire Strikes Back include plot points similar to those used in the film, such as the Empire's counter-strike against the rebels after the destruction of the Death Star.
However, the film's makers have not acknowledged receiving any inspiration from the comic books.

====
Books ====
A novelization of the film was released on April 12, 1980, and published by Del Rey Books.
It was written by Donald F. Glut, and based on the film's screenplay.
Japanese artist Toshiki Kudo also adapted it into a manga comic book.
Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set.
Released in 1980, the 24-page Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back
read-along book was accompanied by a 33+1⁄3 rpm 7-inch gramophone record.
Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the film with an abridged and condensed version of the story.
The record was produced by Buena Vista Records.

====
Video games ====
Video games based on the film have been released on several consoles.
Additionally, several Star Wars video games feature or mention key events seen in the film, but are not entirely based upon the film.

In 1982 Parker Brothers released Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back for the Atari 2600 games console, which featured the speeder attack on the AT-ATs on Hoth.
The arcade game
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back followed in 1985.
The game features familiar battle sequences and characters played from a first-person perspective.
Specific battles include the Battle of Hoth and the subsequent escape of the Millennium Falcon through an asteroid field.
A conversion was released in 1988 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, BBC Micro, Atari ST, and Commodore Amiga.
In 1992, JVC released the LucasArts-developed video game also titled Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) console.
The player assumes the role of Luke Skywalker and maneuvers through Skywalker's story as seen in the film.
In 1992, Ubisoft released a version for the Game Boy.
Like its previous incarnation, it follows the story of Luke Skywalker.
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back was developed for the console Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) by LucasArts and was released by JVC in 1993.
The SNES game is similar in spots to the 1991 NES release, and is on a 12-megabit cartridge.

====
Pinball ====
Hankin released a pinball machine based on The Empire Strikes Back in 1980.
The machine was designed by David Hankin and was the last built by the manufacturer.

The Empire Strikes Back was the first Star Wars pinball machine ever created.
This game was first exhibited in November 1980 at the National Amusement Machine Operators Convention held at Surfers Paradise, Queensland, Australia.
A total of 350 units were produced and are sought-after collectors items.

==
Sequels and prequels ==
The sequel and the final installment of the original trilogy, titled Return of the Jedi, was released on May 25, 1983.
The film was directed by Richard Marquand and produced by Howard Kazanjian.
The prequel trilogy consists of Episode I – The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005); all of which were written and directed by George Lucas, and produced by Rick McCallum.
The sequel trilogy was announced in October 2012 when George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company, and began with the first installment,
The Force Awakens, was released on December 18, 2015.
It was directed by J. J. Abrams who co-wrote the screenplay with Lawrence Kasdan and Michael Arndt.
Original trilogy cast members including Harrison Ford, Mark Hamill, and Carrie Fisher reprised their roles, co-starring alongside franchise newcomers Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Adam Driver, and Oscar Isaac.
The trilogy's second installment, The Last Jedi, was released on December 15, 2017, with Rian Johnson as screenwriter and director, and most of the cast returning.
The final installment, The Rise of Skywalker, was released on December 20, 2019.
It was directed by Abrams, who co-wrote the screenplay with Chris Terrio.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Official website at starwars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode V
The Empire Strikes Back on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
The Empire Strikes Back at IMDb
The Empire Strikes Back at the TCM Movie Database
The Empire Strikes Back at AllMovie
Star Wars, Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back at Filmsite.org
The Empire Strikes Back at the American Film Institute Catalog
The Empire Strikes Back essay by Daniel Eagan
In America's Film Legacy, 2009-2010: A Viewer's Guide To The 50 Landmark Movies Added To The National Film Registry
In 2009–10, Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2011, ISBN 1441120025 pages 166
-169 [1]
The fictional universe of the Star Wars franchise features multiple planets and moons.
While only the feature films and selected other works are considered canon to the franchise since the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, some canon planets were first named or explored in works from the non-canon Star Wars
expanded universe, now rebranded Star Wars Legends.

In the theatrical Star Wars films, many settings for scenes set on these planets and moons were filmed at real-world locations on Earth.
For example, the resort city of Canto Bight located on the planet Cantonica, seen in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017), was filmed in Dubrovnik, Croatia.

==
Star Wars canon astrography ==
The Star Wars galaxy contains several broad sub-regions.
Their exact definitions fluctuated somewhat during the Legends continuity, but were later formally updated by the new canon continuity when Disney purchased Lucasfilm.
The new canon map is broadly similar to the later versions of the Legends galactic map.

As a general rule, most of the galaxy's wealth, power, and population are concentrated near the middle of the galactic circle – the "Core Worlds".
The first major interstellar powers in the core are stated to have risen many millennia ago, gradually coalescing into the early Galactic Republic, with its capital at Coruscant.
Waves of colonization (and conquest) by the Republic gradually spread outward from the Core, into the sparser systems at the galaxy's edge, such as Tatooine.
Worlds of the Outer Rim are rich in raw resources but lack the population, infrastructure, or political power of the Core.
Major galactic sub-regions are further divided into quadrants, sectors, etc.,
down to individual star systems and planets.

The galaxy has at least two companion-satellite dwarf galaxies, one of which is known as the Rishi Maze, but they are very lightly settled or explored.

The canon map depicts a top-down view of the galactic disk, with "north" as the side of the galactic center that Coruscant is located on.
As the capital planet of the Republic and later the Empire, Coruscant is used as the reference point for galactic astronomy, set at XYZ coordinates 0-0-0.
Standardized galactic time measurements are also based on Coruscant's local solar day and year.

According to the updated Visual Dictionary series made by Pablo Hidalgo for the Sequel Trilogy, these are the general regions of the galaxy spreading outward from the Core:
Deep Core – the innermost brightly lit region of space, with a supermassive black hole at the center which binds the galaxy together.
Densely-packed with stars, nebulae, and other anomalies, it is therefore thinly settled due to the resulting high radiation levels and lack of stable hyperspace routes.

Core Worlds – powerful and wealthy planets with millennia-long histories, many of them founding members of the Galactic Republic.
On-screen examples include Coruscant, Corellia, Alderaan, and Hosnian Prime.

The Colonies – the first colonies founded by the nascent Galactic Republic in ancient times.
The name is somewhat of a misnomer, as they have grown nearly as powerful as the "Core Worlds" themselves, though their histories aren't quite as long or prestigious (i.e. comparable to how the United States or Canada could be called "the colonies" of Great Britain).
Mentioned by name in The Rise of Skywalker.

Inner Rim – the original edge of the Galactic Republic, where expansion waves stopped for many generations.

Expansion Region – nestled between the "Inner Rim" and the "Mid Rim", anachronistically named due to a new colonization wave starting again.

Mid-Rim
– Generally industrialized though not very important planets, but more developed than the true "frontier" in the Outer Rim.
On-screen examples include Naboo and Kashyyyk.

Outer Rim – a vast region including all of the last major star systems up to the galaxy's edge.
As the last region that the Republic expanded into, it is relatively the least developed, a frontier more often than not exploited by the central galactic government for its resources.
On-screen examples include Tatooine, Yavin, Hoth, Bespin, Endor, Geonosis, Utapau, Mustafar, and Kessel.

Wild Space – star systems located beyond the Outer Rim – because a galaxy's "edge" is not a fixed border line, but a concentration of stars tapering off in frequency.
Unlike the Outer Rim, these sparse few systems around the galaxy's circumference were never formally charted.
More broadly, Attack of the Clones established that the Star Wars galaxy actually possesses at least three small satellite galaxies, never colonized and considered largely inhospitable.
The secret cloner-world Kamino, however, is located in one of these minor galactic clusters beyond the Outer Rim.

Unknown Regions – the new Canon map establishes that, due to the stability of hyperspace lanes, inhabited planets are weighted toward the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane with the "western" one being mostly unexplored.
These Unknown Regions are home to the first Jedi temple on Ahch-To and the Chiss Ascendancy, into which Grand Admiral Thrawn was born.
The remnants of the Empire retreated here after their defeat at Endor, reforming into the First Order – as well as, secret even to the First Order, Palpatine's Sith forces reconstituting on Exegol.

Western Reaches – the sectors once controlled by the Republic that border the Unknown Regions of the galactic "west".
Essentially similar to the Outer Rim in terms of their history and economic development, the only difference being that instead of being located at the galaxy's physical edge, they are located at the edge of galactic exploration in the "western" side of the Republic.
In The Force Awakens, it is stated in dialogue that Jakku is in the Western Reaches.
Apart from these broad regions radiating out from the galactic core, there are also several major galactic sub-regions of note:

Mandalorian space – technically located in the Outer Rim, but relatively close to the border with the Mid-Rim, near Kashyyyk, in the galactic "northeast".
The planet Mandalore had its own regional space empire in ancient times, led by their formidable warrior culture.
The Mandalorians were the most difficult enemies the Jedi ever faced short of the Sith: they were not Force-wielders, but were a culture of regular humans who had honed themselves to possess the pinnacle of combat training, equipment, and battle tactics.
During a series of long wars with the Republic, however, many centuries before the Clone Wars, the Jedi were eventually able to fight them into submission - though with heavy losses.
In the Star Wars: Clone Wars animated series, both the Republic and the Separatists compete for support from rival Mandalorian factions, and in the later Star Wars: Rebels animated series, Mandalorians again divide into a proxy war between pro-Imperial and pro-Rebel forces.
According to The Mandalorian TV series, this eventually resulted in the devastation of Mandalorian space by the Empire, with surviving enclaves scattering across the Outer Rim.
Hutt Space – a fairly large swath of space along the "eastern" quadrant of the galactic plane, loosely straddling the border between the Mid-Rim and Outer-Rim.
The Hutts are a kleptocratic Mafia state, derided as "gangsters" composed of several rival clans.
The Hutts' resources and power are formidable enough that both the Republic and the Empire never bothered to conquer them, while the Hutts were too divided by their own internal politics to seriously challenge the Republic (unlike the Mandalorians).This official galactic astrography was later re-confirmed for the first time in on-screen, live-action dialogue in The Mandalorian.
In the second season's fourth episode, "The Siege", a classroom is briefly shown on a planet in the Outer Rim, in which a lesson on galactic astrography is being taught by a protocol droid.
The teacher not only lists off each of these major regions from the Visual Dictionary, but lists them in the exact same order, from the Outer Rim to the Core:
"Who can name one of the five major trade routes in the galaxy?
The Hydian Way [runs] from the Outer Rim to as far away as the Core Worlds.
However, there are several other regions within our galaxy.
They are the Mid Rim, the Expansion Region, the Inner Rim, the Colonies, the Core, and the Deep Core."
==
Star Wars canon planets and moons ==
The following list names prominent planets and moons from the Star Wars films or other canon media.

==
Star Wars Legends planets and moons =
=
These are planets with multiple appearances in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, now rebranded as Star Wars Legends.
The accompanying works were declared non-canon by Lucasfilm in April 2014, following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in October 2012.

==
Similarities to real-world planets ==
The discovery of exoplanets in the real-world universe gained pace in the early 21st century.
In 2015, the US space agency NASA published an article which stated that many of the newly discovered astronomical bodies possessed scientifically confirmed properties that are similar to planets in the fictional Star Wars universe.

Kepler-452b, a rocky super-Earth-type planet
, is said to be similar to the Star Wars planet Coruscant.
Likewise, the planets Kepler-16b and Kepler-453b, planets discovered orbitting binary stars probably resemble the desert world Tatooine.
The hot, molten worlds of Kepler-10b and Kepler-78b are comparable to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
OGLE-2005-BLG-390Lb, a cold, remote exoplanet, is like the ice planet Hoth.
Kepler-22b, thought by scientists to be an ocean planet, is compared to the planet Kamino.
According to NASA, there are also similarities to Alderaan and Endor in the real-world universe.

===
Solar System ===
Two non-canonical works also feature the real-life Solar System's planets.
Monsters and Aliens from George Lucas (1993) contains a feature, presented as a clip from a gossip column, in which a pair of Duros are abducted by humans and taken to "Urthha" (Earth), where they create havoc by misunderstanding terrestrial objects and food.
In issue #19 of the comic series Star Wars Tales (2004), the story "Into the Great Unknown" finds Han Solo and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon, fleeing the Imperial Navy.
They jump to hyperspace without doing calculations and find themselves in the middle of our Solar System, overpassing Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars while decelerating and landing in Northern America.
Han is killed by Native Americans, and a mourning Chewbacca leaves the Falcon to live in the trees, where the natives believe him to be a sasquatch.
In an epilogue set 126 years later, archaeologist Dr. Jones and his sidekick Short Round, searching for the sasquatch, find the Falcon and Han's remains.

==
See also ==
List of Star Wars filming locations
Planets in science
fiction


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Content in this article was copied from The galaxy at the Wookieepedia, the Star Wars Wiki, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share
Alike 3.0 (Unported)
(CC-BY-SA 3.0) license.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2015).
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-3816-4.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2017).
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-5551-2.

Luceno, James (2005).
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 0-7566-1128-8.

Hidalgo, Pablo (2019).
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker: The Visual Dictionary.
New York, N.Y.: DK.
ISBN 978-1-4654-7903-7.

Wallace, Daniel (1998).
Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons.
Del Rey.
ISBN 0345420683.

==
External links ==
Galaxy Building, from Alderaan to Utapau at StarWars.com (official)
Star Wars Canon:
Just How Realistic Are the Single-Biome Planets?
at The Escapist
List of planets on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Interactive map of Star Wars galaxy
In programming jargon, Yoda conditions (also called Yoda notation) is a programming style where the two parts of an expression are reversed from the typical order in a conditional statement.
A Yoda condition places the constant portion of the expression on the left side of the conditional statement.

Yoda conditions are part of the Symfony and the WordPress coding standards.

==
Origin ==
The name for this programming style is derived from the Star Wars character named Yoda, who speaks English with a non-standard syntax.
Thomas M. Tuerke claims to have coined the term Yoda notation and first published it online in 2006.
According to him, the term Yoda condition was later popularized by Félix Cloutier in 2010.

==
Example ==
Usually a conditional statement would be written as:

Yoda conditions describe the same expression, but reversed:
The constant is written to the left of the comparison operator, and the variable whose value is being checked against the constant is written to the right.
This order is comparable to the non-standard English speaking style of Yoda, which is roughly object–subject–verb (e.g., “When nine hundred years old you reach, look as good you will not.").

==
Advantage ==


===
Error detections ===
Placing the constant value in the expression does not change the behavior of the program (unless the values evaluate to false—see below).
In programming languages that use a single equals sign (=) for assignment and not for comparison, a possible mistake is to assign a value unintentionally instead of writing a conditional statement.

Using Yoda conditions:

Since 42 is a constant and can not be changed, this error will be caught by the compiler.

===
Avoiding some types of unsafe null behavior ===
Yoda conditions help with unsafe behavior in some situations.

With Yoda conditions:


==
Criticism ==
Yoda conditions are widely criticized for compromising readability by increasing the cognitive load of reading the code.
Some programming languages (such as Swift and versions of Python below 3.8) do not allow variable assignments within conditionals—for example by requiring that assignments do not return a value, or by defining as part of their grammar the invariant that conditions cannot contain assignment statements—in which case this error is impossible to encounter (that is, it would be detected as a syntax error by the parser prior to a program ever being allowed to enter into runtime).

Many compilers produce a warning for code such as if (myNumber = 42)
(e.g., the GCC -Wall option warns suggest parentheses around assignment used as truth value), which alerts the programmer to the likely mistake.
In dynamic languages like JavaScript, linters such as ESLint can warn on assignment inside a conditional.
The advantage of avoiding null behavior can also be considered a disadvantage, as null pointer errors can be hidden and only appear much later in the program.

Another disadvantage appears in C++ when comparing non-basic types as the == is an operator and there may not be a suitable overloaded operator function defined.
Example:
a Microsoft's CComBSTR compare against a string literal, written as if (L"Hello" == cbstrMessage)
, does not map to an overload function.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
united-coders.com
: What are Yoda Conditions?
Examples in Java
Yoda conditions very harmful seems to be How this technique can do much more harm than good
Harmy's Despecialized Edition is a fan-created film preservation of the original Star Wars trilogy films:
Star Wars (1977),
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
It is a high quality replica of the out-of-print theatrical versions created by a team of Star Wars fans, with the intention of preserving the films, culturally and historically.
The project was led by Petr Harmáček, an English teacher from Plzeň, Czech Republic under the online alias Harmy.

The original Star Wars trilogy was created by George Lucas and released theatrically between 1977 and 1983.
For the "Special Edition" theatrical re-release of the films in 1997, Lucas introduced noticeable changes to address his dissatisfaction with the original cuts.
These included additional scenes and altered dialogue, and new sound-effects and computer-generated imagery.
These changes were included in subsequent releases of the films for home viewing.
As of 2021, the original theatrical releases are not commercially available, and have never been released in high definition.

Some of the alterations were met with a negative response from both critics and fans.
Harmáček felt that altering the films in this way constituted "an act of cultural vandalism".
In 2010, he began to create a high definition reconstruction of the films' theatrical versions.
Harmáček and a team of eight other fans used the 2011 Blu-ray releases for the majority of material, the lower-definition 1993 LaserDisc releases as a guide to the original version, and various other sources.
The first version was published online in 2011, and updated versions have been released since.

As a derivative work, Harmy's Despecialized Edition cannot be legally bought or sold in the United States and other countries with treaties respecting US copyrights, and is "to be shared among legal owners of the officially available releases only".
Consequently, the films are mainly available via various file sharing methods.

Reaction to the project has been positive, with critics generally praising the quality and aesthetics of the work.

==
Background ==
The original Star Wars trilogy was a Lucasfilm production released theatrically by 20th Century Fox between 1977 and 1983, and was subsequently released on home media during the 1980s and 1990s.
The films were distributed by CBS/Fox Video on several formats, such as VHS, Betamax, and LaserDisc.
In 1997, to coincide with the 20th anniversary of Star Wars, Lucas re-released new cuts of the trilogy to theaters, naming them the "Special Editions".
The purpose of this release was to alter the films to meet Lucas' ideal vision that he could not achieve during their original productions.
A number of changes to the original releases included additions of enhanced digital effects, previously unreleased scenes, altered dialogue, unreleased and newly recorded music by John Williams, updated sound-effects by THX and Skywalker Sound, and entirely new CGI sequences from Industrial Light & Magic.
Reaction to the "Special Edition" versions remain controversial with commentators praising the picture and sound restoration, but criticising unnecessary additions such as computer-generated characters, creatures, and vehicles as well as alterations to the essential story; most notably a short scene involving the bounty hunter Greedo shooting at Han Solo from the first film drew significant ire.
Further changes to the series were added to the DVD release in 2004 to establish continuity with the prequel trilogy and to the Blu-ray releases from 2011.
The final release of the theatrical cuts was in 2006, when unrestored masters used for the 1993 "Definitive Collection" trilogy on LaserDisc were added as a DVD bonus feature to a limited run –
fans named this release "George's Original Unaltered Trilogy" (GOUT).Despite a high demand and many online fan petitions, Lucasfilm has refused to release the theatrical versions of Star Wars in a high quality.
In 2010, Lucas stated that bringing the original cuts to Blu-ray would be a "very, very expensive" process; as of 2020, the films are still only widely available in their altered versions.

==
Production ==


===
Conception ===
Petr Harmáček (known online by the alias "Harmy") had watched a dubbed version of the original cut of Star Wars at the age of six, and had then seen the Special Editions of The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi on their 1997 release.
Although initially admiring them, he became disappointed when he learned how much the films had been changed retroactively; he argued that replacing the original effects with re-composited digital effects was "an act of cultural vandalism".
A fan of the original trilogy, he had written his undergraduate thesis on their cultural impact.
After seeing a trailer for Adywan's cut of The Empire Strikes Back, Harmáček was inspired to create a version of the film that "undid" the various post-1977 changes and restored the theatrical releases in high-definition.
He described his motivation as: "I wanted to be able to show people who haven't seen Star Wars yet, like my little brother or my girlfriend, the original, Oscar-winning version, but I didn't want to have to show it to them in bad quality."
Harmáček's edits were the first to recreate the theatrical releases in HD.

===
Editing ===
Harmáček began creating his new cuts in 2010.
At the time, he was working as an English teacher in Plzeň and had no professional experience with film editing.
Instead, he taught himself programs such as Avisynth and Adobe
After Effects as the project progressed, beginning with Photoshop skills that he had developed in college.
To remove the post-1977 changes, Harmáček was required to go through the film frame-by-frame, correcting colors and rotoscoping.
Undoing some shots took only an hour, while others took hundreds.
Lightsabers were color-corrected, shots of the Millennium Falcon cockpit were un-cropped, Boba Fett's original voice was restored, and CGI characters and backgrounds were removed.
===
Sources ===
Most of the source material used for Harmy's Despecialized Edition was taken from Lucasfilm's official Blu-ray release of the films in 2011, while other sequences were upscaled from previous home video releases.

These include:

The 2-disc "Limited Edition" DVD release from 2006.
This set contains a low resolution copy of the theatrical cuts on a bonus disc.
Harmy refers to this disc as "George's Original Unaltered Trilogy" (GOUT).

The official trilogy on DVD box set from 2004, primarily the HDTV broadcasts of those versions of the films.

The 1997 "Special Edition" re-releases, most notably digital broadcasts of those cuts along with their LaserDisc releases.

The 1993 LaserDisc "Definitive Collection" box set.

Digital transfers of a Spanish 35 mm Kodak LPP and 70 mm film cels, a 16 mm print.

A collection of still images of the original matte paintings.
Harmáček edited these sources together using programs such as Avisynth and Adobe After Effects.
To help, Harmáček was assisted by a group of like-minded fans from the website OriginalTrilogy.com.

In total, the project took thousands of hours of work between them.
In 2011, one year after the project had begun, the first version of Harmy's Despecialized Edition was published online; new and updated versions were created regularly in the five years that followed.
As of February 2017, the most recent "despecialized" versions of Star Wars, The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi are v2.7,
v2.0 and v2.5 respectively.
As a result of the project, Harmáček was able to quit his teaching job and in 2015 was hired by UltraFlix to prepare and restore a library of 4K-encoded films for sale and rent.
He has since joined UPP, a Prague-based VFX house, as a 2D digital compositor and worked on such projects as Blade Runner 2049, Wonder Woman, and AMC's The Terror.

===
Legality ===
The legality of downloading Harmy's Despecialized Edition is contentious.
As a fan edit, the cut cannot be legally bought or sold, and treads a line between fair use and copyright infringement.
OriginalTrilogy.com states that the edits are "made for culturally historical and educational purposes" and that they are "to be shared among legal owners of the officially available releases only".
Consequently, the films are only available via various BitTorrent trackers and through specialized rapid download programs using file sharing sites.
Harmáček himself remarked: "I'm convinced that 99% of people who download this already bought Star Wars 10 times over on DVD."
As of January 2020, he had received no legal challenge from Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, the owner of Lucasfilm and 20th Century Studios, over the Despecialized Edition.
==
Translated versions ==
In 2013, Italian blogger "Leo", from the blog
DoppiaggiItalioti.it, which talks about Italian adaptations of foreign films – mainly satirizing dubbing and translation errors – worked on an Italian-language version of Harmy's Despecialized Edition of the original 1977 Star Wars, with Harmáček's permission.
He used original 35mm prints of the localized Italian-language edition for the opening crawl, subtitles, and end credits (even keeping the typos that were present), as well as a rare 1991 VHS copy of the film.
This version is no longer available, since it is based on an outdated version of Harmáček's work, although an update to the blog post assures that when a "definitive" edition is released, the localization will be adapted to that one, and also signals another Italian-language version using video from the English-language one and audio from the Italian version of the 2006 limited edition DVD.
The project also restored the original Italian trailer for the film, which Leo produced using the video from the original US trailer and audio from low-definition copies, as well as completely remaking the text sections.

==
Alternate projects ==


===
Team Negative 1 ===
Star Wars 4K77 was a fan project to scan and restore original 35mm prints of Star Wars from 1977.
The project name refers to the 4K resolution used and the film's release year of 1977.
In 2016, a few 35mm prints were located and donated to group of fans called "Team Negative 1" (TN1), who scanned these prints at 4K resolution.
TN1 released the film online in May 2018, first in the form of a 4K UHD file and then a 1080p downscale.
According to the Project 4K77 website, 97% of the restored video came from a single print that dubbed in Spanish, with the remainder from an alternate print and some frames upscaled from the official Lucasfilm Blu-ray.
TN1 followed 4K77 with Project 4K83, based on an original 35mm print of Return of the Jedi (released in 1983) that was discovered and scanned in 4K.
According to their website, this print required little cleanup, and the restoration was released in October 2018.Project 4K80, a restoration of The Empire Strikes Back (1980), was begun by TN1 in 2020, reporting that although they have multiple prints, some were faded and they required substantially more cleanup, with a project two-year time frame to complete.
==
Reception ==
Reaction to Harmy's Despecialized Edition has been universally positive.
Writing for Inverse, Sean Hutchinson placed it at number one on his list of the best Star Wars fan edits, and described it as "the perfect pre-1997 way to experience the saga".
Whitson Gordon of Lifehacker called the edits "the best version of Star Wars you can watch", and named them "the version of Star Wars we've all been clamoring for the last 20 years".
Similarly, Nathan Barry of Wired praised the films as "an absolute joy to watch", while Gizmodo described them as "very, very good".
In an article listing Ars Technica's favorite Star Wars items, Sam Machkovech selected Harmy's Despecialized Edition, calling it "a treat".

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Harmy's channel on YouTube
Star Wars
Trilogy Despecialized Edition on Facebook
Why watching the best version of Star Wars is actually illegal via Looper
Star Wars: Despecialized Edition Remastered V2.5, Introducing the Sources at IMDb
Star Wars Day is an informal commemorative day observed annually on May 4 to celebrate George Lucas' Star Wars media franchise.
Observance of the day spread quickly through media and grassroots celebrations since the franchise began in 1977.The date originated from the pun "
May the Fourth be with you", a variant of the popular Star Wars catchphrase "
May the Force be with you".
Even though the holiday was not created or declared by Lucasfilm, many Star Wars fans across the world have chosen to celebrate the holiday.
It has since been embraced by Lucasfilm and parent company Disney as an annual celebration of Star Wars.

==
History ==
The first recorded reference of the phrase being used was on May 4, 1979, the day after Margaret Thatcher was elected as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
Her political party, the Conservatives, placed a congratulatory advertisement in the London Evening News saying "May the Fourth Be with You, Maggie.
Congratulations.
"In
the 1988 episode of Count Duckula, "The Vampire Strikes Back", a space-faring superhero, Tremendous Terrance, asks Duckula the date and is told, "May the Fourth".
As Terrance departs, he tells all below, "May the Fourth Be with You.
"The
saying was used in a UK Parliament defence debate on May 4, 1994.Astrophysicist and author Jeanne Cavelos used the saying on page 94 of her 1999 book The Science of Star Wars.
In 2008, the first Facebook groups appeared, celebrating Luke Skywalker Day, with the same catchphrase.
In 2011, the first organized celebration of Star Wars Day took place in Toronto, Ontario, Canada at the Toronto Underground Cinema.
Produced by Sean Ward and Alice Quinn, festivities included an Original Trilogy Trivia Game Show; a costume contest with celebrity judges; and the web's best tribute films, mash-ups, parodies, and remixes on the big screen.
The second annual edition took place on Friday, May 4, 2012.Fans
(even government officials, such as Boris Johnson) have celebrated Star Wars in a variety of ways in social media and on television.

Since 2013, The Walt Disney Company has officially observed the holiday with several Star Wars events and festivities at Disneyland and Walt Disney World.
Disney had purchased Lucasfilm, including the rights to Star Wars, in late 2012.
The finale of The Clone Wars was made available on Disney+
on May 4, 2020.
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker, as well as an eight-episode documentary series titled Disney Gallery:
The Mandalorian, were also made available on Disney+ the same day.
An animated series, Star Wars:
The Bad Batch also premiered on Disney+
on this day in 2021.Minor League baseball teams such as the Toledo Mud Hens and the Durham Bulls have worn special uniforms as part of Star Wars Day promotions.

On Star Wars Day 2015, astronauts in the International Space Station watched Star Wars.
Also in 2015, the carillon bells inside the Peace Tower on Parliament Hill in Ottawa, Canada played "The Imperial March" theme from Star Wars, among other space-related tunes.

==
Additional dates ==


===
Revenge of the Fifth/Sixth ===
Some recognize the following day, May 5, as "Revenge of the Fifth", a play on Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith and celebrate the Sith Lords and other villainous characters from the Star Wars series rather than the Jedi.
Others celebrate this one day later, on May 6, citing "Revenge of the Sixth" as a better play on "Sith", while others refer to the 6th as "Return of the 6th" as a play on the trilogy aspect of the Star Wars films.

===
May 25 ===
The Los Angeles City Council declared May 25, 2007, as Star Wars Day, in honor of the 30th anniversary release date of Star Wars.
A separate initiative for observing Geek Pride Day on May 25 is based on the Star Wars connection along with ties to The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy (
Towel Day) and Discworld.
Solo:
A Star Wars Story was also released on May 25, 41 years after Star Wars.

== See also ==
Cinco de Mayo, a celebration held on May 5
Free Comic Book Day, which occasionally falls on May 4
Pi day, also based on the name of the date


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
"Star Wars Day: What to do on May 4 (and why)".
CNN.
May 4, 2018.
Retrieved May 4, 2018.

==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
Episode
I –
The Phantom Menace is a 1999 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas, produced by Lucasfilm, distributed by 20th Century Fox and stars Liam Neeson, Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Jake Lloyd, Ian McDiarmid, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Pernilla August, and Frank Oz.
It is the first installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy and begins the "Skywalker saga," though it was the fourth film to be produced.
Set 32 years before the original trilogy, during the era of the Galactic Republic, the plot follows Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi as they try to protect Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo in hopes of securing a peaceful end to an interplanetary trade dispute.
Joined by Anakin Skywalker—a young slave with unusually strong natural powers of the Force—they simultaneously contend with the mysterious return of the Sith.

Lucas began production of The Phantom Menace after he determined that computer-generated imagery (CGI) had advanced to the level he wanted for the prequel trilogy's visual effects.
Filming started on June 26, 1997, at locations including Leavesden Film Studios and the Tunisian desert.
The film was Lucas's first directorial effort after a 22-year hiatus following the original Star Wars in 1977.

The Phantom Menace was released in theaters on May 19, 1999, almost 16 years after the premiere of the previous Star Wars film, Return of the Jedi.
The film's premiere was extensively covered by media and was greatly anticipated because of the large cultural following the Star Wars saga had cultivated.
Despite the anticipation, it received mixed reviews.
While the visual effects, action sequences, musical score, and some performances (particularly Neeson and McGregor) were praised, criticism largely focused on the screenplay, characterization, pacing, and the character of Jar Jar Binks.
It grossed more than $924.3 million (equivalent to $1.42 billion in 2019) worldwide during its initial theatrical run, becoming the highest-grossing film of 1999, the second-highest-grossing film worldwide and in North America (behind Titanic), and the highest-grossing Star Wars film at the time.
A 3D reissue, which earned an additional $102.7 million at the box office and brought the film's overall worldwide takings to over $1 billion, was released in February 2012.
Two sequels within the prequel trilogy have been released: Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005).
==
Plot ==
The Trade Federation upsets order in the Galactic Republic by blockading the planet Naboo in preparation for a full-scale invasion.
The Republic's leader, Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum, dispatches
Jedi Knight Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice, Obi-Wan Kenobi, to negotiate with Trade Federation Viceroy Nute Gunray.
Darth Sidious, a Sith Lord and the Trade Federation's secret benefactor, orders the Viceroy to kill the Jedi and begin their invasion with an army of battle droids.
The Jedi escape and flee to Naboo.
During the invasion, Qui-Gon saves the life of a Gungan outcast, Jar Jar Binks.
Indebted to Qui-Gon, Jar Jar leads the Jedi to Otoh Gunga, the Gungans' underwater city.
The Jedi fail to persuade the Gungan leader, Boss Nass, to help the planet's surface dwellers, but manage to obtain Jar Jar's guidance and underwater transport to Theed, the capital city of Naboo.
After rescuing Queen Padmé Amidala, the group make their escape from Naboo aboard her Royal Starship, intending to reach the Republic capital planet of Coruscant.

Passing through the Federation blockade, the ship is damaged in the crossfire and its hyperdrive is disabled.
The group lands for repairs on the outlying desert planet of Tatooine, situated beyond the Republic's jurisdiction.
Qui-Gon, Jar Jar, astromech droid R2-D2, and Padmé—disguised as one of her handmaidens—visit the settlement of Mos Espa to purchase a new part for their hyperdrive.
They encounter a junk dealer, Watto, and his nine-year-old slave, Anakin Skywalker, a gifted pilot and engineer who has built a protocol droid, C-3PO.

Qui-Gon senses a strong presence of the Force within Anakin, and is convinced that he is the prophesied "Chosen One," destined to restore balance to the Force.
With Watto refusing to accept payment in Republic currency, Qui-Gon wagers both the required hyperdrive part and Anakin's freedom in a podrace.
Anakin wins the race and joins the group to be trained as a Jedi, leaving behind his mother, Shmi.
En route to their starship, Qui-Gon is attacked by Darth Maul, Sidious' apprentice, who was sent to capture Amidala.
After a brief lightsaber duel, Qui-Gon escapes onboard the starship with the others.

Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan escort Padmé to Coruscant so that she can plead her people's case to Valorum and the Galactic Senate.
Qui-Gon asks the Jedi Council for permission to train Anakin as a Jedi, but the Council refuses, concerned that Anakin is vulnerable to the dark side of the Force.
Undaunted, Qui-Gon vows to take up Anakin as his new apprentice.
Meanwhile, Naboo's Senator Palpatine persuades Amidala to call for a vote of no confidence in Valorum to elect a more capable leader and to resolve the crisis.
Though she is successful in pushing for the vote, Amidala grows frustrated with the corruption in the Senate and decides to return to Naboo.
Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan are ordered by the Jedi Council to accompany the queen and investigate the return of the Sith, whom they had believed to be extinct for more than a millennium.

On Naboo, Padmé reveals herself as the queen before the Gungans to gain their trust, and persuades them to help against the Trade Federation.
Jar Jar is promoted to general and joins his tribe in a battle against the droid army, while Padmé leads the search for Gunray in Theed.
Anakin is told by Qui-Gon to hide in a starfighter alongside R2 in the hangar, but accidentally triggers its autopilot and flies into space, where he takes part in the battle against the Federation droid control ship, inadvertently causing its destruction from within, which deactivates the droid army.
Maul, who has been dispatched by Darth Sidious to capture Amidala, engages Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan in a lightsaber duel.
He mortally wounds Qui-Gon, but is cut in half by Obi-Wan and his remains fall down a shaft.

Qui-Gon asks Obi-Wan to train Anakin before dying in his arms.

Following the battle, Gunray is arrested by the Republic, and Palpatine is elected Chancellor.
Master Yoda promotes Obi-Wan to the rank of Jedi Knight, and reluctantly accepts Anakin as Obi-Wan's apprentice.
A funeral is held for Qui-Gon, attended by the other Jedi, who contemplate that there is still one Sith remaining since there are always two of them.
During a celebratory parade on Naboo, Padmé presents a gift of thanks to the Gungans to establish peace.

== Cast ==
Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, a Jedi Master who discovers Anakin and under the belief that he is destined to bring balance to the force as the prophesied "Chosen One", insists that the boy be trained as a Jedi, despite the Jedi Council's refusal to do so.
Lucas originally wanted to cast an American actor in the role, but cast Neeson (who is Northern Irish) because he considered that Neeson had great skills and presence.
Lucas said Neeson was a "master actor, who the other actors will look up to, who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands.
"
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, Qui-Gon's twenty-five-year-old Jedi Padawan, who holds his master in high regard but questions his motives at times, especially when it seems he is breaking the rules of the Jedi.
McGregor was cast from a shortlist of fifty actors, all of whom had to be compared to pictures of young Alec Guinness, who portrayed the elderly Obi-Wan, to make a believable younger version.
McGregor had a vocal coach to help his voice sound closer to Guinness's.
He also studied several of Guinness's performances, from his early work and the original Star Wars films.

Natalie Portman as Queen Padmé Amidala, the fourteen-year-old Queen of Naboo, who hopes to protect her planet from the Trade Federation's blockade invasion.
Throughout most of the film, she uses the name Padmé Naberrie and poses as one of the queen's handmaidens for protection.
Over 200 actresses auditioned for the role.
The production notes stated that "The role required a young woman who could be believable as the ruler of that planet, but at the same time be vulnerable and open".
Portman was chosen especially for her performances in Léon:
The Professional (1994) and Beautiful Girls (1996), which impressed Lucas.
He stated, "I was looking for someone who was young, strong, along the lines of Leia [and]
Natalie embodied all those traits and more".
Portman was unfamiliar with Star Wars before being cast, but was enthusiastic about being cast as a character she expected to become a role model.
Portman said, "It was wonderful playing a young queen with so much power.
I think it will be good for young women to see a strong woman of action who is also smart and a leader."

Jake Lloyd as Anakin Skywalker, a nine-year-old slave boy and a skilled pilot who dreams of becoming a Jedi.
Hundreds of actors were tested across the UK, Ireland, Canada, and the United States before the producers settled on Lloyd, who Lucas considered met his requirements of "a good actor, enthusiastic and very energetic".
Producer Rick McCallum said that Lloyd was "smart, mischievous, and loves anything mechanical—just like Anakin."

Ian McDiarmid as Senator Palpatine / Darth Sidious, a middle aged senator of Naboo and a secret Sith Lord who orchestrates the invasion of his home planet to get elected Supreme Chancellor.
He is the Trade Federation's benefactor, and the Phantom Menace.
McDiarmid was surprised when Lucas approached him sixteen years after Return of the Jedi to reprise the role of Palpatine, having assumed that a younger actor would play the role in the prequel films.

Ahmed Best as Jar Jar Binks, a clumsy Gungan exiled from his home and taken in by Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan.
Best was hired after casting director Robin Gurland saw him on a Stomp performance in San Francisco.
Best was originally intended to provide motion capture data, but his offer to voice the character was accepted.
On the set, to provide references for the actors, Best was clothed in a suit made of foam and latex and a headpiece.
Best's filmed performance was later replaced with the computer-generated character.
Best frequently improvised movements to make Jar Jar look as clumsy and comedic as possible.

Anthony Daniels as the voice of C-3PO, a protocol droid built by Anakin.
He lacks a metal covering in this film; R2-D2 humorously refers to it as being "naked".
A puppeteer dressed in a color closely matching the background—in a manner similar to the Japanese puppet theater Bunraku—manipulated a skeletal C-3PO figure attached to his front while Daniels read his lines off-camera.
The puppeteer was erased from the film during post-production.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2, an astromech droid from Naboo that saves Queen Amidala's ship when other astro droids fail.
Before the film's production started, fans campaigned on the Internet to retain Baker as R2-D2; Lucas replied that the actor would reprise the role.
Baker is used for scenes where R2-D2 bends forwards and backwards and wobbles from side-to-side.
Robots and a digital model were used in other shots.

Pernilla August as Shmi Skywalker, Anakin's mother, who is concerned for her son's future and allows him to leave with the Jedi.
August, a veteran of Swedish cinema, was chosen after auditioning with Liam Neeson.
She was afraid of being rejected because of her accent.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda, the centuries-old Jedi Grandmaster and head of the Jedi Council who is apprehensive about allowing Anakin to be trained.
Yoda was mostly portrayed as a puppet designed by Nick Dudman based on Stuart Freeborn's original design.
Oz controlled the puppet's mouth, and other parts were controlled by puppeteers using remote controls.
Lucas fitted Yoda's filming around Oz's schedule as he finished and promoted In & Out.
A computer-generated Yoda is featured in two distant shots.
Warwick Davis (who played the part of the Ewok Wicket W. Warrick in Return of the Jedi in 1983) portrays him in the scene where Obi-Wan becomes a Jedi Knight.
Lucas said he originally wanted to use a full-time digital Yoda, but the attempts did not work well enough at the time.
Beginning with the 2011 Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, which was also used for the 3D reissue, a CG Yoda replaced the puppet entirely.

Oliver Ford Davies as Sio Bibble, the governor of Naboo.

Hugh Quarshie as Captain Quarsh Panaka, Queen Amidala's chief of security at the Theed Palace.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master and high-ranking member of the Jedi Council who opposes training Anakin.

Ray Park as Darth Maul, Darth Sidious' Zabrak Sith apprentice, who wields a double-bladed lightsaber.

Peter Serafinowicz as the voice of Darth Maul
Terence Stamp as Chancellor Finis Valorum, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who commissions Obi-Wan and Qui-Gon to negotiate with the Trade Federation viceroy.
Lucas described the character as a "good man
but he's beleaguered—a bit like [Bill] Clinton".

Keira Knightley as Sabé, one of Queen Amidala's handmaidens who serves as her decoy throughout the majority of the film.

Silas Carson as:
Nute Gunray, the viceroy of the Trade Federation who leads Naboo's invasion and tries to force Queen Amidala to sign a treaty to legitimize their occupation of the planet.

Ki-Adi-Mundi, a wise and powerful Jedi Master who sits on the Council.

Lott Dod, a Trade Federation Senator.

An ill-fated pilot.
This was the role for which Carson originally auditioned.

Jerome St. John Blake as:
Rune Haako, Gunray's chief lieutenant and Settlement Officer in the Trade Federation.

James Taylor as the voice of Rune Haako.

Oppo Rancisis, a Jedi Master and member of the Council.

Orn Free Ta, a Twi-lek senator.

Mas Amedda, a Chagrian politician and Vice Chair of the galactic senate.
Additionally, Brian Blessed, Andy Secombe, and Lewis MacLeod
voiced Boss Nass, the leader of the Gungan tribe who allies with the Naboo surface dwellers, Watto, a junk dealer on Tatooine who owns Anakin and his mother as slaves, and Sebulba, an aggressive, scheming podracer who is Anakin's main rival at the Boonta Eve podrace, respectively.
Greg Proops and Scott Capurro voiced Fode and Beed, respectively, the two-headed announcer of the Boonta Eve Race.
Alan Ruscoe appears as Jedi Master Plo Koon and Neimoidian Daultay Dofine, commander of the Trade Federation's droid control ships.
Ralph Brown plays Ric Olie, commander of the Naboo Royal Space Fighter Corps and chief pilot aboard Queen Amidala's starship, Matthew Wood appears as the Twi'lek Bib Fortuna, alongside a CGI Jabba the Hutt who is voiced by an uncredited actor.
Dominic West plays the role of an unnamed Naboo guard, and Sofia Coppola appears as Saché, one of Amidala's handmaidens.
Christian Simpson appears as Lieutenant Gavyn Sykes.
Lindsay Duncan voices
TC-14, a protocol droid on the Federation ship.
Sally Hawkins made her screen debut as an uncredited villager.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
While writing the original Star Wars film, Lucas decided the story was too vast to be covered in one film.
He introduced a wider story arc that could be told in sequels if it became successful.
He negotiated a contract that allowed him to make two sequels, and over time created an elaborate backstory to aid his writing process.
While writing the second film, The Empire Strikes Back, Lucas considered directions in which to take the story.
In the original trilogy, Darth Vader was revealed to have been Anakin Skywalker, a once-powerful Jedi Knight, and a traitor to the Jedi Order.
With this backstory in place, Lucas decided that the movies would work best as a trilogy.
In the trilogy's final episode, Return of the Jedi, Vader is redeemed through an act of sacrifice for Luke.
Throughout the 1980s, Lucas said he had no desire to return to Star Wars and had canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of Return of the Jedi.
However, because Lucas had developed most of the backstory, the idea of prequels continued to fascinate him.
In the early 1990s, Star Wars saw a resurgence in popularity in the wake of Dark Horse's comic line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels.
Lucas saw that there was still a large audience for his idea of a prequel trilogy, and with the development of special effects generated with computer-generated imagery (CGI), Lucas considered returning to his saga and directing the film.
In 1993, it was announced in Variety and other sources that he would be making the prequels.
Lucas began outlining the story; Anakin Skywalker rather than Obi-Wan Kenobi would be the protagonist, and the series would be a tragedy examining Darth Vader's origins.
A relic of the original outline was that Anakin would, like his son, grow up on Tatooine.
Lucas also began to change the prequels' timeline relative to the original series; instead of filling in the tangential history, they would form the beginning of a long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death.
This was the final step toward turning the franchise into a saga.
Lucas began writing the Star Wars prequel trilogy on November 1, 1994.
The screenplay of Star Wars was adapted from Lucas' 15-page outline that was written in 1976, which he designed to help him keep track of the characters' backstories and events that occurred before the original trilogy.
Anakin was first written as a twelve-year-old, but Lucas reduced his age to nine because he felt that the lower age would better fit the plot point of Anakin being affected by his mother's separation from him.
Eventually, Anakin's younger age led Lucas to rewrite his participation in the movie's major scenes.
The film's working title was The Beginning; Lucas later revealed that its true title was The Phantom Menace; a reference to Palpatine hiding his true identity as an evil Sith Lord behind the facade of a well-intentioned public servant.
The larger budget and possibilities opened up by the use of digital effects made Lucas "think about a much grander, more epic scale—"which
is what I wanted Star Wars to be".
The story ended with five simultaneous, ongoing plots, one leading to another.
The central plot is Palpatine's intent to become Chancellor, which leads to the Trade Federation's attack on Naboo, the Jedi being sent there, Anakin being met along the way, and the rise of the Sith Lords.
As with the original trilogy, Lucas intended The Phantom Menace to illustrate several themes throughout the narrative.
Duality is a frequent theme; Amidala is a queen who passes as a handmaiden, Palpatine plays on both sides of the war, among others.
"
Balance" is frequently suggested; Anakin is supposedly "the one" chosen to bring balance to the Force—Lucas said, "Anakin needed to have a mother, Obi-Wan needed a Master, Darth Sidious needed an apprentice" as without interaction and dialogue, "you wouldn't have
drama".
In November 2015, Ron Howard confirmed that he, Robert Zemeckis, and Steven Spielberg were approached by Lucas to direct The Phantom Menace.
All three approached directors told Lucas that he should direct the film, as they each found the project "too daunting."
===
Pre-production and design ==
=
Before Lucas had started writing, his producing partner Rick McCallum was preparing for the film.
McCallum stated that his experience with The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles led to many of his decisions on The Phantom Menace, such as long-term deals with actors and soundstages, the employment of recent graduates with no film experience, and the creation of sets and landscapes with digital technology.
In April 1994, McCallum started searching for artists in art, architecture and design schools, and in mid-year he began location scouting with production designer Gavin Bocquet.
Industrial Light & Magic (ILM)
art director Doug Chiang impressed McCallum the most and was hired as the design director.
Art development on the film began in January 1995.Within three to four months of Lucas beginning the writing process, Chiang and his design team started a two-year process of reviewing thousands of designs for the film.
Chiang stated that Lucas intended Episode I to be stylistically different from the other Star Wars films; it would be "richer and more like a period piece, since it was the history leading up to A New Hope."
The story takes place on three planets, some with varied environments such as the human and Gungan cities of Naboo and three buildings in Coruscant.
With the exception of the Gungan city, which had an art nouveau-inspired visual, these locations would be given distinctive looks with some basis in the real world.
The concept drawings of Ralph McQuarrie for the original trilogy served as the basis for Mos Espa—which was also inspired by old Tunisian hotels and buildings and had touches such as a market place to differentiate it from A New Hope's Mos Eisley—and Coruscant, in particular a metropolis design that became the basis for the Senate.
Bocquet would later develop the work of Chiang's team and design the interiors, translating the concepts into construction blueprints with environments and architectural styles that had some basis in reality "to give the audience something to key into.
"
Some elements were directly inspired by the original trilogy; Lucas described the battle droids as predecessors to the stormtroopers.
Chiang uses that orientation to base the droids on the Imperial soldiers, only in the same style of stylized and elongated features seen in tribal African art.
Terryl Whitlatch, who had a background on zoology and anatomy, was in charge of creature design.
Many of the aliens are hybrids, combining features of real animals.
At times, entire food chains were developed, even though only a small percentage of them would appear in the film.
Whitlatch also designed detailed skeletons for the major characters and facial muscles on Jar Jar Binks as a reference for ILM's animators.
Each creature would reflect its environment; those on Naboo were more beautiful because the planet is "lush and more animal-friendly", Tatooine has rough-looking creatures "with weather-beaten leathery skin to protect them from the harsh desert elements", and Coruscant has bipedal, human-looking aliens.
The film made extensive use of the new technique of digital pre-visualization, using computers to essentially create 3-D animated storyboards.
This was done for dozens of scenes in the film but was first and primarily used in the pod race sequence.
Animatic supervisor David Dozoretz, also an ILM alum, worked on this sequence for nearly three years, and at one point had a 25 minute version of the race, although the film only included a 9-minute version.

Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard was recruited to create a new Jedi fighting style for the prequel trilogy.
Gillard likened the lightsaber battles to a chess game "with every move being a check".
Because of their short-range weapons, Gillard thought that the Jedi would have had to develop a fighting style that merged every swordfighting style, such as kendo and other kenjutsu styles, with other swinging techniques, such as tennis swings and tree-chopping.
While training Liam Neeson and Ewan McGregor, Gillard wrote a sequence that lasted around 60 seconds and intended to be around five or six sequences per fight.
Lucas later referred to the Jedi as "negotiators" rather than high-casualty soldiers.
The preference of hand-to-hand combat was intended to give a spiritual and intellectual role to the Jedi.
Because Gillard thought that the stunt jumps with the actors and stuntmen dangling from wires did not look realistic, air rams were used to propel them into the air instead.
Lucas decided to make elaborate costumes, because the film's society was more sophisticated than the one depicted in the original trilogy.
Designer Trisha Biggar and her team created over 1,000 costumes that were inspired by various cultures.
Biggar worked closely with concept designer Iain McCaig to create a color palette for the inhabitants of each world:
Tatooine followed A New Hope with sun-bleached sand colors
, Coruscant had grays, browns, and blacks, and Naboo had green and gold for humans while Gungans wore "a leathery look, like their skin".
The Jedi costumes followed the tradition from the original film; Obi-Wan's costume was inspired by the costume that was worn by Guinness.
Lucas said he and Biggar would look at the conceptual art to "translat[e]
all of these designs into cloth and fabric and materials that would actually work and not look silly".
Biggar also consulted Gillard to ensure that the costumes would accommodate action scenes, and consulted the creature department to find which fabrics "wouldn't wear too heavily" on the alien skins.
A huge wardrobe department was set up at Leavesden Film Studios to create over 250 costumes for the main actors and 5,000 for the background ones.
Nute Gunray's Thai accent was chosen after Lucas and McCallum listened to various languages to decide how the Neimoidians would speak.
The character design of Watto was an amalgam of rejected ideas; his expressions were based on video footage of Secombe's voice acting, photographs of animation supervisor Rob Coleman imitating the character, and modeler Steve Alpin saying Watto's lines to a mirror.
Lucas described Sebulba's design as "a spider crossed with an orangutan crossed with a sloth", with a camel-like face, and clothing inspired by medieval armor.

===
Casting ===
After Samuel L. Jackson expressed interest in appearing in a Star Wars film, he was approached by casting director Robin Gurland to play Windu.
Ray Park, a martial arts champion with experience in gymnastics and sword fighting, was originally a member of the stunt crew.
Stunt coordinator Nick Gillard filmed Park to demonstrate his conception of the lightsaber battles.
Lucas and McCallum were so impressed with the test tape that they gave Park the role of Maul.
His voice was considered "too squeaky" and was dubbed over in post-production by Peter Serafinowicz.
Keira Knightley's parents tried to convince her not to audition, but the teenage actress still sought a role since she was a Star Wars fan.
The casting was influenced by Knightley's remarkable similarity to Natalie Portman, with the actress admitting their mothers could not tell each other apart.
Knightley was reported to have "cried every single day" due to finding the wardrobe uncomfortable.
Silas Carson was cast as Nute Gunray because another actor was uncomfortable with the costumes used by the Trade Federation characters, which were hot, exerted a lot of pressure on the bearer, and took about 15 minutes to apply.
Hugh Quarshie considered the part of Panaka as "a good career move" and a production that would be fun to make.
Brian Blessed originally auditioned for the role of Sio Bibble, the Governor of Naboo, for which he was considered "too loud".
Casting director Robin Gurland approached him to play Nass because it was a "bigger than life" character with "a kind of bravado".
Blessed described Nass as a "reluctant hero".
Sofia Coppola, daughter of Lucas' long-time friend and creative partner Francis Ford Coppola, considers Lucas as "like an uncle to me".
As she prepared the script for her directorial debut
The Virgin Suicides, Coppola heard Lucas would make a new Star Wars film and asked him if she could accompany him during filming.
Lucas offered Coppola a role in the royal entourage, which she accepted because it "seemed like a good vantage point to watch without getting in the way".
===
Filming ===
Filming began on June 26, 1997, and ended on September 30 of that year, primarily taking place at Leavesden Film Studios in England.
Leavesden was leased for a two and a half year period so the production company could leave the sets intact and return after principal photography had been completed.
The forest scenes on Naboo were filmed at Cassiobury Park in Watford, Hertfordshire.
Pick-ups were shot between August 1998 and February 1999 after Lucas screened a rough cut of the film for friends and colleagues in May 1998.
Most of the action and stunts were filmed by Roger Christian's second unit, which worked alongside the main unit instead of afterwards because of the high number of shots to be completed daily.
The Tunisian desert was again used for the Tatooine scenes; Mos Espa was built outside the city of Tozeur.
On the night following the third day of shooting in Tozeur, an unexpected sandstorm destroyed many of the sets and props.
The production was quickly rescheduled to allow for repairs and was able to leave Tunisia on the date originally planned.
The Italian Caserta Palace was used as the interior of the Theed City Naboo Palace; it was used as a location for four days after it had been closed to visitors.
Scenes with explosions were filmed on replica sets in Leavesden.

A binder with the film's storyboards served as a reference for live-action filming, shots that would be filmed in front of a chroma key blue screen, and shots that would be composed using CGI.
The sets were often built with the parts that would be required on screen; often they were built only up to the heights of the actors.
Chroma key was extensively used for digital set extensions, backgrounds, or scenes that required cinematographer David Tattersall to seek powerful lamps to light the sets and visual effects supervisor John Knoll to develop software that would remove the blue reflection from shiny floors.
Knoll, who remained on set through most of the production, worked closely with Tatterstall to ensure that the shots were suitable to add effects later.
The cameras were fitted with data capture models to provide technical data for the CGI artists.
The Phantom Menace was the final Star Wars film to be shot on 35mm film until Episode VII
(Star Wars:
The Force Awakens).
Some scenes, mostly of elements filmed by the special effects team, were shot on high definition, digital video tapes to test the performance of digital recordings, which Lucas and McCallum considered the next logical step because of the amount of digitizing—an expensive process compared to recording directly on digital media—for the compositing of computer-generated effects.
All future films would be shot using Sony CineAlta high-definition video cameras.
Greg Proops and Scott Capurro were filmed wearing makeup and blue bodysuits
so their heads could be joined in a computer-generated body.
The visual effects crew did not like the original results and crafted Fode and Beed as an entirely computer generated alien.
Editing took two years; Paul Martin Smith started the process in England and focused on dialogue-heavy scenes.
Ben Burtt—who was also the film's sound editor—was responsible for action sequences under Lucas' supervision.
Non-linear editing systems played a large part in translating Lucas' vision; he constantly tweaked, revised, and reworked shots and scenes.
The final sound mix was added in March 1999, and the following month, the film was completed after the delivery of the remaining visual effects shots.

=== Effects ===
The film saw breakthrough in computer generated effects.
About 1,950 of the shots in The Phantom Menace have visual effects.
The scene in which toxic gas is released on the Jedi is the only sequence with no digital alteration.
The work was so extensive that three visual effects supervisors divided the workload among themselves—John Knoll supervised the on-set production and the podrace and space battle sequences, Dennis Muren supervised the underwater sequence and the ground battle, and
Scott Squires, alongside teams assigned for miniature effects and character animation, worked on the lightsaber effects.
Until the film's production, many special effects in the film industry were achieved using miniature models, matte paintings, and on-set visual effects—although other films had made extensive use of CGI.
Knoll previewed 3,500 storyboards for the film; Lucas accompanied him to explain factors of the shots that would be practical and those that would be created through visual effects.
Knoll later said that on hearing the explanations of the storyboards, he did not know how to accomplish what he had seen.
The result was a mixture of original techniques and the newest digital techniques to make it difficult for the viewer to guess which technique was being used.
Knoll and his visual effects team wrote new computer software, including cloth simulators to allow a realistic depiction of the digital characters' clothing, to create certain shots.
Another goal was to create computer-generated characters that could act seamlessly with live-action actors.
While filming scenes with CGI characters, Lucas would block the characters using their corresponding voice actors on-set.
The voice actors were then removed and the live-action actors would perform the same scene alone.
A CGI character would later be added into the shot to complete the conversation.
Lucas also used CGI to correct the physical presence of actors in certain scenes.
Practical models were used when their visuals helped with miniature sceneries for backgrounds, set extensions, and model vehicles that would be scanned to create the digital models or filmed to represent spaceships and podraces.
Lucas, who had previously confronted problems with the props used to depict R2-D2, allowed ILM and the production's British special effects department to create their own versions of the robot.
Nine R2-D2 models were created; one was for actor Kenny Baker to be dropped into, seven were built by ILM and featured two wheelchair motors capable of moving 440 pounds (200 kg), enabling it to run and be mostly used in stage sets, and the British studio produced a pneumatic R2-D2 that could shift from two to three legs and was mostly used in Tunisia because its motor drive system allowed it to drive over sand.
Lucas originally planned to create many of the aliens with computer graphics, but those that would be more cost-effectively realized with masks and animatronics were created by Nick Dudman's creature effects team.
These included the Neimodians, background characters in Mos Espa, the Jedi Council, and the Galactic Senate.
Dudman's team was told where the creatures would be required six months before principal photography begun, and they rushed the production.
The Neimodian suits, which were originally intended as digital characters, were delivered one day before they would be required on set.
Dudman traveled to Skywalker Ranch to see the original creatures that could be reused, and read the script for a breakdown of scenes with practical creatures, leaving only the more outlandish designs to be created using CGI.To research for the podrace vehicles, the visual effects crew visited a jet aircraft junkyard outside Phoenix, Arizona and scavenged four Boeing 747 engines.
Life-sized replicas of the engines were built and sent to Tunisia to provide reference in the film.
Except for Jake Lloyd inside a hydraulically controlled cockpit and a few practical podracer models, the entire podracing scene—which the effects crew designed to be as "out of this world" as possible—is computer-generated.
===
Music ===
As with previous Star Wars films, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace's score was composed and conducted by John Williams.
He started composing the score in October 1998 and began recording the music with the London Voices and London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios on February 10, 1999.
Williams decided to use electronic instruments such as synthesizers to enhance the sound and choral pieces to "capture the magical, mystical force that a regular orchestra might not have been able to provide", and create an atmosphere that was "more mysterious and mystical and less military" than those of the original trilogy.
One of the most notable tracks is "Duel of the Fates", which uses the chorus to give a religious, temple-like feel to the epic lightsaber duel.
The track was made into a music video.
While composing Anakin's theme, Williams tried to reflect the innocence of his childhood and to foreshadow his transformation into Darth Vader by using slight suggestions of "The Imperial March" in the melody.
The film's soundtrack was released by Sony Classical Records on May 4, 1999.
This album featured the score, which Williams restructured as a listening experience; it is not presented in film order and omits many notable cues from the film because of the space restriction of the compact disc.
A two-disc "Ultimate Edition" was released on November 14, 2000.
The set features the entire score as it is heard in the film, including all of the edits and loops that were made for the sound mix.

==
Themes ==
Like previous Star Wars films, The Phantom Menace makes several references to historical events and films that George Lucas watched in his youth.
The Star Wars films typically mix several concepts from different mythologies together, drawing heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
This film also notably borrows from Ben Hur, including the podrace sequence, which mirrors the chariot race scene; additionally, the end celebration scene closely resembles a Roman parade in Ben Hur.

There are many references to Christianity in the film, such as the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil, complete with red skin and horns.
The Star Wars film cycle features a similar Christian narrative involving Anakin Skywalker; he is the "Chosen One"—the individual prophesied to bring balance to the Force—who was conceived of a virgin birth.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin will eventually fall from grace and seemingly fail to fulfill his destiny (until the prophecy comes true in Return of the Jedi).Japanese films such as Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress influenced the original Star Wars film; scholars say that The Phantom Menace was likewise influenced by Korean and Japanese culture.
Film historians Geoff King and Tanya Krzywinska write, "The costume and make-up designs ...
favour a mixture of the gothic and the oriental [sic] over anything very futuristic.
The gothic is most strongly apparent in Darth Maul's demonic horns and the red and black make-up mask that borrows from the facial designs found in depictions of Japanese demons".
King and Krzywinska say that "Qui-Gon's pony tail and Obi-Wan's position of apprentice further encourage a reading in terms of the Samurai tradition".
They also say "Amidala, in keeping with her status and character, has a number of highly formal outfits ... to go with hair sculpted into a curve that frames make-up of a Japanese cast".
The Jedi practice Zen-like meditation and martial arts, as did the ancient Japanese Samurai warriors.
The name "Qui-Gon" adapts the term qigong, which refers to a Chinese discipline involving meditation and cultivation of the flow of the vital energy called "Chi" or "Qi" for healing, health, and combat.
The words Ch'i (Chinese), gi (Korean), ki (Japanese), and the Indian term "Prana" all refer to the energy that is thought to flow through all living things, from the source of all chi (or power), which is "The Way" or "The Tao" in Chinese philosophy.
In Taoist philosophy, from The Way, yin and yang—the opposing but complementary aspects of reality or nature—are born.
Unlike Chinese philosophy, in which yin and yang are not moral qualities, the ancient Persian philosophy of Zurvanism taught that the dualism of dark and light forces are locked in an eternal battle while being two sides (or evolutes) of the same "Force", the force of time itself (Zurvan)—the prime mover.
These elements derive primarily from Eastern and Iranian religions and myths.
As with other Star Wars films, the themes about family and hope are featured prominently.
In the episode "Legacy" of Disney Gallery: The Mandalorian, Dave Filoni explains that the use of "Duel of the Fates" during the lightsaber duel between Darth Maul against Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi represents the fight for the fate of Anakin Skywalker.
According to Filoni, Qui-Gon Jinn acts like a father figure towards Anakin because he feels he needs one after taking him from his mother, having realized that the Jedi shouldn't be opposed to love and care.
In the end, Qui-Gon dies, and thus Anakin loses his father figure; Obi-Wan Kenobi ultimately becomes his master to honor Jinn's dying wish despite his initial contempt for him, and while he comes to eventually see him like a brother as shown in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, he doesn't act like a father, which coupled with the Jedi's indifference, seals Anakin's fate.

==
Release ==
The release on May 19, 1999 of the first new Star Wars film in 16 years was accompanied by a considerable amount of attention.
Few film studios released films during the same week: DreamWorks and Universal Studios released The Love Letter on May 21 and Notting Hill on May 28, respectively.
The Love Letter was a commercial failure but Notting Hill fared better and followed The Phantom Menace closely in second place.
Employment consultant firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas estimated that 2.2 million full-time employees missed work to attend the film, resulting in a US$293 million loss of productivity.
According to The Wall Street Journal, so many workers announced plans to view the premiere that many companies closed on the opening day.
Queue areas formed outside cinema theaters over a month before ticket sales began.
More theater lines appeared when it was announced that cinemas were not allowed to sell tickets in advance until two weeks into the release.
This was because of a fear that family theater-goers would be either unable to receive tickets or would be forced to pay higher prices for them.
Instead, tickets were to be sold on a first-come-first-served basis.
However, after meetings with the National Association of Theatre Owners, Lucasfilm agreed to allow advance ticket sales on May 12, 1999, provided there was a limit of 12 tickets per customer.
As a result, some advance tickets were sold by scalpers at prices as high as US$100 apiece, which a distribution chief called "horrible" and said was exactly what they wanted to avoid.
Daily Variety reported that theater owners received strict instructions from Lucasfilm that the film could only play in the cinema's largest auditorium for the first 8–12 weeks, no honor passes were allowed for the first eight weeks, and they were obliged to send their payments to distributor 20th Century Fox within seven days.
Despite worries about the film being finished on time, two weeks before its theatrical release Lucasfilm moved the release date from May 21 to 19, 1999.
At the ShoWest Convention, Lucas said the change was intended to give the fans a "head start" by allowing them to view it during the week and allowing families to view it during weekends.
Foreshadowing his future conversion to digital cinematography, Lucas said the film would be released on four digital projectors on June 18, 1999.
Eleven charity premieres were staged across the United States on May 16, 1999; receipts from the Los Angeles event, where corporate packages were available for between US$5,000 and US$25,000; proceeds were donated to the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Other charity premieres included the Dallas premiere for the Children's Medical Center, the Aubrey Fund for Pediatric Cancer Research at the Sloan-Kettering Hospital in New York, the Big Brother/Sister Association of the Philadelphia premiere, and the Children's National Medical Center in Washington,
D.C. A statement said that tickets were sold at US$500 apiece and that certain sections of the theaters were set aside for disadvantaged children.

===
Marketing ===
Lucasfilm spent US$20 million on the film's advertising campaign and made promotional licensing deals with Hasbro, Lego, Tricon Global Restaurants, and PepsiCo.
Lucasfilm also helped the Star Wars fan club to organize an event called Star Wars Celebration, which was held in Denver, Colorado between April 30 and May 2, 1999.The teaser trailer was released on selected screens accompanying Meet Joe Black on November 13, 1998, and media reported that people were paying full admission at theaters to see the trailer.
To keep fans from leaving before the movie was over, some theaters played the teaser an additional time after the film finished.
A second trailer was released on March 12, 1999, with the film Wing Commander.
Again, many fans paid full theater admission to watch the new trailer.
A bootlegged version of the preview was leaked to the Internet the same day.
The next morning, the trailer was released on the film's official website and shortly afterwards the servers became overloaded.
The theatrical trailer caused even more media attention because it was premiered in theaters and screened at the ShoWest Convention in Las Vegas, and was aired on Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood.
The teaser poster, featuring Anakin with his shadow forming Darth Vader's silhouette, was released on November 10, 1998.
After Lucas opted for a drawn theatrical poster, Drew Struzan, the artist responsible for the Special Edition posters, was commissioned to illustrate, and the poster was unveiled on March 11, 1999.
Lucasfilm dictated that, contractually, Struzan's illustration was the only art the foreign distributors could use, and other than the text, it could not be modified in any way.
===
Adaptations ===
A novelization was written by Terry Brooks, who met with Lucas before writing the book and received his approval and guidance.
It includes some scenes that are not in the film and foreshadows pending developments in the following two installments of the series.
Additionally, a Scholastic junior novelization was written by Patricia C. Wrede.
A four-issue comic book adaptation was written by Henry Gilroy and published by Dark Horse Comics.
A LucasArts video game adaptation was released for the PlayStation and PC.
The podracing tie-in Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer was released for Nintendo 64, PC, and other platforms.
A pinball machine was created by WMS Industries.
===
Home media ===
The film was released worldwide on VHS between April 3 and 8, 2000.
Two versions were released in North America on April 4—a standard pan and scan version and a widescreen Collector's Edition version.
In its first two days of availability, the regular version sold 4.5 million copies and the limited edition sold 500,000.
It was the first Star Wars film to be officially released on DVD, on October 16, 2001, in a slightly extended cut from the theatrical release.
The special features included seven deleted scenes completed specifically for the DVD, a commentary track featuring Lucas and producer Rick McCallum, and several documentaries—including a full-length documentary entitled The Beginning:
Making Episode I.
The Phantom Menace became the fastest selling DVD ever in the U.S.; 2.2 million copies were sold in its first week after release.
The DVD version was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.
A LaserDisc version of The Phantom Menace was released in Japan on April 7, 2000, one year and six months before it was available on DVD in the U.S.
The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011; The Phantom Menace was restored to improve the picture quality and remove the magnification present on the previous DVD release, restoring approximately 8 percent of the picture to the frame.
In the Blu-ray release of The Phantom Menace, the Yoda puppet was replaced with a CGI model, making it consistent with the other films of the prequel trilogy.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
The Phantom Menace was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued The Phantom Menace on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series would be stereo-converted to 3D.
These would be re-released in episode order, beginning with The Phantom Menace, which was released to cinemas on February 10, 2012.
Prime Focus Limited did the conversion under the supervision of ILM.
However, the 3D re-releases of Episodes II–VI were postponed or canceled after Lucasfilm was bought by The Walt Disney Company, who decided to focus on the development of Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Lucas stated the 3D re-release was "just a conversion" of the film's 2011 Blu-ray release and no additional changes were made.
Only a change to Anakin's magnetic wand during the podrace scene—its tip was sharpened to more accurately fit the original 2D photography to the new 3D image—was confirmed.
General Mills and Brisk were promotional partners in North America for the 3D re-release but promotion was limited.
The film was extensively promoted in Japan; promotional products were sold by 7-Eleven, Domino's Pizza, Pepsi and Gari-Gari Kun.
Kellogg's promoted the film internationally, and French restaurant Quick launched three Star Wars-themed burgers.
Lucasfilm also partnered with Variety, the Children's Charity to raise funds for children through the sale of a special edition badge.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 53% based on 232 reviews, with an average rating of 5.9/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "Burdened by exposition and populated with stock characters
, The Phantom Menace gets the Star Wars prequels off to a bumpy – albeit visually dazzling – start."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.
Many aspects of the scripting and characters were criticized, especially that of Jar Jar Binks, who was regarded by many members of the older fan community as toyetic—a merchandising opportunity rather than a serious character.
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described Binks as "a major miscue, a comic-relief character who's frankly not funny".
Drew Grant of Salon wrote, "Perhaps the absolute creative freedom director George Lucas enjoyed while dreaming up the flick's 'comic' relief—with no studio execs and not many an independently minded actor involved—is a path to the dark side.
"Conversely, Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave it three-and-a-half stars out of four and called it "an astonishing achievement in imaginative filmmaking" and said, "Lucas tells a good story."
Ebert also wrote that, "If some of the characters are less than compelling, perhaps that's inevitable" because it is the opening film in the new trilogy.
He concluded his review by saying that rather than Star Trek films, filmmakers could "[g]ive me transparent underwater cities and vast hollow senatorial spheres any day".
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a "B" grade and complimented Liam Neeson's performance and the action scenes.
In an Entertainment Weekly review for the DVD release, Marc Bernardin gave the film a "C–", calling it "haplessly plotted, horribly written, and juvenile".
ReelViews' James Berardinelli wrote, "Looking at the big picture, in spite of all its flaws, The Phantom Menace is still among the best 'bang for a buck' fun that can be had in a movie theater," and said the film was a "distinct improvement" over Return of the Jedi.
Andrew Johnston of Time
Out
New York wrote, "Let's face it: no film could ever match the expectations some have for Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
Which isn't to say it's a disappointment: on the contrary, it's awesomely entertaining, provided you accept it on its own terms ...
Like the original film, it's a Boy's Own adventure yarn with a corny but irresistible spiritual subtext.
The effects and production design are stunning, but they always serve the story, not the other way around."
Susan Wloszczyna of USA
Today said that the film did "plenty right" and praised the characters Darth Maul and Watto.
David Cornelius of efilmcritic.com said that the film's better moments "don't merely balance out the weaker ones—they topple them".
Colin Kennedy of Empire magazine said that despite problems with pacing and writing, "there is still much pleasure to be had watching our full-blown Jedi guides in action".
He praised the visuals and Liam Neeson's performance, and said that the duel between Darth Maul and the Jedi was "the saga's very best lightsaber
battle".
Empire magazine ranked The Phantom Menace on its list of "500 Greatest Movies of All Time", while Entertainment Weekly and Comcast included the film on their lists of the worst movie sequels.
James Berardinelli wrote, "The Phantom Menace was probably the most overhyped motion picture of the last decade (if not longer), and its reputation suffered as a result of its inability to satisfy unreasonable expectations."
William Arnold of the Seattle Post-Intelligencer agreed that the film's massive hype caused many of the negative reactions, saying, "it built expectations that can't possibly be matched and scuttled [the] element of storytelling surprise".
He also said that the film was "well made and entertaining" and was much better than similar box office fare released around that year, such as The Mummy and The Matrix.
The introduction of midi-chlorians—microscopic organisms that mediate use of the Force—has been regarded as controversial.
Some viewed it as a concept that negates the Force's spiritual quality.
Film historian Daniel Dinello says, "Anathema to Star Wars fanatics who thought they reduced the Force to a kind of viral infection, midi-chlorians provide a biological interface, the link between physical bodies and spiritual energy."
Religion expert John D. Caputo writes, "In the 'Gospel according to Lucas', a world is conjured up in which the intractable oppositions that have tormented religious thinkers for centuries are reconciled ...
The gifts that the Jedi masters enjoy have a perfectly plausible scientific basis, even if its ways are mysterious: their bodily cells have a heavier than usual concentration of 'midi-chlorians'.
"There has been some controversy over whether several alien characters reflect racial stereotypes.
For example, the oafish, slow-witted Jar Jar Binks has long droopy ears reminiscent of dreadlocks and spoke with what many perceived as a Caribbean patois reminiscent of Jamaican Creole.
Drew Grant describes the character as "[s]ervile and cowardly ...
a black minstrel-ish stereotype on par with Stepin Fetchit."
Georgetown University professor of African-American studies
Michael Eric Dyson says that the entire Gungan species seems suggestive of a primitive African tribe, with Boss Nass portrayed as "a fat, bumbling ... caricature of a stereotypical African tribal chieftain.
"
The greedy and corrupt Neimoidians of the Trade Federation speak with East Asian accents, and the unprincipled trader Watto has been interpreted as a Jewish stereotype reminiscent of Charles Dickens' character Fagin.
Lucas has denied all of these implications, instead criticizing the American media for using opinions from the Internet as a reliable source for news stories.
Lucas added that it reflects more the racism of the commenters than it does the movie; however, animator Rob Coleman said that he viewed footage of Alec Guinness as Fagin in Oliver Twist to inspire his animators in the creation of Watto.

===
Box office ===
Despite its mixed critical reception, The Phantom Menace was a financial success, breaking many box office records in its debut, and beating out The Mummy by taking number 1.
It broke The Lost World: Jurassic Park's records for the largest single-day gross for taking more than $28 million in the opening day and fastest to gross $100 million in five days.
It grossed $64.8 million in its opening weekend, the second-ever highest at the time.
It also became the quickest film to reach the $200 million and $300 million marks, surpassing Independence Day (1996) and Titanic (1997) respectively.
The Phantom Menace was 1999's most successful film, staying in the Top 10 until August 5 (11 weeks total), earning $431.1 million in the United States and Canada.
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 84.8 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.
The film set an opening record in Japan, grossing $12.2 million in its first two days from 403 screens.
In the UK, the film also set an opening record with £9.5 million in its opening weekend (including previews).
It also grossed a record $11 million in its opening weekend in Germany.
Outside the United States and Canada, the film grossed over $10 million in Australia ($25.9 million), Brazil ($10.4 million), France and Algeria ($43 million), Germany ($53.9 million), Italy ($12.9 million), Japan ($109.9 million), Mexico ($12 million), Spain ($25 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($81.9 million).
Its overseas total was $493.2 million, taking its worldwide total to $924.3 million.
At that time, the film was the third highest-grossing film in North America behind Titanic and Star Wars (1977), and the second highest-grossing film worldwide behind Titanic without adjusting for inflation of ticket prices.
When adjusted for ticket price inflation, it ranked as the 19th-highest-grossing film domestically, making it the fourth Star Wars film to be in the Inflation-Adjusted Top 20.

After its 3D re-release in 2012, the worldwide box office gross exceeded $1 billion.
Although in the intervening years, the film had lost some of its rankings in the lists of highest-grossing films, the 3D re-release returned it to the worldwide all-time Top 10 for several months.
In North America, its revenues overtook those of the original Star Wars as the saga's highest-grossing film when not adjusting for inflation of ticket prices, and is the tenth highest-grossing film in North America as of August 2017.
In North America, its ranking on the Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation list climbed to 16th place—one place behind Return of the Jedi.
The 3D re-release, which premiered in February 2012, earned $43 million—$22.5 million of which was in North America—worldwide.
The 3D re-release earned US$102,727,119 worldwide—including $43.5 million in North America—and has increased the film's overall box office takings to $474.5 million domestically, and $552.5 million in other territories.
The film's earnings exceeded $1 billion worldwide on February 22, 2012, making it the first Star Wars film and the 11th film in history—excluding inflation—to do so.
===
Accolades ===
The Phantom Menace was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Shawn Murphy and John Midgley); all of which went to The Matrix.
The film won Saturn Awards for Best Costumes and Best Special Effects, the MTV Movie Award for Best Action Scene, and a Young Artist Award for Jake Lloyd's performance.
It was also nominated for—among others—the BAFTAs for Visual Effects and Sound, and the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media.
The film did however receive seven Golden Raspberry Award (Razzie) nominations for Worst Picture, Worst Director, Worst Screenplay, Worst Supporting Actor (Jake Lloyd as Anakin), Worst Supporting Actress (Sofia Coppola as Saché), Worst Screen Couple (Jake Lloyd and Natalie Portman), and
Jar Jar Binks
actor Ahmed Best won the Worst Supporting Actor category.
The film was nominated Choice Movie: Drama, Choice Movie: Villain and Choice Movie:
Summer at 1999 Teen Choice Awards, but both lost to Cruel Intentions and Big Daddy, respectively.

==
Legacy ==
A month after the film's release, "Weird Al" Yankovic released the parody song and music video "
The Saga Begins", in which he interprets the film's plot from Obi-Wan's point of view to the tune of "American Pie"; this was included as a bonus feature on a 2011 Star Wars Blu-ray.
In a 2018 Saturday Night Live comedy rap video, Natalie Portman reprised her appearance as Queen Amidala from The Phantom Menace and defended the prequel trilogy.
Darth Maul's lightsaber-fighting style served as the inspiration for the 2003 viral video Star Wars Kid.
Maul, who appears to die in The Phantom Menace, was resurrected for the animated series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and also appears in Star Wars Rebels and Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In 2012, IGN named Maul the 16th greatest Star Wars character.
A similar weapon to his dual-bladed lightsaber appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Sequels ==
A sequel, Attack of the Clones, was released in 2002.
The story continues a decade later with Anakin grown to adulthood, played by Hayden Christensen.
A second sequel, Revenge of the Sith, was released in 2005.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Official website at StarWars.com
Official website at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
Episode
I
The Phantom Menace on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at IMDb
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace at AllMovie
Star Wars
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace at Corona's Coming Attractions
Angry Birds Star Wars was a puzzle video game, a crossover between the Star Wars franchise and the Angry Birds series of video games, launched on November 8, 2012, first for Windows, iOS, and Android devices, later also to Mac and BlackBerry.
The game is the sixth Angry Birds game in the series.
The characters are copyrighted from George Lucas's double-trilogy.
On July 18, 2013, Rovio announced that Angry Birds Star Wars would be heading for the PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, Xbox 360, Wii, Wii U, and the Nintendo 3DS on October 29, 2013, in conjunction with Activision.
As of August 2013, the game has been downloaded over 100 million times on its various platforms.
The game is a launch title for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.

On July 15, 2013, Rovio announced a sequel, entitled Angry Birds Star Wars II.
It is based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy and the television show Star Wars Rebels.
Angry Birds Star Wars II was released on September 19, 2013.
Angry Birds Star Wars was discontinued on February 3, 2020 along with Angry Birds Star Wars II and Angry Birds Rio.
==
Gameplay ==
The game combines elements of both Angry Birds and Angry Birds Space, featuring levels that take place on both standard terrain and in outer space.
The game begins on Tatooine, Anakin Skywalker and Luke Skywalker's home desert planet, moves to the Death Star I, travels to Hoth, then Cloud City, and eventually ends up with Endor and Death Star II.
With the exclusion of Blue Bird, all the Birds are given new powers not yet seen before in a canon Angry Birds title, some of these that are upgraded as the game progresses further.
Players can replay previously completed levels with the upgraded abilities.

Differences from other games are that Birds may still perform their chosen abilities a split second after colliding with an object.
The Millennium Falcon is called the Mighty Falcon and used instead of the Mighty Eagle found in previous games.
When a certain number of stars are earned, the player gets a reward.
It can be either 5 Mighty Falcons (an item that may be used during normal levels to try to earn badges) or access to a Golden Droid level.
There are additional bonus levels if the player manages to hit golden droids in selected levels.
On June 13, 2013, power-ups were added.

There was a Facebook version of Angry Birds Star Wars that included weekly tournaments in addition to some story levels.
It closed down on March 3, 2014.

== Reception ==
The game has received favorable reviews with a Metacritic score of 88/100 based on 22 reviews.
Mark Brown of Pocket Gamer gave the title a Gold Award, praising the game for being "faithful to the source material" and "filled with content".
Justin Davis of IGN says it is a great game with Star Wars references and Force powers, and has a huge variety of perfectly tuned stages.
In a 2013 poll on the Rovio website, the game collected the most votes for favorite Angry Birds game.
The Facebook version has garnered a lot of positive response as well.
At the 2013 Webby Awards, the game was awarded as the "Best Game" from both the Judges and as the People's Choice.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
This is a list of Star Wars video games.
Though there have been many hobbyist-made and freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

Platforms: Arcade, Apple II, Atari 2600, Famicom, Nintendo Entertainment System, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Nintendo 64, Sega Master System, Sega Dreamcast, Game Gear, GameCube, DOS, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh, Classic Mac OS, macOS, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii, Wii U, Game Boy, Game Boy Color, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, iOS, Android, Linux, Stadia.

==
Episode-related titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films.
They are listed in order of release by film.

===
Episode IV:
A New Hope ===
Star Wars (1983–88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Star Wars (1987) – Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) – PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) – NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992) – SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) –
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


===
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982) –
Atari 2600, Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
– NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) –
SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ===
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) –
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) –
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994) – SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


==
=
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace ===
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) – Microsoft Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars
Episode I (1999) –
Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020), Xbox One (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000) – Nintendo 64, Microsoft Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) –
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001) –
Xbox


===
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (2002) –
Game Boy Advance


===
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ===
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) – PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance
, Mobile Phone


== Series titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are not based on a particular feature film, and form part of a series.
The list is ordered from the oldest series to the latest.

=== X-Wing ===
Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)
Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)
Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997) –
Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999) –
Windows


===
Rebel Assault ===
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Microsoft Windows


===
Jedi Knight ===
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2019), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, Xbox
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)


===
Rogue Squadron ===
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube


===
Star Wars Racer ===
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002) – PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)


===
Galactic Battlegrounds ===
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows, Mac


===
Starfighter ===
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


===
Knights of the Old Republic ===
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2005)
Windows, Linux (SteamOS), Xbox, Mac , Android
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016), and Onslaught (2019)


===
Star Wars: Galaxies ===
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows (Shutdown)
Expansion(s):
Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),Compilation(s):
Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)


===
Battlefront ===
The Battlefront series has been handled by two different developers.

Pandemic Studios

Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac, Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) –
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009) –
Mobile PhoneEA DICE

Star Wars Battlefront (2015) – PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) – PlayStation 4, Windows,
Xbox One
===
Empire at War ===
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


===
The Force Unleashed ===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii, Nintendo DS, iOS
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed – Ultimate Sith Edition (
2009) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010)
Windows, Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, iOS


===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) –
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) – Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures (2010) – Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


==
Stand-alone titles ==
The following is a list of stand-alone Star Wars games that do not form part of a series, released primarily for consoles, personal computers, handhelds and arcade.
The titles are grouped together depending on the decade in which they were released.

=== 1980s ===
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) – Atari 2600
Star Wars: Droids (1988) – Amstrad CPC,
ZX Spectrum


=== 1990s ===
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996) – Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997) – PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997) –
Windows
Re-released for: Game Boy Color (1999)
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy – UK) (1998) –
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998) –
Windows


=== 2000s ===
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) –
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) – PlayStation 2
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation 3 (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon (2003) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005) – Xbox, Windows
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2021), PlayStation 4 (2021)
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006) –
Windows


=== 2010s
===
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) –
Arcade
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) –  Card trading
Vader Immortal (2019) –
Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, PlayStation VR
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) –
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Stadia


=== 2020s ===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) – Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
Star Wars:
Tales from the Galaxy's Edge (2020) – Oculus Quest
== Games by genre ==
The following games are grouped together because they share the same genre, rather than because they are officially part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993) – DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1997) –
Windows


===
Pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Star Wars Pinball (2013
) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Kinect Motion Sensor ===
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360


===
Educational ===
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008)
(Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


===
Jakks Pacific-
Plug It
In & Play TV Games ===
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) – Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


===
Non-video game PC software ===
Star Wars Screen Entertainment (1994) (Screensaver) –
Windows
Star Wars:
Behind the Magic (1998) (CD-ROM encyclopedia) – Windows, Macintosh


==
Mobile titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are only for mobile operating systems.

Star Wars: Battle For The Republic (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Battle Above Coruscant (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Trivia (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Jedi Assassin (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D (2006) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Cantina (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) –
iOS
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010) –
iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2011) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Tiny Death Star (2013) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Commander (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Galactic Defense (2014) – Android, iOS
Star Wars Journeys: The Phantom Menace (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars Journeys:
Beginnings (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars: Uprising (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Heroes Path (2015) – iOS
Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions (2015) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Puzzle Droids (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Jedi Challenges (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Rise to Power (TBA) –
Android


==
Browser games ==
StarWars.com
Carbon Connection
Force Flight
Garbage Masher
Sharpshooter Clone Training (2008)
Live Fire (2008)
Clones vs. Droids
Ewok VillageDisney.com

Star Wars Rebels:
Ghost Raid – StarWars.com, Disney.com
(2014)
Star Wars Rebels: Rebel Strike – Disney.com (2014)
==
Crossovers ==
In some cases, Lucasfilm has allowed other video game franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego made video games based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.

Lego main series
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Nintendo DS,
Game Boy
Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2,  Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360,  3DS, Wii,  Windows, Mac, Nintendo DS, Nintendo, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2021):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, Nintendo Switch
Compilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007) includes Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac, Nintendo DS, iOS, AndroidMobile game and web browser

Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2 (2012) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012) –
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars:
The New Yoda Chronicles (2014) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014) – Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Battles (2020) – Android, iOSLego
Indiana Jones
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Roblox ===
Star Wars (2014-2019):
Windows, Xbox One, Xbox One S, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift (VR) - Sponsors and events for Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, and The Rise of Skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the events’ respective games, as well as free items in the Catalog (currently known as the Avatar Shop) for 1 ticket or for free.
List of sponsors:
Star Wars Rebels:
Season One (2014)
Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two (2015)List of events:

Universe (2016) - Sponsored by Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Space Battle (2017) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Last Jedi
Battle Arena (2018) - Sponsored by Solo: A Star Wars Story
Galactic Speedway Creator Challenge (2019) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Rise of SkywalkerAdditional notes:
Besides the main events, a Disney XD crossover event known as Summer Camp (2015) included a virtual prize of the Star Wars: Rebels character, Chopper, in the form of a tiny shoulder pal.

The event also included promotional billboards of the Star Wars: Rebels TV series in the maps of the events’ respective games.

Similarly to Summer Camp (2015), Disney Infinity 3.0 was also featured as a sponsored event in 2015, and had the maps decorated in the games that were part of the event that included promotional billboards that featured the characters Princess Leia, Darth Vader, Yoda, Anakin Skywalker and Sabine Wren.

While the characters were advertised in billboards in the events’ respective games, none of the actual virtual prizes or free items tied directly into any Star Wars media.

As part of the sponsor, Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two not only included free items, but was also featured on the promotional material of the billboards in the maps of two pre-existing games on the platform, and also included the limited-time branding on the games’ respective thumbnails.

===
Disney Infinity ===
The Disney Infinity series allowed the use of Star Wars characters alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS, Android


===
The Sims ===
The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020): Microsoft Windows, Mac, PlayStation 4, Xbox One - Ninth game pack for The Sims 4.
Adds a new destination world called Batuu with a Star Wars-style storyline.
Adds new types of aliens and other Star Wars-inspired outfits, objects and characters.

===
Minecraft ===
Star Wars (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Amazon Kindle Fire, Amazon Fire TV, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift, Gear VR - DLC for Minecraft: Bedrock Edition purchasable through the Minecraft Market place.
Adds Star Wars maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the Original Trilogy and The Mandalorian into the game.

==
Cultural impact ==
This category refers to video games from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or unlockable character cameos.

Night Shift (1990) – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003) – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005) – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008) –
Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all dlc in SoulCalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores due to licensing from the purchase of Star Wars by Disney.

Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009) – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS,
PlayStation Portable


== Canceled games ==
Games that were never finished, nor released.

Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure – Atari
2600 (unreleased)
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) PlayStation 3, Windows, Xbox 360
Star Wars: First Assault (2012) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (2015) (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III (Windows, Xbox)
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed III (Windows, Wii U, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)
Project Ragtag (Windows, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)


==
References ==
Star Wars: The Last Jedi (also known as Star Wars: Episode VIII –
The Last Jedi) is a 2017 American epic space opera film written and directed by Rian Johnson.
Produced by Lucasfilm and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the second installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015), and the eighth episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Andy Serkis, Lupita Nyong'o, Domhnall Gleeson, Anthony Daniels, Gwendoline Christie, Kelly Marie Tran, Laura Dern, and Benicio del Toro.
The Last Jedi follows Rey as she seeks the aid of Luke Skywalker, in hopes of turning the tide for the Resistance in the fight against Kylo Ren and the First Order, while General Leia Organa, Finn, and Poe Dameron attempt to escape a First Order attack on the dwindling Resistance fleet.
The film features the first posthumous film performance by Fisher, who died in December 2016, and the film is dedicated to her.
The Last Jedi is part of a new trilogy of films announced after Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm in October 2012.
It was produced by Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy and Ram Bergman and executive produced by The Force Awakens director J. J. Abrams.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score.
A number of scenes were filmed at Skellig Michael in Ireland during pre-production in September 2015, but principal photography began at Pinewood Studios in England in February 2016 and wrapped that July.

The Last Jedi premiered in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15.
It grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film of 2017 and the ninth-highest-grossing film of all time during its theatrical run.
It is also the second-highest-grossing Star Wars film and turned a net profit of over $417 million.
The film received positive reviews, with praise for its ensemble cast, musical score, visual effects, action sequences, and emotional weight.
The film received four nominations at the 90th Academy Awards, including Best Original Score and Best Visual Effects, as well as two nominations at the 71st British Academy Film Awards.
The sequel, The Rise of Skywalker, was released in December 2019.

==
Plot ==
Shortly after the battle of Starkiller Base, General Leia Organa is leading the Resistance forces in evacuating their base when the First Order fleet arrives.
Against Leia's orders, Poe Dameron leads a costly counterattack that destroys a First Order dreadnought.
The remaining Resistance escapes into hyperspace, but the First Order uses a device to track them, and attacks again.
Kylo Ren hesitates to fire on the lead Resistance ship after sensing his mother Leia's presence on board, but his wingmen destroy the bridge, killing most of the Resistance's leaders.
Leia is dragged into space but survives by using the Force.
While Leia recovers, Vice-Admiral Holdo assumes command of the Resistance.
Running low on fuel, the remaining fleet is pursued by the First Order.

On Ahch-To, Rey attempts to recruit Luke Skywalker to the Resistance.
Under self-imposed exile, Luke refuses to help and says that the Jedi should end.
After encouragement from R2-D2, he agrees to give Rey three lessons in the ways of the Force.
Rey and Kylo begin communicating through the Force, which puzzles them both.
Kylo tells Rey that Luke feared his power; Luke confesses that he momentarily contemplated killing Kylo upon sensing that Snoke was corrupting him, which prompted Kylo to destroy Luke's new Jedi Order.
Convinced that Kylo can be redeemed, Rey leaves Ahch-To.
Luke prepares to burn the Jedi library but hesitates.
The spirit of Luke's master Yoda appears and destroys the library by summoning a bolt of lightning.
He encourages Luke to learn from his failure.

Meanwhile, Poe entrusts Finn, mechanic Rose, and BB-8 with a secret mission to disable the First Order's tracking device.
Maz Kanata directs them to the casino town of Canto Bight, where they meet the hacker DJ.
Pursued by the local security, they escape Canto Bight with the help of stablehand children and racing animals they set free.
Finn, Rose, and DJ infiltrate Snoke's flagship but are captured by Captain Phasma.
Kylo brings Rey to Snoke, who reveals that he connected their minds to discover Luke's whereabouts.

Holdo plans to evacuate the remaining members of the Resistance using small transport vessels.
Believing her plan cowardly and futile, Poe leads a mutiny.
A recovered Leia stuns Poe with a blaster and proceeds with the evacuation.
Holdo remains aboard the ship as a decoy to mislead Snoke's fleet as the others flee to an abandoned base on Crait.
DJ buys his freedom by revealing the Resistance's plan to General Hux, and the First Order fleet begins firing on the evacuation transports, destroying many.

Ordered to kill Rey, Kylo instead kills Snoke and defeats his Praetorian Guard with her help.
Rey hopes that Kylo has abandoned the dark side, but he instead asks her to rule the galaxy with him.
Refusing, she battles him for control of Luke's lightsaber, bisecting the weapon.
Holdo sacrifices herself by slicing through Snoke's flagship at lightspeed, crippling the First Order fleet.
Rey escapes the destruction while Kylo declares himself Supreme Leader.
BB-8 frees Finn and Rose; they defeat Phasma and join the survivors on Crait.
When the First Order arrives, Poe, Finn, and Rose attack with obsolete speeders.
Rey and Chewbacca draw TIE fighters away in the Millennium Falcon, while Rose stops Finn from sacrificing himself.
The First Order penetrates the Resistance fortress using a siege cannon.

Luke appears and confronts the First Order, allowing the surviving Resistance to escape.
Kylo orders the First Order's forces to fire on Luke, but they fail to harm him.
He then engages Luke in a lightsaber duel; upon striking Luke, Kylo realizes that Luke is not physically present, but projecting his image through the Force.
Rey helps the remaining Resistance escape on the Falcon.
Exhausted, Luke dies peacefully on Ahch-To, becoming one with the Force.
Rey and Leia sense his death, and Leia tells Rey that the Resistance can rise again.

At Canto Bight, the stablehands recount the story of Luke Skywalker; afterward, one of them moves a broom with the Force and gazes into space.

== Cast ==
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, a powerful Jedi Master who has been in self-imposed exile on the planet Ahch-To.
Hamill voices Dobbu Scay, named after the film's editor, Bob Ducsay.
On Canto Bight, the character mistakes BB-8 for a slot machine.

Carrie Fisher as General Leia Organa, twin sister to Luke, former princess of Alderaan, and a leading general in the Resistance.

Adam Driver as Kylo Ren, Supreme Leader Snoke's disciple, who is strong with the Force.
He is the son of Han Solo and Leia Organa, and Luke's nephew.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a highly Force-sensitive scavenger from the desert planet Jakku who joined the Resistance and goes to find Luke.

John Boyega as Finn, a former stormtrooper of the First Order who defected to the Resistance.

Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot in the Resistance.

Andy Serkis as Supreme Leader Snoke, the leader of the First Order and Kylo Ren's master.

Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a pirate and ally of the Resistance.

Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the former head of the First Order's Starkiller Base.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of Leia Organa.

Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma, the commander of the First Order's stormtroopers.

Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a member of the Resistance who works in maintenance.

Laura Dern as Vice-Admiral Amilyn Holdo, an officer in the Resistance.

Benicio del Toro as DJ, an underworld codebreaker.
Frank Oz returns as Yoda, the deceased former Jedi Master and Luke's wise mentor, who appears as a Force spirit.
Joonas Suotamo appears as Chewbacca, taking over the role from Peter Mayhew after previously serving as his body double in The Force Awakens.
Mayhew, who suffered from chronic knee and back pain, was credited as "Chewbacca consultant".
Billie Lourd, Mike Quinn, and Timothy D. Rose reprise their roles as Lieutenant Connix, Nien Nunb, and
Admiral Ackbar, respectively; with Tom Kane voicing Ackbar.
Amanda Lawrence appears as Commander D'Acy, and Mark Lewis Jones and Adrian Edmondson play Captains Canady and Peavey, respectively.
BB-8 is controlled by puppeteers Dave Chapman and Brian Herring, with initial voice work by Ben Schwartz and final sound effects voiced by Bill Hader modulated through a synthesizer.
Jimmy Vee portrays R2-D2, taking over the role from Kenny Baker, who died in August 2016.
Veronica Ngo portrays Rose's sister Paige Tico, a Resistance gunner who sacrifices her life to destroy a First Order dreadnought.
Justin Theroux plays the master codebreaker, while Lily Cole plays his companion.
Joseph Gordon-Levitt has a voice cameo as Slowen Lo, and Warwick Davis plays Wodibin.
Rogue One (2016)
director Gareth Edwards has a cameo appearance as a Resistance Soldier, with Edgar Wright and Joe Cornish also cameo in the film.
Hermione Corfield appears as Tallissan "Tallie" Lintra, a Resistance A-Wing pilot and squadron leader, and Noah Segan and Jamie Christopher appear as Resistance pilots Starck and Tubbs.
Hugh Skinner cameos as a Resistance Officer; while Hamill's children, Griffin, Nathan, and Chelsea, cameo as Resistance soldiers.
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge; Prince Harry, Duke of Sussex; and Gary Barlow have cameo appearances as stormtroopers, and Tom Hardy also has an appearance as a stormtrooper, but his cameo was dropped from the final cut.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney announced a new trilogy of Star Wars films.
J. J. Abrams was named director of the first episode in the trilogy, The Force Awakens, in January 2013.
In June 2014, director Rian Johnson was reported to be in talks to write and direct its sequel, Episode VIII, and to write a treatment for the third film, Episode IX, with Ram Bergman producing both films.
Johnson confirmed in August that he would direct Episode VIII.In January 2015, Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Episode VIII would be released in 2017.
In December, Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy said that the film had not been mapped out and that Abrams was collaborating with Johnson, who would in turn work with (then)
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow to ensure a smooth transition.
Additionally, Abrams served as an executive producer along with Tom Karnowski and Jason McGatlin.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm announced the title for Episode VIII as Star Wars: The Last Jedi.

===
Writing ===
The Last Jedi story begins immediately after The Force Awakens.
Johnson had his story group watch films such as Twelve O'Clock High (1949),
The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Gunga Din (1939), Three Outlaw Samurai (1964), Sahara (1943), and Letter Never Sent (1960) for inspiration while developing ideas.
He felt it was difficult to work on the film while The Force Awakens was being finished.
Johnson wrote the scene with the mirrored versions of Rey to symbolise her search for identity; when she asks for a vision of her parents, she sees only herself.
Rey learns that her parents were "nobodies" as it would be "the hardest thing" she and the audience could hear; Johnson likened the scene to Luke Skywalker learning that Darth Vader is his father in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980).
During production, Hamill expressed disagreement with the direction of his character, Luke, feeling his character's disillusioned state was at odds with his character.
Hamill later said he regretted making his initial misgivings public and compared his disagreements to his clashes with George Lucas during the filming of Return of the Jedi (1983).

===
Casting ===
In September 2015, Disney shortlisted the female cast members to Gina Rodriguez, Tatiana Maslany, and Olivia Cooke.
That same month, Benicio del Toro confirmed his involvement in the film, but denied that he was playing a villain, and Mark Hamill was also confirmed.
Joaquin Phoenix was also courted to portray the role of DJ, but would end up passing on the offer.
In October 2015, Gugu Mbatha-Raw was rumored to have been cast in the film.
In November, Kennedy announced at the London premiere of The Force Awakens that the entire cast would return for Episode VIII, along with "a handful" of new cast members.
In February 2016, at the start of filming, it was confirmed that Laura Dern and Kelly Marie Tran had been cast in undisclosed roles.
In April 2017, at the Star Wars Celebration Orlando, Lucasfilm announced that Tran would play Resistance maintenance worker Rose Tico, which Johnson described as the film's largest new role.
To keep Frank Oz's return as Yoda a secret, producers excluded Oz's name in the billing for the film's pre-release marketing and ensured that Oz stayed on set during filming.

===
Filming ===
Second unit photography began during pre-production at Skellig Michael in Ireland on September 14, 2015, due to the difficulties of filming at that location during other seasons.
It would have lasted five days, but filming was canceled for the first day due to poor weather and rough conditions.
In September 2015, del Toro revealed that principal photography would begin in March 2016.
The production began work on the 007 Stage at Pinewood Studios on November 15, 2015.
Rick Heinrichs served as production designer.
In January 2016, production of Episode VIII was delayed until February due to script rewrites.
Filming was in danger of being delayed further due to an upcoming strike between the Producers Alliance for Cinema and Television and the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union.
On February 10, 2016, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed that principal photography had begun under the working title Space Bear.
Additional filming took place in Dubrovnik, Croatia from March 9 to 16, as well as in Ireland in
May. Malin Head in County Donegal and a mountain headland, Ceann Sibeal in County Kerry, served as additional filming locations.
To increase the scenes' intimacy Driver and Ridley were both present when filming Kylo and Rey's Force visions.
Location filming for the battle scenes on the planet
Crait took place at the Salar de Uyuni salt flats in Bolivia.
Additional filming took place in Mexico.
Principal photography wrapped on July 22, 2016, though as of early September, Nyong'o had not filmed her scenes.
In February 2017, it was announced that sequences from the film were shot in IMAX.
Production designer Rick Heinrichs said the original script called for 160 sets, double what might be expected, but that Johnson did some "trimming and cutting".
Ultimately, 125 sets were created on 14 sound stages at Pinewood Studios.
According to creature designer Neal Scanlan, The Last Jedi has more practical effects than any Star Wars film, with 180 to 200 creatures created with practical effects, some cut from the final edit.
For Yoda's appearance in the film as a Force ghost, the character was created using puppetry, as was done in the original Star Wars trilogy (as opposed to computer-generated imagery, which was used to create Yoda in most of the prequel trilogy).

===
Music ===
In July 2013, Kennedy confirmed at the Star Wars Celebration Europe that John Williams would return to score the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
Williams confirmed his assignment for The Last Jedi at a Tanglewood concert in August 2016, stating he would begin recording the score "off and on" in December 2016 until March or April 2017.
On February 21, 2017, it was confirmed that recording was underway, with both Williams and William Ross conducting the sessions.
In lieu of a traditional spotting session with Johnson, Williams was provided a temp track of music from his previous film scores as a reference for scoring The Last Jedi.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 15, 2017.

==
Marketing ==
On September 19, 2017, Australia Post released a set of stamp packs.
On October 12, Royal Mail released a set of eight promotional postage stamps designed by Malcolm Tween.
Several tie-in books were released on the same day as the film's release, including The Last Jedi: The Visual Dictionary, and various children's reading and activity books.
Related novelizations included the prequel book Cobalt Squadron, and the Canto Bight, a collection of novellas about the Canto Bight Casino.
As with The Force Awakens, there is no official tie-in game for The Last Jedi, in favor of integrating content from the film into other Star Wars video games, including Star Wars Battlefront II, which introduced various content from the film, during the game's first "season".

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film had its world premiere at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles on December 9, 2017, and was released in the United States on December 15, in IMAX and 3D.
The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on May 26; however, it was pushed back to December to avoid competition with Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017).
===
Home media ===
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Star Wars:
The Last Jedi digitally in HD and 4K via digital download and Movies
Anywhere on March 13, 2018, with an Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD physical release on March 27.
The 4K version of the film was later re-released in "The Skywalker Saga" 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray box set on March 31, 2020.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi  grossed $620.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $712.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.333 billion.
It had a worldwide opening of $450.8 million, the eighth-biggest of all time, including $40.6 million that was attributed to IMAX screenings, the second biggest for IMAX.
It was estimated that the film would need to gross $800 million worldwide to break even; Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $417.5 million, accounting for production budgets, P&A, talent participations, and other costs, with box office grosses, and ancillary revenues from home media, placing it first on their list of 2017's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".
====
United States and Canada ====
Pre-sale tickets went on sale in the United States on October 9, 2017, and as with The Force Awakens and Rogue One, ticket service sites such as Fandango had their servers crash due to heavy traffic and demand.
In the United States and Canada, industry tracking had The Last Jedi grossing around $200 million from 4,232 theaters in its opening weekend.
The film made $45 million from Thursday night previews, the second-highest amount ever (behind The Force Awakens' $57 million).
It went on to make $104.8 million on its first day (including previews), and $220 million over the weekend, both the second-highest amounts of all time.
The opening weekend figure included an IMAX opening-weekend of $25 million, the biggest IMAX opening of the year, and the second biggest ever behind The Force Awakens.
After dropping by 76% on its second Friday, the worst Friday-to-Friday drop in the series, the film fell by a total of 67% in its second weekend, grossing $71.7 million.
It was the largest second-weekend drop of the series, although it remained atop the box office.
It made $52.4 million in its third weekend, again topping the box office.
It also brought its domestic total to $517.1 million, overtaking the Disney film Beauty and the Beast (2017) as the highest of 2017.
It grossed $23.6 million and was surpassed the following weekend by Jumanji:
Welcome to the Jungle (2017) (which was in its third week) and Insidious:
The Last Key (2018).
====
Other countries ====
In its first two days of release the film made $60.8 million from 48 markets.
The top countries were the United Kingdom ($10.2 million), Germany ($6.1 million), France ($6 million), Australia ($5.6 million), and Brazil ($2.5 million).
By the end of the weekend, the film made $230 million outside the United States and Canada.
All-time opening weekend records were set in various countries, including France, Germany, Spain, United Kingdom, and Finland.
On its second weekend, it grossed $76.1 million outside the United States and Canada and became the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year in Europe.
As of January 21, the largest markets outside of the United States and Canada are the United Kingdom ($109.3 million), Germany ($79.8 million), France ($63.5 million), Japan ($60.8 million), and Australia ($43.5 million).The film had a $28.7 million opening weekend in China.
A week after its debut, China's movie exhibitors dropped the film's showtimes by 90%.
The film grossed $910,000 in its third weekend, dropping to ninth place at the Chinese box office, overshadowed by new releases including Bollywood film Secret Superstar (2017), Hollywood films
Ferdinand (2017)
and Wonder (2017), and
Chinese film
A Better Tomorrow 2018.
The Last Jedi grossed $42.5 million in China.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 90% of 476 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi honors the saga's rich legacy while adding some surprising twists — and delivering all the emotion-rich action fans could hope for."
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 56 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 84 out of 100, The Last Jedi received "universal acclaim".
Metacritic analysis found the film was the 25th-most mentioned film on "best of the year" film rankings and the 22nd-most mentioned on "best of the decade" film rankings.
Matt Zoller Seitz of RogerEbert.com gave the film four stars out of four, praising the surprises and risks that it took, writing that "The movie works equally well as an earnest adventure full of passionate heroes and villains and a meditation on sequels and franchise properties", in which the film "includes multiple debates over whether one should replicate or reject the stories and symbols of the past.
"
Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the cast and the direction, and the film "ranks with the very best Star Wars epics (even the pinnacle that is The Empire Strikes Back) by pointing the way ahead to a next generation of skywalkers".
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, praising the action sequences and humor, said that the film "doesn't pack quite the same emotional punch [as The Force Awakens] and it lags a bit in the second half,
[but] this is still a worthy chapter in the Star Wars franchise", and containing a few callbacks of "previous characters and iconic moments.
"Will Gompertz, arts editor of BBC News, gave the film four stars out of five, writing "Rian Johnson [...] has not ruined your Christmas with a turkey.
His gift to you is a cracker, a blockbuster movie packed with invention, wit, and action galore.
"
The unpredictability of the plot was appreciated by reviewers such as Alex Leadbeater of Screen Rant, who commented specifically that the death of Snoke was "the best movie twist in years".
Creator of the franchise George Lucas, who was not involved with the film's production, described The Last Jedi as "beautifully made" shortly after its release.
His reaction to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens was generally more negative.
Conversely, Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote that the film "comes off as a work that's ironed out, flattened down, appallingly purified."
Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave the film two stars out of four, saying the film suffered from too many new additions, and writing the film that "seeks to uphold a giant cultural legacy, this unfolding trilogy struggles to maintain a balance that often seems just out of reach."
Owen Gleiberman of Variety criticized the film for being too derivative of the past movies by saying that "it's now repeating things that have already been repeated", with such attempts by having a "mood and darkening design of The Empire Strikes Back", making the sequel trilogy becoming "an official monument to nostalgia."
===
Audience reception ===
Audience reception measured by scientific polling methods was highly positive.
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, and those at PostTrak gave the film an 89% overall positive score, a 79% "definite recommend", and a rare five-star rating.
User-generated scores at Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic were more negative.
At Rotten Tomatoes, 42% of users rated the film 3.5 stars or higher out of 5, while at Metacritic, the average user score is 4.2 out of 10.
Audience scores on such sites require only registration and do not ensure that contributing voters have seen the film.
Several reviewers speculated that coordinated vote brigading from internet groups and bots contributed to the low scores.
Quartz noted that some new accounts gave negative ratings to both The Last Jedi and Thor: Ragnarok (2017), while Bleeding Cool stated that reviews for Thor: Ragnarok had tapered off but then "skyrocketed".
In response to tampering claims shortly after the film's release, a Fandango executive stated that Rotten Tomatoes detected no unusual activity on The Last Jedi aside from a noticeable "uptick in the number of written user reviews".
In 2019, a Rotten Tomatoes spokesperson said the film had been "seriously targeted" by a review-bombing campaign.
Reviewers characterized The Last Jedi as divisive among audiences.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox found that dissatisfied fans saw the film as too progressive, disliked its humor, plot, or character arcs, or felt betrayed that it ignored fan theories.
Other reviewers made similar observations.
Particularly divisive was the reveal that Rey's parents are insignificant; many fans had expected her to be Luke's daughter or to share a lineage with another character from the original trilogy.
There was also sentiment that Snoke's character was underdeveloped and that Luke's actions contradicted his previous heroic portrayal.
Reviewers stated that fan theories were held so strongly among some viewers that it was difficult for them to accept different stories, but that other viewers appreciated the film's action, tone, and deviation from Star Wars tradition.

===
Accolades ===


==
Sequel ==
The Rise of Skywalker, the final installment of the sequel trilogy, was released on December 20, 2019.
Colin Trevorrow was expected to direct the film, but on September 5, 2017, Lucasfilm announced that he had stepped down.
A week later, Lucasfilm announced that J. J. Abrams would return to direct the film and co-write it with Chris Terrio.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: The Last Jedi at Disney A to Z
Star Wars:
Clone Wars is an American animated television micro-series set in the Star Wars universe and developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Produced, released and set between the Star Wars prequel trilogy films
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, it is amongst the first of many works to explore the conflict known as the Clone Wars.
The show follows the actions of various prequel trilogy characters, notably Jedi and clone troopers, in their war against the droid armies of the Confederacy of Independent Systems and the Sith.

The series aired on Cartoon Network for three seasons consisting of 25 episodes altogether from 2003 to 2005, and was the first Star Wars television series since Ewoks (1985–1986).
The first two seasons of Clone Wars, released on DVD as "Volume One", were produced in episodes ranging from two to three minutes, while the third season consisted of five 12-minute episodes comprising "Volume Two".
Since its release, the series has received critical acclaim and won multiple awards, including the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program for both volumes.
Its success led to it being spun off as the half-hour CGI series The Clone Wars.

==
Plot ==
The series begins shortly after Attack of the Clones, as the failing Galactic Republic and the Jedi are under siege from the Separatist Confederacy of Independent Systems and the Sith.
As the war rages, more and more planets slip from Republic control.

===
Synopsis ===
The main storyline of Volume One features the Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi leading an assault on the planet Muunilinst, home of the Intergalactic Banking Clan, benefactors of the Separatists wishing to break away from the Republic.
His apprentice, Anakin Skywalker, is personally appointed to lead the space forces by Supreme Chancellor Palpatine.
Meanwhile, Separatist leader Count Dooku takes in the Force-sensitive Asajj Ventress as his Sith apprentice and sends her to eliminate Anakin.
Anakin diverts his attention in the middle of the space battle to pursue Ventress to Yavin 4, where he manages to defeat her in a lightsaber duel by drawing on his anger.
Surrounding this storyline are various battles focusing on other Jedi and their wartime exploits: Master Mace Windu faces a droid army unarmed on Dantooine, Master Yoda travels to the ice world Ilum to save two imperiled Jedi, the amphibious Kit Fisto leads an aquatic regiment of clone troopers on the waterworld Mon Calamari, and a team of Jedi encounter the dreaded General Grievous on Hypori.

In Volume Two, Obi-Wan sends his team of ARC troopers to Hypori to rescue the Jedi from Grievous.
The Republic is desperate, and after much consideration, the Jedi Council decides to promote Anakin to the rank of Jedi Knight.
The series then jumps ahead to nearly the end of the war, when Anakin has become a more powerful Jedi.
He aids Obi-Wan in capturing a fortress, saves Saesee Tiin in space battle, and rescues Jedi from crab droids.

Anakin and Obi-Wan are assigned to search for Grievous on the planet Nelvaan, but instead end up liberating a group of Nelvaanians who had been enslaved and mutated by the Separatist Techno Union.
While rescuing the Nelvaan warriors, Anakin sees a cryptic vision of his eventual transformation into Darth Vader.
Meanwhile, Grievous leads an assault on Coruscant and, despite the best efforts of Yoda, Windu, Shaak Ti, and others, kidnaps Palpatine for his master, Dooku.
Anakin and Obi-Wan then set out to rescue the Chancellor over Coruscant, leading directly into the beginning of Revenge of the Sith.
===
Continuity ===
Several attempts were made to maintain continuity with the overall saga, most notably bridging Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Anakin appears with his new lightsaber (as it appears in Episode III) after his first was destroyed in the previous film.
In "Chapter 21", C-3PO makes his first appearance in gold plating and Anakin is knighted; he sends his Padawan braid to Padmé, who stores it with the necklace he gave her in The Phantom Menace.
In "Chapter 22", Anakin appears with the facial scar he has in Revenge of the Sith, and it is implied that Anakin and Padmé may conceive the Skywalker twins on Naboo.
The series is notable for introducing Revenge of the Sith villain General Grievous (in "Chapter 20"), although some of his personality traits had yet to be finalized.
According to Tartakovsky, George Lucas initially pitched Grievous to him and his crew as "this ruthless, totally capable Jedi killer," but later developed him into "one of those old B-serial villains who does something bad ... twirls his mustache
and then he runs off.
"
The character was given a cough in Revenge of the Sith, intended to emphasize his organic nature as well as the flaws of having cyborg prosthetics.
His depiction in Clone Wars lacked a cough until the concluding episode, in which Mace Windu Force-crushes the chestplate housing Grievous's internal organs; this was intended to create continuity with the film and was mentioned in its novelization.
However, in the CGI The Clone Wars series (2008–2014, 2020), Grievous is depicted as having this cough all along.

Volume Two shares aspects of its storyline with the novel Labyrinth of Evil, which was created at the same time.
In the series, Anakin and Obi-Wan investigate a possible base for Grievous on Nelvaan prior to returning to Coruscant, but in the novel, they pursue Count Dooku on Tythe; Dooku briefly pauses at Nelvaan when escaping to Coruscant.
According to The New Essential Chronology, the events on Nelvaan occurred before those on Tythe, with the final scene of Obi-Wan and Anakin getting the message from Mace on the cruiser taking place afterwards.

Clone Wars served as a pilot for the half-hour CGI The Clone Wars.
The character designer for the latter series attempted to translate aspects of the character designs from the 2D series to 3D. Clone trooper Alpha from the older series was considered for the newer series, but Lucas thought too many characters had names beginning with the letter A, leading to the creation of Captain Rex.
It was originally reported that the 2008 series would not supersede the continuity of the 2003 series, but
following Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, in 2014, it was announced that the CGI The Clone Wars would officially be considered canon, while most other spin-off works would not.

==
Production ==
The series was produced and directed by Genndy Tartakovsky, the creator of Dexter's Laboratory and Samurai Jack, and employs a similar animation style to the latter.
According to Tartakovsky, the series was developed in two weeks and created by a small crew.
Tartakovsky stated that he purposely animated C-3PO with moveable expressive eyes to pay homage to his animated appearances in The Star Wars Holiday Special and Droids.
Additionally, the planet Nelvaan's name was a nod to Nelvana, the production company that produced all previous Star Wars animated series.
In "Chapter 21", a Dulok appears, a species introduced in Ewoks.
According to art director Paul Rudish, the Banking Clan planet of Muunilinst was designed to look like a U.S. dollar bill.

==
Voice cast ==
Mat Lucas as Anakin Skywalker
Frankie Ryan Mariquez as young Anakin Skywalker
James Arnold Taylor as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Agen Kolar
Tom Kane as
Yoda
Terrence "T.C." Carson as Mace Windu and Saesee Tiin
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Corey Burton as San Hill and Count Dooku
Grey DeLisle as Asajj Ventress, Padmé Amidala, Shaak Ti, and Stass Allie
Nick Jameson as Palpatine / Darth Sidious
André Sogliuzzo as Commander Cody, Captain Typho, Captain Fordo, and all clone troopers
Richard McGonagle as General Grievous and Kit Fisto
Fred Tatasciore
as Qui-Gon Jinn and Oppo Rancisis
Daran Norris as Ki-Adi-Mundi, Durge, Master Barrek, and Even Piell
Cree Summer as Luminara Unduli
Tatyana Yassukovich as Barriss Offee
Kevin Michael Richardson as K'Kruhk


== Broadcast
==
The series originally ran on Cartoon Network.
In addition to being shown on television, the episodes were released online simultaneously on the Star Wars and Cartoon Network websites.
It was heavily advertised by the channel, and was originally shown immediately before their popular Friday-night programming block, 'Fridays'.

==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2003) ===
The first season consisted of 10 episodes, lasting three minutes each.
Along with the second season, it was released on DVD as Volume One.
===
Season 2 (2004) ===
The second season consisted of 10 episodes, lasting three minutes each.
Along with the first season, it was released on DVD as Volume One.
===
Season 3 (2005) ===
The third and final season consisted of five episodes, lasting 12 minutes each.
These episodes were released on DVD as Volume Two.
==
Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
According to the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 80% of critics have given season 1 a positive review based on 5 reviews.
In 2009, Clone Wars was ranked 21 on IGN's Top 100 Animated Series list.
ComicBook.com writes that the series "is worth a watch for any fan of magnificent animation".
In 2021, SyFy Wire's Phil Pirrello rated the series as the best Star Wars television production ever produced, writing that Tartakovsky "gave Star Wars its most dynamic visuals ever as he tackled all the Clone Wars action and conflict Lucas left out of his big-screen prequels.
"
Pirrello continues: "[W]hat Clone Wars lacks in intricate storytelling
it more than makes up for with stunning animation and stirring action scenes.
The mini-episodes are bare bones by design, as Tartakovsky employs a pure visual storytelling execution ...
The franchise has only taken such a bold stylistic risk this one time."

===
Awards and nominations ===


==
Home media ==
Both volumes were distributed by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, making it one of the few Cartoon Network original shows not to have their Home Media releases released through Warner Home Video.
Both volumes were released on Disney+
on April 2, 2021.

==
Merchandising ==
A series of Hasbro action figures was released in the years of the series' run, including four Walmart-exclusive "Commemorative DVD Collection" 3-packs (which did not include a DVD).
Dark Horse Comics also published a ten-volume comic series titled Clone Wars – Adventures, which utilized the style of the 2D animated series and depicts original stories set during the era; the last issue was published in 2007.

==
Legacy ==
Elements of the series, including the regenerative villain Durge, are mentioned in the 2005 novelization of Revenge of the Sith.
Durge will appear in an upcoming issue of the canon Marvel comic book series Doctor Aphra, as part of the Boba Fett-centric "War of the Bounty Hunters" crossover event.
According to the (now-defunct) Star Wars Databank, Durge has a vendetta against Mandalorians, and extends this to the clones of Jango Fett.
Versions of the medieval-style Jedi knighting ceremony have appeared in canon works such as Star Wars Rebels and Jedi:
Fallen Order.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
Clone Wars at IMDb
Star Wars:
Clone Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
Clone Wars (2003 TV series) at the Big Cartoon DataBase
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D CGI animated television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation.
The series follows a motley group of rebels conducting covert operations to thwart the sinister Galactic Empire.

==
Overview ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith is a 2005 American epic space-opera film written and directed by George Lucas.
It stars Ewan McGregor, Natalie Portman, Hayden Christensen, Ian McDiarmid, Samuel L. Jackson, Christopher Lee, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker and Frank Oz.
It is the final installment in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, the third chapter in the Skywalker saga and the sixth Star Wars film to be released overall.

Revenge of the Sith is set three years after the onset of the Clone Wars, established in Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002).
The Jedi are spread across the galaxy, leading a large-scale war against the Separatists.
Following the death of Separatist leader Count Dooku, the Jedi Council dispatches Obi-Wan Kenobi to eliminate General Grievous, the head of the Separatist army, to put an end to the war.
Meanwhile, after having premonitions of his wife Padmé Amidala dying in childbirth, Anakin Skywalker is tasked by the Council to spy on Palpatine, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic and, secretly, a Sith lord known as Darth Sidious.
Palpatine manipulates Anakin into turning to the dark side of the Force and becoming his apprentice, Darth Vader, with wide-ranging consequences for the galaxy.
Lucas began writing the script before production of Attack of the Clones ended, citing that he wanted to end the trilogy to have similar aspects of a romantic tragedy, thus building into Darth Vader's state at the beginning of the next film.
Production of Revenge of the Sith started in September 2003, and filming took place in Australia with additional locations in Thailand, Switzerland, China, Italy and the United Kingdom.

Revenge of the Sith premiered on May 15, 2005, at the Cannes Film Festival, then released worldwide on May 19, 2005.
The film received positive reviews and was deemed an improvement over the first two prequel films, with praise for its action sequences, mature themes, score, visual effects, darker tone, and the performances of McGregor, McDiarmid, Oz, and Jimmy Smits; criticism largely focused on the film's dialogue and aspects of Christensen's performance.
It broke several box office records during its opening week and went on to earn over $868 million worldwide, making it the second-highest-grossing film in the Star Wars franchise at the time.
It was the highest-grossing film in the U.S. and the second-highest-grossing film worldwide in 2005.
The film also holds the record for the highest opening-day gross on a Thursday, making $50 million.

==
Plot ==
Above Coruscant, Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker lead a mission to rescue the kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine from the cyborg Separatist commander General Grievous.
After infiltrating Grievous' flagship, the Jedi battle Sith Lord Count Dooku, whom Anakin overpowers and decapitates at Palpatine's urging.
Grievous escapes the battle-torn ship, which the Jedi crash-land on Coruscant.

Anakin reunites with his wife, Padmé Amidala, who reveals that she is pregnant.
While initially excited, Anakin soon begins to have nightmares about Padmé dying in childbirth.
Palpatine appoints Anakin to the Jedi Council as his personal representative.
The Council, suspicious of Palpatine, approve the appointment, but decline to grant Anakin the rank of Jedi Master and instead instruct him to spy on Palpatine, diminishing Anakin's trust in the Jedi.

Darth Sidious, the Sith Lord behind the war, appoints Grievous as the new Separatist leader and orders him to relocate the Separatist Council to the volcanic planet Mustafar.
Obi-Wan travels to Utapau, where he kills Grievous, and Yoda travels to the Wookiee homeworld of Kashyyyk to defend it from a Separatist invasion.
Meanwhile, Palpatine tempts Anakin with his knowledge of the Force, including the power to prevent death, which he offers to teach him to save Padmé's life.
Anakin deduces that Palpatine is Sidious and reports his treachery to Mace Windu, who confronts and subdues him.
Desperate to save Padmé's life, Anakin betrays Windu before he can kill Palpatine, who sends Windu falling to his death.
Anakin pledges himself to the Sith, and Palpatine knights him Darth Vader.

Palpatine then issues Order 66, which commands the clone troopers to kill their commanding Jedi officers, thus sending the Jedi Order into near-extinction.
Meanwhile, Vader and a battalion of clone troopers kill the remaining Jedi in the Jedi Temple, after which Vader travels to Mustafar to assassinate the Separatist leaders.
Palpatine declares himself Emperor before the Galactic Senate, transforming the Republic into the Galactic Empire, and denounces the Jedi as traitors.
Having survived the chaos, Obi-Wan and Yoda return to Coruscant and learn of Anakin's turn to the dark side.
Yoda orders Obi-Wan to confront Vader while he faces Palpatine.

When Padmé learns of Anakin's treachery, she travels to Mustafar – with Obi-Wan stowing away on her ship – and implores Vader to abandon the dark side, but he refuses.
Sensing Obi-Wan's presence, and thinking that they are conspiring to kill him, Vader angrily uses the Force to strangle Padmé to unconsciousness.
Obi-Wan then engages Vader in a lightsaber duel that ends with Obi-Wan severing Vader's legs and left arm.
Obi-Wan retrieves Vader's lightsaber and leaves him for dead at the bank of a lava flow.

On Coruscant, Yoda battles Palpatine until their duel reaches a stalemate.
Yoda then flees with Senator Bail Organa and regroups with Obi-Wan and Padmé on the planetoid Polis Massa.
There, Padmé gives birth to twins, whom she names Luke and Leia, and dies soon after, having lost her will to live.
On Mustafar, Palpatine retrieves a barely alive Vader and takes him to Coruscant, where his mutilated body is treated and covered in a black armored suit.
Palpatine tells him that he killed Padmé in a blind rage, devastating Vader.

Obi-Wan and Yoda plan to conceal the twins from the Sith and go into exile until the time is right to challenge the Empire.
As Padmé's funeral takes place on her homeworld of Naboo, Palpatine and Vader supervise the construction of the Death Star.
Bail takes Leia to his homeworld of Alderaan, where he and his wife adopt her, while Obi-Wan delivers Luke to his step-uncle and aunt, Owen and Beru Lars, on Tatooine before going into exile to watch over the boy.

== Cast ==
Ewan McGregor as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Master, general of the Galactic Republic and Anakin's mentor.

Natalie Portman as Padmé Amidala, a senator of Naboo who is secretly Anakin's wife and pregnant with their children.

Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, a Jedi Knight, hero of the Clone Wars and former Padawan of Obi-Wan, who turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes the Sith lord Darth Vader.
Christensen also plays Vader in his suit.

Ian McDiarmid as Palpatine / Darth Sidious, the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic who is secretly a Sith Lord, and later the founder and leader of the Galactic Empire.
He takes advantage of Anakin's distrust of the Jedi and fear of Padmé dying to turn him towards the dark side, becoming Vader's master.

Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, a Jedi Master and senior member of the Jedi Council.

Jimmy Smits as Bail Organa, a senator of Alderaan.

Christopher Lee as Count Dooku / Darth Tyranus, Darth Sidious' Sith apprentice and leader of the Separatists.

Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, Anakin and Padmé's personal protocol droid that Anakin created as a child.

Kenny Baker as R2-D2, Anakin's astromech droid.

Frank Oz as the voice of Yoda, a Jedi Grandmaster and the leader of the Jedi Council.
Peter Mayhew, Oliver Ford Davies, Ahmed Best, and Silas Carson reprise their roles as Chewbacca, Sio Bibble, Jar Jar Binks, and Nute Gunray and Ki-Adi-Mundi, respectively, from the previous films.
Joel Edgerton and Bonnie Piesse also make cameo appearances, reprising their roles as Owen and Beru Lars respectively from Attack of the Clones.
Sound engineer Matthew Wood provides the voice of General Grievous, the fearsome cyborg commander of the Separatists' droid army; Temuera Morrison portrays Commander Cody and the rest of the clone troopers; Bruce Spence portrays Tion Medon, local administrator of Utapau; Jeremy Bulloch (who played Boba Fett in The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi) appears as Captain Colton, the pilot of the Rebel Blockade Runner Tantive IV; Genevieve O'Reilly portrays senator Mon Mothma, though her scene was ultimately cut.
Rohan Nichol portrays Captain Raymus Antilles.
Wayne Pygram appears as a young Wilhuff Tarkin, and stunt coordinator Nick Gillard appears as a Jedi named Cin Drallig (his name spelled backward, without the 'k').
Editor Roger Barton's son Aidan Barton portrays Luke Skywalker and Leia Organa as infants.
James Earl Jones makes an uncredited cameo appearance, reprising his role from previous films as the voice of Darth Vader.
Director and Star Wars creator George Lucas has a cameo as Baron Papanoida, a blue-faced alien in attendance at the Coruscant opera house.
Lucas' son Jett portrays Zett Jukassa, a young Jedi-in-training.
One of Lucas' daughters, Amanda, appears as Terr Taneel, seen in a security hologram, while his other daughter Katie plays a blue-skinned Pantoran named Chi Eekway, visible when Palpatine arrives at the Senate after being saved by the Jedi and talking to Baron Papanoida at the opera house.
Christian Simpson appeared as a stunt double for Hayden Christensen.

==
Production
==
===
Writing ===
Lucas stated that he conceived the Star Wars saga's story in the form of a plot outline in 1973.
However, he later clarified that, at the time of the saga's conception, he had not fully realized the details
—only major plot points.
The film's climactic duel has its basis in the Return of the Jedi novelization, in which Obi-Wan recounts his battle with Anakin that ended with the latter falling "into a molten pit".
Lucas began working on the screenplay for Episode III before the previous film, Attack of the Clones, was released, proposing to concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven battles on seven planets.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski surmises that Lucas found flaws with Anakin's fall to the dark side and radically reorganized the plot.
For example, instead of opening the film with a montage of Clone War battles, Lucas decided to focus on Anakin, ending the first act with him killing Count Dooku, an action that signals his turn to the dark side.
A significant number of fans speculated online about the episode title for the film with rumored titles including Rise of the Empire,
The Creeping Fear (which was also named as the film's title on the official website on April Fool's 2004), and Birth of the Empire.
Eventually, Revenge of the Sith also became a title guessed by fans that George Lucas would indirectly confirm.
The title is a reference to Revenge of the Jedi, the original title of Return of the Jedi; Lucas changed the title scant weeks before the premiere of Return of the Jedi, declaring that Jedi do not seek revenge.
Since Lucas refocused the film on Anakin, he had to sacrifice certain extraneous plot points relating to Attack of the Clones.
Lucas had previously promised fans that he would explain the mystery behind the erasure of the planet Kamino from the Jedi Archives.
However, Lucas abandoned this plot thread in order to devote more time to Anakin's story, leaving the matter unresolved on film.
Lucas had originally planned to include even more ties to the original trilogy, and wrote early drafts of the script in which a 10-year-old Han Solo appeared on Kashyyyk, but the role was not cast or shot.
He also wrote a scene in which Palpatine reveals to Anakin that he created him from midichlorians, and is thus his "father", a clear parallel to Vader's revelation to Luke in The Empire Strikes Back, but Lucas ejected this scene as well.
Another planned scene by Lucas that was written during the early development of the film was a conversation between Master Yoda and the ghostly Qui-Gon Jinn, with Liam Neeson reprising his role as Jinn (he also hinted his possible appearance in the film).
However, the scene was never filmed and Neeson was never recorded, although the scene was present in the film's novelization.
Neeson finally reprised the role in an episode of The Clone Wars in 2011.After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas made even more changes in Anakin's character, rewriting the entire "turn" sequence.
Lucas accomplished this "rewrite" through editing the principal footage and filming new scenes during pickups in London in 2004.
In the previous versions, Anakin had myriad reasons for turning to the dark side, one of which was his sincere belief that the Jedi were plotting to take over the Republic.
Although this is still intact in the finished film, by revising and refilming many scenes, Lucas emphasized Anakin's desire to save Padmé from death.
Thus, in the version that made it to theaters, Anakin falls to the dark side primarily to save Padmé.
===
Art design ===
For the Kashyyyk environment, the art department turned to the Star Wars Holiday Special for inspiration.
Over a period of months, Lucas would approve hundreds of designs that would eventually appear in the film.
He would later rewrite entire scenes and action sequences to correspond to certain designs he had chosen.
The designs were then shipped to the pre-visualization department to create moving CGI versions known as animatics.
Ben Burtt would edit these scenes with Lucas in order to pre-visualize what the film would look like before the scenes were filmed.
The pre-visualization footage featured a basic raw CGI environment with equally unprocessed character models performing a scene, typically for action sequences.
Steven Spielberg was brought in as a "guest director" to make suggestions to the art designers for the Mustafar duel, and oversee the pre-visualization of an unused version of the Utapau chase scene.
Later, the pre-visualization and art department designs were sent to the production department to begin "bringing the film out of the concept phase" by building sets, props and costumes.

===
Filming ===
Although the first scene filmed was the final scene to appear in the film (shot during the filming of Attack of the Clones in 2000), the first bulk of principal photography on the film occurred from June 30, 2003 to September 17, 2003, with additional photography occurring at Shepperton Studios in Surrey and Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire from August 2004 to January 31, 2005.
The initial filming took place on sound stages at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, although practical environments were shot as background footage later to be composited into the film.
These included the limestone mountains depicting Kashyyyk, which were filmed in Phuket, Thailand.
The production company was also fortunate enough to be shooting at the same time that Mount Etna erupted in Italy.
Camera crews were sent to the location to shoot several angles of the volcano that were later spliced into the background of the animatics and the final film version of the planet Mustafar.
While shooting key dramatic scenes, Lucas would often use an "A camera" and "B camera", or the "V technique", a process that involves shooting with two or more cameras at the same time in order to gain several angles of the same performance.
Using the HD technology developed for the film, the filmmakers were able to send footage to the editors the same day it was shot, a process that would require a full 24 hours had it been shot on film.
Footage featuring the planet Mustafar was given to editor Roger Barton, who was on location in Sydney cutting the climactic duel.

Hayden Christensen says Lucas asked him "to bulk up and physically show the maturity that had taken place between the two films.
"
The actor says he worked out with a trainer in Sydney for three months and ate "six meals a day and on every protein, weight gain supplement that man has created" to go from 160 lbs to 185 lbs.
Christensen and Ewan McGregor began rehearsing their climactic lightsaber duel long before Lucas would shoot it.
They trained extensively with stunt coordinator Nick Gillard to memorize and perform their duel together.
As in the previous prequel film, McGregor and Christensen performed their own lightsaber fighting scenes without the use of stunt doubles.
The speed at which Vader and Obi-Wan engage in their duel is mostly the speed at which it was filmed, although there are instances where single frames were removed to increase the velocity of particular strikes.
An example of this occurs as Obi-Wan strikes down on Vader after applying an armlock in the duel's first half.
Revenge of the Sith eventually became the first Star Wars film in which Anakin Skywalker and the suited Darth Vader were played by the same actor in the same film.
As Christensen recounted, it was originally intended to simply have a "tall guy" in the Darth Vader costume, but after "begging and pleading" Christensen persuaded Lucas to have the Vader costume used in the film created specifically to fit him.
The new costume featured shoe lifts and a muscle suit.
It also required Christensen (who is 6 feet or 1.8 metres tall) to look through the helmet's mouthpiece.
In 2004, Gary Oldman was originally approached to provide the voice of General Grievous; however, complications arose during contract negotiations after Oldman learned the film was to be made outside of the Screen Actors Guild, of which he is a member.
He backed out of the role rather than violate the union's rules.
Matthew Wood, who voiced Grievous, disputed this story at Celebration III, held in Indianapolis.
According to him, Oldman is a friend of producer Rick McCallum, and thus recorded an audition as a favor to him, but was not chosen.
Wood, who was also the supervising sound editor, was in charge of the auditions and submitted his audition anonymously in the midst of 30 others, under the initials "A.S." for Alan Smithee.
Days later, he received a phone call asking for the full name to the initials "A.S."


===
Visual effects ===
The post-production department (handeled by Industrial Light & Magic) began work during filming and continued until weeks before the film was released in 2005.
Special effects were created using almost all formats, including model work, CGI and practical effects.
The same department later composited all such work into the filmed scenes—both processes taking nearly two years to complete.
Revenge of the Sith has 2,151 shots that use special effects, a world record.
The DVD featurette Within a Minute illustrated the film required 910 artists and 70,441 man-hours to create 49 seconds of footage for the Mustafar duel alone.
Members of Hyperspace, the Official Star Wars Fan Club, received a special look into the production.
Benefits included not only special articles, but they also received access to a webcam that transmitted a new image every 20 seconds during the time it was operating in Fox Studios Australia.
Many times the stars, and Lucas himself, were spotted on the webcam.

=== Removed scenes ===
Lucas excised all the scenes of a group of Senators, including Padmé, Bail Organa, and Mon Mothma (Genevieve O'Reilly), organizing an alliance to prevent Palpatine from usurping any more emergency powers.
Though this is essentially the Rebel Alliance's birth, the scenes were discarded to achieve more focus on Anakin's story.

The scene where Yoda arrives on Dagobah to begin his self-imposed exile was also removed, but is featured as an extended scene in the DVD release, although McCallum stated he hopes Lucas may add it to the release if Lucas releases a six-episode DVD box set.
Bai Ling filmed minor scenes for the film playing a senator, but her role was cut during editing.
She claimed this was because she appeared in a nude pictorial for the June 2005 issue of Playboy, whose appearance on newsstands coincided with the film's May release.
Lucas denied this, stating that the cut had been made more than a year earlier, and that he had cut his own daughter's scenes as well.
The bonus features show an additional removed scene in which Jedi Master Shaak Ti is killed by General Grievous in front of Obi-Wan Kenobi and Anakin Skywalker.
The bonus features also show Kenobi and Skywalker running through Grievous's ship, escaping droids through a fuel tunnel, and arguing over what the droid R2-D2 is saying.

===
Music ===
The music was composed and conducted by John Williams (who has composed and conducted the score for every episode in the Star Wars saga), and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra and London Voices.

The film's soundtrack was released by Sony Pictures Classical Records on May 3, 2005, more than two weeks before the film's release.
A music video titled A Hero Falls was created for the film's theme, "Battle of the Heroes", featuring footage from the film and was also available on the DVD.The soundtrack also came with a collectors' DVD
, Star Wars: A Musical Journey, at no additional cost.
The DVD, hosted by McDiarmid, features 16 music videos set to remastered selections of music from all six film scores, set chronologically through the saga.

==
Releases ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith charity premieres took place in Seattle, Los Angeles, Chicago, Washington D.C., Boston, Denver, Atlanta, San Francisco, and Miami on Thursday, May 12, 2005; and on May 13, 2005, there were two additional charity premiere screenings in George Lucas's hometown of Modesto, California.
The official premiere was at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival (out of competition) on May 16.
Its theatrical release in most other countries took place on May 19 to coincide with the 1999 release of The Phantom Menace
(the 1977 release of A New Hope and the 1983 release of Return of the Jedi were also released on the same day and month, six years apart).
The global outplacement firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas claimed one week before the premiere that it may have cost the U.S. economy approximately US$627 million in lost productivity because of employees who took a day off or reported in sick.
Grauman's Chinese Theatre, a traditional venue for the Star Wars films, did not show it.
However, a line of people stood there for more than a month hoping to convince someone to change this.
Most of them took advantage of an offer to see the film at a nearby cinema, ArcLight Cinemas (formerly the "Cinerama Dome").
On May 16, the Empire Cinema in London's Leicester Square hosted a day-long Star Wars marathon showing of all six films; an army of Imperial stormtroopers "guarded" the area, and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra gave a free concert of Star Wars music.
===
Leaked workprint ===
A copy of the film leaked onto peer-to-peer file sharing networks just hours after opening in theaters.
The film was a time-stamped workprint, suggesting it may have come from within the industry rather than from someone who videotaped an advance screening.
Eight people were later charged with copyright infringement and distributing material illegally.
Documents filed by the Los Angeles District Attorney allege that a copy of the film was taken from an unnamed Californian post-production office by an employee, who later pleaded guilty to his charges.
The illegal copy was passed among seven people until reaching an eighth party, who also pleaded guilty to uploading to an unnamed P2P network.
Shortly after the above-mentioned print was leaked, it was released in Shanghai as a bootleg DVD with Chinese subtitles.
The unknown producer of this DVD also chose to include English subtitles, which were in fact translated back into English from the Chinese translation, rather than using the original English script.
This resulted in the subtitles being heavily mis-translated, often causing unintentional humor.
For example, in the opening crawl the title is mis-translated as Star War:
The Third Gathers – The Backstroke of the West.
Darth Vader's cry of "Noooooooo!"
(
不要) is rendered as "Do not want".
This translation error would later be popularized as an Internet meme.
In 2016, YouTube user GratefulDeadpool uploaded a fan edit of Revenge of the Sith in which the cast's voices were dubbed by other actors to match the bootleg subtitles.

===
Rating ===
Revenge of the Sith is the first Star Wars film to receive a PG-13 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), officially for "thematic elements sci-fi violence and some intense images", namely for the scene in which Darth Vader is set aflame by lava and molten rock.
Lucas had stated months before the MPAA's decision that he felt the film should receive a PG-13 rating, because of Anakin's final moments and the film's content being the darkest and most intense of all six films.
Some critics, including Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper, later responded that children would be able to handle the film as long as they had parental guidance, hence a "PG rating".
All previously released films in the series were rated PG.

===
Home media ===
The film was released on DVD and VHS on October 31, 2005, in the UK and Ireland; on November 1, 2005, it was released in the United States and Canada on DVD; and on November 3, 2005, it was released in Australia.
It was also released in most major territories on or near the same day.
The DVD included a number of documentaries including a new full-length documentary as well as two featurettes, one which explores the prophecy of Anakin Skywalker as the Chosen One, the other looking at the film's stunts and a 15-part collection of web-documentaries from the official web site.
Like the other DVD releases, included is an audio commentary track featuring Lucas, producer Rick McCallum, animation director Rob Coleman, and ILM visual effects supervisors John Knoll and Roger Guyett.
Six deleted scenes were included with introductions from Lucas and McCallum.

This release is notable because, due to marketing issues, it was the first Star Wars film never to be released on VHS in the United States.
However, the film was released on VHS in Australia, the U.K. and other countries.
The DVD was re-released in a prequel trilogy box set on November 4, 2008.The Star Wars films were released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment on Blu-ray on December 16, 2010, in three different editions.
On April 7, 2015, Walt Disney Studios, 20th Century Fox, and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films.
Revenge of the Sith was released through the iTunes Store, Amazon Video, Vudu, Google Play, and Disney Movies
Anywhere on April 10, 2015.Walt
Disney Studios Home Entertainment reissued Revenge of the Sith on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on September 22, 2019.
Additionally, all six films were available for 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos streaming on Disney+ upon the service's launch on November 12, 2019.
This version of the film was released by Disney on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 31, 2020.
===
3D re-release ===
On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series were to be stereo-converted to 3D.
The films would be re-released in chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace on February 10, 2012.
Revenge of the Sith was originally scheduled to be re-released in 3D on October 11, 2013.
However, on January 28, 2013, Lucasfilm announced that it was postponing the 3D release of episodes II and III in order to "focus 100 percent of our efforts on Star Wars:
The Force Awakens" and that further information about 3D release plans would be issued at a later date.
The premiere of the 3D version was shown on April 17, 2015, at Star Wars Celebration Anaheim.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 80% based on 302 reviews, with an average rating of 7.3/10.
The site's critical consensus reads, "With Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
, George Lucas brings his second Star Wars trilogy to a suitably thrilling and often poignant – if still a bit uneven – conclusion."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 68 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score as the previous two films.
Most critics have considered the film to be the best of the prequel trilogy.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times concluded that it was "the best of the four episodes Mr. Lucas has directed", and equal to The Empire Strikes Back as "the richest and most challenging movie in the cycle".
In a 2007 summary of the 100 Best Science-Fiction Films on Rotten Tomatoes, Revenge of the Sith was placed 51 out of 100, making it the only Star Wars prequel film to earn a rank on that list.
J.R. Jones, a Chicago Reader critic who disliked The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones, gave the film a positive review, saying that it had a "relatively thoughtful story".
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, writing "If [Lucas] got bogged down in solemnity and theory in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones, the Force is in a jollier mood this time, and Revenge of the Sith is a great entertainment", but he noted that "the dialogue throughout the movie is once again its weakest point".
Though many critics and fans viewed Revenge of the Sith as the strongest of the three prequels, some viewers thought it was more or less on par with the previous two episodes.
Much of the criticism was directed towards the dialogue, particularly the film's romantic scenes; critics claimed this demonstrated Lucas's weakness as a writer of dialogue, a subject with which Lucas openly agreed when receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award from the American Film Institute.
Some film critics and fans criticized Hayden Christensen's acting, calling it "wooden".

In 2012, Glittering Images art critic Camille Paglia praised the film, comparing some of its scenes to works by modern painters and calling it "the greatest work of art in recent memory".
Paglia explained that the film's finale ...has more inherent artistic value, emotional power, and global impact than anything by the artists you name.
It's because the art world has flat-lined and become an echo chamber of received opinion and toxic over-praise.
It's like the emperor's new clothes -- people are too intimidated to admit what they secretly think or what they might think with their blinders off.
Episode III epitomizes the modern digital art movement, more so than other piece from the last 30 years.
I had considered using Japanese anime for the digital art chapter of the book, but it lacked the overwhelming operatic power and yes, seriousness of Lucas's Revenge of the Sith.

During the late 2010s, the film amassed a cult following on social media among young fans who were children when the film was released, using the film's dialogue to create Internet memes out of nostalgia.
Some American conservatives criticized the film, claiming it had a liberal bias and was a commentary on the George W. Bush administration and Iraq War.
Some websites went so far as to propose a boycott of the film.
Lucas defended the film, stating that the film's storyline was written during the Vietnam War and was influenced by that conflict rather than the war in Iraq.
Lucas also said "The parallels between Vietnam and what we're doing in Iraq now are unbelievable".
===
Box office ===
The film was released in 115 countries.
Its worldwide gross eventually reached $849 million—making it the second most financially successful film of 2005, behind Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.
The film earned an estimated $16.91 million from 2,900 midnight screenings in North America upon its release.
In total, it earned a record $50 million on its opening day.
It was surpassed the following year by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, which earned $55.5 million on its opening day.
With only the May 19 earnings, the film broke four box office records: midnight screenings gross (previously held by The Lord of the Rings:
The Return of the King, $8 million), opening day gross (Spider-Man 2, with $40.4 million), single day gross (Shrek 2 with $44.8 million) and Thursday gross (
The Matrix Reloaded with $37.5 million).
Its single day and opening day gross records were later surpassed by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest on July 7, 2006, when that movie grossed $55.5 million on its opening day, and its midnight screening gross was broken by The Dark Knight on July 18, 2008 with $18.5 million.
According to box office analysis sites, the film set American records for highest gross in a given number of days for each of its first 12 days of release except for the seventh and eighth, where the record is narrowly held by Spider-Man 2.
On its fifth day, it became the highest-grossing film of 2005, surpassing Hitch ($177.6 million).
The film earned $158.5 million in its first four-day period, surpassing the previous four-day record held by The Matrix Reloaded ($134.3 million), and joining Spider-Man, The Matrix Reloaded and Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire as one of the only films to make $100 million in three days.
In eight days, it reached the $200 million mark (a record tied with Spider-Man 2) and by its 17th day, the film had passed $300 million (surpassing the record of 18 days of Shrek 2).
It was eventually the third-fastest film (after Shrek 2 and Spider-Man) to reach $350 million.
The film ended its run in American theaters on October 20, 2005, finishing with a total gross of $380,270,577.
It ranks 29th in all-time domestic grosses and is the highest-grossing U.S. of 2005, out-grossing second-place
The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe by nearly $90 million.
The film sold an estimated 59,324,600 tickets in the US.
It topped the domestic box office for two consecutive weekends before being overtaken by Madagascar and The Longest Yard (which were in their second weekends).International grosses that exceeded $460 million include those Australia ($27.2 million), France and Algeria ($56.9 million), Germany ($47.3 million), Italy ($11.3 million), Japan ($82.7 million), Mexico ($15.3 million), South Korea ($10.3 million), Spain ($23.8 million), and the United Kingdom and Ireland ($72.8 million).
===
Accolades ===
Following the release of Revenge of the Sith—the completion of the original and prequel Star Wars series—on June 9, 2005, George Lucas was presented with the 33rd American Film Institute Lifetime Achievement Award.
The institute honored his "astonishing contributions to the art and technology of filmmaking, as well as the impact of the epic Star Wars series".
Despite being the prequel trilogy's best reviewed and received film, it received fewer award nominations than the previous films.
It became the only Star Wars film not to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects; it was nominated for Best Makeup (Dave Elsey and Nikki Gooley), losing to The Chronicles of Narnia:
The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.
It also won "Favorite Motion Picture" and "Favorite Dramatic Motion Picture" awards at the People's Choice Awards, "Hollywood Movie of the Year" award at the Hollywood Film Festival, Empire Awards (Sci-Fi/Fantasy Film), and the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie – Action.
As did every film of the original trilogy, the film won the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film.
Williams also won Best Music.
The film was nominated for ten Saturn Awards overall, including Best Director and Best Writing for Lucas, Best Actor for Christensen, Best Actress for Natalie Portman and Best Supporting Actor for Ian McDiarmid.
Of the three Star Wars prequels, the film received the fewest Golden Raspberry Awards nominations: only one, for Christensen as Worst Supporting Actor, which he won.
(
The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones received seven nominations each, with one and two wins, respectively.)
It is the only Star Wars prequel not to receive a Razzie nomination for "Worst Picture".
Christensen further won the "Best Villain" award at the MTV Movie Awards.
The film also received the fewest nominations (and no wins) at the 2005 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards: Worst Screenplay for a Film Grossing More Than $100M and Worst On-Screen Couple (Christensen and Portman).

==
Themes ==
Throughout Revenge of the Sith, Lucas refers to a wide range of films and other sources, drawing on political, military, and mythological motifs to enhance his story's impact.
Perhaps the most media coverage was given to a particular exchange between Anakin and Obi-Wan, which led to the aforementioned controversy: "If you're not with me, then you're my enemy", Anakin declares.
Despite Lucas' insistence to the contrary, The Seattle Times concluded, "Without naming Bush or the Patriot Act, it's all unmistakable no matter what your own politics may be.
"McDiarmid, Lucas, and others have also called Anakin's journey to the dark side Faustian in the sense of making a "pact with the devil" for short-term gain, with the fiery volcano planet Mustafar representing hell.
Midway through the film, Lucas intercuts between Anakin and Padmé by themselves, thinking about one another in the Jedi Temple and their apartment, respectively, during sunset.
The sequence is without dialogue and complemented by a moody, synthesized soundtrack.
Lucas' coverage of the exterior cityscapes, skylines and interior isolation in the so-called "Ruminations" sequence is similar to the cinematography and mise-en-scène of Rosemary's Baby, a film in which a husband makes a literal pact with the devil.

==
Other media ==


===
Novelization ===
The film's novelization was written by Matthew Stover.
It includes much more dialogue than the film, and certain story elements were fleshed out further in the novelization, such as Anakin and Palpatine's relationship and Palpatine's apprenticeship to Darth Plagueis.
===
Video game ===
A video game based on the film was released on May 5, 2005, two weeks before the film.
The game followed the film's storyline for the most part, integrating scenes from the film.
However, many sections of the game featured scenes cut from the film, or entirely new scenes for the game.
The style of the game was mostly lightsaber combat and fighting as Obi-Wan or Anakin.
It also has a form of multiplayer mode, which includes both "VS" and "Cooperative" mode.
In the first mode, two players fight with characters of their choice against each other in a lightsaber duel to the death.
In the latter mode, two players team up to combat increasingly difficult waves of enemies.

===
The Clone Wars and subsequent Star Wars media ===
The 2008 animated film and subsequent television series fill the three-year gap between the events of Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith.
Several plot threads planned but ultimately dropped from Revenge of the Sith were instead incorporated into The Clone Wars; these included Boba Fett's revenge plot against Mace Windu for his father Jango's death, as well as the mystery behind deceased Jedi Master Sifo-Dyas introduced in Attack of the Clones.
The final four episodes of the series take place concurrently with Revenge of the Sith.
Several scenes from the film were recreated and expanded for these episodes in order to showcase the whereabouts of Anakin Skywalker's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano during the events of the film.
While Ahsoka was a major character in The Clone Wars, she is not alluded to in Revenge of the Sith as the character had not yet been created when the film was in production.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at StarWars.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at IMDb
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at the TCM Movie Database
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith at AllMovie
"Yoda" is a song by "Weird Al" Yankovic from his third album
, Dare to Be Stupid (1985).
It is a parody of the song "Lola" by the Kinks.
Inspired by the events of the movie The Empire Strikes Back, the song is told from the point of view of Jedi-in-training Luke Skywalker and concerns his dealings with Master Yoda on the planet Dagobah.
The song was initially written and recorded in 1980, during the original release of The Empire Strikes Back and achieved success on The Dr. Demento Show; however, securing permission from both Star Wars creator George Lucas and "Lola" songwriter Ray Davies delayed the physical release of the song for about five years.

"Yoda" was never released as a single and no music video was ever made for it.
Nevertheless, the parody has gone on to be one of Yankovic's most famous songs.
It was re-released twice in 1994: on his second greatest hits set and the box set Permanent Record and also on the 2009 compilation The Essential "Weird Al" Yankovic.
The song is also a staple during Yankovic's live shows, and an idiosyncratic chant dubbed "The Yoda Chant" is often performed during the song's middle portions.

==
History ==


===
Early success ===
"Yoda" was originally written by "Weird Al" Yankovic in 1980 when the epic space opera
The Empire Strikes Back was playing in theaters.
The film introduced the character of Yoda, the ancient Jedi Master who trains Luke in the ways of the Force following the demise of Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Yankovic later jokingly said that, "Prior to The Empire Strikes Back, the thought of writing a song about Yoda had never occurred to me."
He considered writing a song based on the "break-out character", but was unable to find a suitable piece to parody until one of his friends proposed that he use "Lola"—"which
I couldn't believe that I hadn't thought of myself, since I was such a huge Kinks fan.
"Yankovic wrote and recorded a version of the song, using only an accordion, with "Musical Mike" Kieffer blowing milk bubbles and making hand sounds, on a 4-track cassette Portastudio.
This version of "Yoda" was a success on The Dr. Demento Show, and peaked at number one on the "Funny Five" countdown for several weeks.
This early demo was later released on the sixth volume of Dr. Demento's Basement Tapes.

===
Obtaining permission ===
Yankovic wanted to include the song on one of his albums, since the demo version had been so popular.
However, securing permission from both George Lucas and the Kinks delayed the physical release of the song for about five years.
Although Lucas eventually gave Yankovic permission, the song's publishers turned Yankovic down.
"
Yoda" might have remained unreleased had it not been for a chance encounter between Yankovic and Ray Davies, who wrote "Lola".
When Yankovic asked him why he had not given his permission, Davies responded that he had never been asked.
Davies ultimately gave Yankovic permission to record the song, and the song was later released on Yankovic's third album
Dare to Be Stupid.
For subsequent parodies, Yankovic has attempted to approach the songwriters themselves for permission rather than their publishers whenever possible.
"Yoda" was re-recorded on February 20, 1985.
This version of the song does not feature the use of an accordion and is truer, musically, to the original Kinks song.
Yankovic later said, "It's kind of a backlash from the first album, where we had accordion on everything.
It just became a little overwhelming to me."

===
Continuing popularity ===
After Dare to Be Stupid was released, Yankovic considered "Yoda" a "cool album track" rather than a potential single due to the age of both The Empire Strikes Back and the original song.
This, and the fact that the majority of the album's video budget went to the then-current "Like a Virgin" parody, meant that a "Yoda" video would not be feasible.
Nevertheless, the song has gone on to be one of Yankovic's most famous parodies and a fan favorite.
The song was featured on the Greatest Hits Volume II (1994), the box set Permanent Record (1994), and the 2009 compilation The Essential "Weird Al" Yankovic.
The song appeared on "The Time Machine" episode of The Weird Al Show, and on the compilation album Radio Disney: Kid Jams.

==
Live performances ==
"Yoda" has been played at the end of every show for the tours promoting Yankovic's albums Dare to Be Stupid,
Off The Deep End, Alapalooza, Bad Hair Day, Running with Scissors, Poodle Hat, Alpocalypse, and Mandatory Fun.
Starting with the Touring with Scissors tour in 1999, the song has been preceded by that album's Star Wars–themed single, "The Saga Begins".

For the Straight Outta Lynwood tour, the band moved both songs to the middle of the set, and performed "Albuquerque" as their finale.

Beginning in June 2010, "Yoda" has again been the final encore.
Unlike the album version of "Yoda", which uses the same instrumentation as "Lola", Yankovic adds accordion accompaniment in live performances; this can be seen on the video releases "Weird Al" Yankovic Live!
and "Weird Al" Yankovic Live! –
The Alpocalypse Tour.
Since 1992, an a cappella chant (often referred to as the "Yoda chant"), originally performed during the bridge of "Another One Rides the Bus" in 1991 during the Dr. Demento 20th Anniversary Show, has been included in live performances, and is considered a staple of Yankovic's shows.

Midway through "Yoda", the band slowly ceases playing and goes into the chant, which Yankovic wrote himself.

Originally, the chant consisted mainly of mnemonic syllables accompanied by synchronized movements from the band.
Over the years, the chant has grown to include, among other things, pieces from "Grim Grinning Ghosts" (the theme to Disneyland attraction
The Haunted Mansion)
, phrases from The Trashmen's "Surfin' Bird" and "Frère Jacques", and elements of the "Hawaiian War Chant" and the "Aussie Aussie Aussie, Oi Oi Oi" chant.
On the Mandatory Fun Tour in 2015, a piece of the "four-way-crimp" from The Mighty Boosh was also added.
In 2015, as part of Comedy Central's Night of Too Many Stars, a benefit for New York Collaborates for Autism, Yankovic performed the song with 13-year-old Jodi DiPiazza, a noted pianist with autism.

==
Personnel ==
"Weird Al" Yankovic – lead and background vocals, keyboards
Jim West – guitars
Steve Jay – bass guitar
Jon "Bermuda" Schwartz – drums, congas, maracas, bubbles
Pat Regan –
piano


== References ==
Since 1995, 85 commercial video games based on Lego, the construction system produced by The Lego Group, have been released.
Following the second game, Lego Island, developed and published by Mindscape, The Lego Group published games on its own with its Lego Media division, which was renamed Lego Software in 2001, and Lego Interactive in 2002.
The division also co-published with Electronic Arts before closing.
Former Lego Interactive staff founded company Giant Interactive Entertainment for future Lego game publishing.
Following the release of Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, Giant merged with Traveller's Tales to form TT Games.
TT Games was acquired by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment (WBIE) in November 2007, making WBIE the primary publisher for Lego games.

==
Original games ==


==
Licensed properties ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back is the sequel to the vector graphics Star Wars arcade game.
It was released by Atari Games in 1985 as a conversion kit for the original game.
As in Star Wars, the player takes the role of Luke Skywalker in a set of battle sequences in a first-person perspective.
The game features the Battle of Hoth and the subsequent escape of the Millennium Falcon through an asteroid field.
The game is the third Star Wars arcade title from Atari; the raster game Return of the Jedi came out the previous year.

Home ports were released by Domark for the Amstrad CPC, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Atari ST, Commodore 64, and Amiga.

==
Gameplay ==
During the Hoth sequences, the player is flying a Rebel snowspeeder.
The first section has the player patrolling in a search and destroy mission for Probots (Imperial Probe Droids).
Imperial transmissions emanating from the Probots can be shot to prolong the stage.
Once the transmission does end up fully transmitted, the player advances.
To earn a Jedi letter, the player must eradicate the specified number of probots.

The second snowspeeder sequence involves the assault of AT-AT and AT-ST walkers against the Rebel shield generator.
The walkers have to be either destroyed or avoided, as collisions will damage the aircraft.
The player has four tow-cables which can be used to take down the AT-AT walkers instantly if fired at the walker's legs.
Otherwise, the player has to aim for the red cockpits in order to destroy the walkers.
To earn a Jedi letter, the player must eradicate the specified number of walkers.

The second half of the game has the player take the role of Han Solo piloting at the head of a convoy trying to escape the Imperial onslaught.
First, the player encounters a swath of TIE fighters.
To earn a Jedi letter, the player must eradicate the specified number of TIE fighters.
When enough time expires, the player moves on to an asteroid field, where the goal is simply to survive.
To earn a Jedi letter, the player must make it through the field and not lose the game.
Once finishing the fourth stage, the game starts back at the beginning of the Battle of Hoth on a higher difficulty level.

Vector objects are now much more noticeably detailed, and the asterisk-particle enemy shots resembling snowflakes from Star Wars are replaced with simpler and clearer vector star-shapes instead.

== Reception ==
According to the creators, the game received less attention as it was not as fresh as the previous game.
Additionally, it was sold as an upgrade kit, so arcade operators that had Star Wars running and getting steady incomes from it did not go for the upgrade.

==
Legacy ==
The game is included as an unlockable extra on Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike for the GameCube.

== See also ==
The Empire Strikes Back, a different game for the Atari 2600 and Intellivision based on the movie


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Empire Strikes Back at the Killer List of Videogames
The GameRoom Blog:
Rare Game Room Gems —
Empire Strikes Back
Crayon Shin-chan:
The Storm Called:
The Adult Empire Strikes Back
(クレヨンしんちゃん 嵐を呼ぶ モーレツ！オトナ帝国の逆襲, Kureyon Shinchan:
Arashi o Yobu: Mōretsu!
Otona Teikoku
no Gyakushū?)
is a Japanese anime film released in 2001.
It is the ninth installment of the Crayon Shin-chan series.
The name is a reference to The Empire Strikes Back.
It was released as Crayon Shinchan
The Movie: Counter Attacking the Adult's Empire with English subtitles on VCD and DVD by PMP Entertainment.
The film tells the story of Shin-chan, who must rescue the adults of Kasukabe when they mysteriously abandon their responsibilities to relive their youth at the new 20th-century expo.

The film is considered by critics to be one of the greatest animated films of all time, and even one of the best Japanese films of all time by publications such as Kinema Junpo.

==
Plot ==
Shinnosuke and his family attend a convention that dates back to the 20th century.
Even though adults like Hiroshi and Misae are filled with fascination and excitement, children like Shin and Himawari are disinterested and concerned for their parents’ nostalgia.
As this goes on, Ken and Chaco (the owners of the convention) discuss plans to "rid of the smell of the 21st century.
"
This takes into effect during the night as Hiroshi and Misae suddenly sleeps for the night.

The next morning, Shin finds that Hiroshi and Misae have become very crude and irresponsible.
After angrily leaving the house for kindergarten, Shin (taking Himawari along with him) finds that every adult is acting childlike; this even extends to the kindergarten he goes to.
Suddenly, trucks appear and take every adult to a place where only the 20th century exists.
Shin and his friends meet at his house to discuss the events that occurred in their hometown.
Not only they found out that children are trying to survive without their parents, the media they are watching and listening to is reverting to the 20th century; this is only made worse when the electricity shuts down.
Later, trucks appear and several workers claim that they arrive to pick up the children and reunite them with their parents
; however, Shin and his friends realize this is nothing more than a trap, and that they heard they will come back to capture other stray children.
After deciding to not stay where they are, Shin, Himawari, his friends, and his dog Shiro take refuge in a department store.

As the hunt for more children beings, Shin and his friends realize that they overslept and must leave immediately.
After failing to hide from the henchmen (including several adults that Shin knows), Shin, his friends, and what is left of his family go on the run.
Several hi-jinks later, they decide to steal the principal's bus to escape from the adults.
Accidentally going to the land of the 20th century, Shin and everyone in the bus decides to find and confront their parents.
After crashing the bus inside the building, Shin's friends are captured; however, Shin, Himawari, and Shiro are able to escape.
Finding the door where Hiroshi is reliving his childhood, Shin found out that the smell of the 20th century is affecting the adults; as such Shin uses his father's bad feet odor to neutralize the 20th smell that is affecting Hiroshi.
Realizing that the hardships of growing older gave him the family he loves, Hiroshi is successfully brought back to reality.
After finding Misae, Ken decides to take Shin and his reunited family to the source of the 20th century.
He explains that his machine will launch the smell of the 20th century, thanks to the added scent of the people living in the false 20th century.
Because of the situation at hand, Hiroshi, Shin, Misae, Himawari, and Shiro must stop the evil plan before it is too late.
One by one, Shin's family distracts the henchmen to buy him time.
With the future at stake, Shin desperately dashes to the control room.

Though Shin failed to reach the control room before Ken and Chaco, the actions of him and his family made those living in the 20th century realize that they want to go back to the future.
As a result, the smell of the 20th century is disappearing.
Even though they accept defeat, Ken and Chaco are unable to accept the future; therefore, they attempt suicide at the top of the building.
But as they attempt the act, they are halted by a pigeon protecting its family.
With their suicidal actions stopped, Ken and Chaco realize that they too must find a place to live.
Several children and adults are reunited and sent back to their hometown.
Shin and his family return home where the future awaits.

== Cast ==
Akiko Yajima as Shin-chan
Keiji Fujiwara as Hiroshi
Miki Narahashi as Misae
Satomi Kōrogi as Himawari
Masane Tsukayama as Ken
Ai Kobayashi as Chaco
Yūko Mita as Child Hiroshi
Rokurō Naya as Bunta Takakura
Mari Mashiba as Toru Kazama and Shiro
Tamao Hayashi as Nene-chan
Teiyū Ichiryūsai as Masao
Chie Satō as Bo
Nobutoshi Canna as Hero Sun
Chafurin as Razaya Dan


==
Critical reception ==
In Japan and South Korea, where Crayon Shin-Chan is one of the most well-recognized anime of all time, the film consistently ranks as not only one of the best Crayon Shin-Chan movies, but one of the best animated films ever, even ranking 4th in Kinema Junpo's Top Anime Films of All Time list
(The Highest Ranked Film not directed by Hayao Miyazaki), and 103rd in their Top Japanese Films of All Time list.
It is also one of only three Japanese films to ever rank 1st in Eiga Hihou's annual top 10 lists.
It also ranked 8th in the 23rd
Yokohama Film Festival Top 10 Japanese Films.
It was the 3rd highest ranked non-Ghibli film ranked by the Japanese audience in the 100 Selected Media Arts in Japan (日本のメディア芸術100選)
Anime Section as well.
Writer Kazuki Nakashima of Gurren Lagann and Kill la Kill has praised this and the 10th Crayon Shin-Chan film, and later went on to write the 22nd Shin-Chan film.

In particular, the film's themes of reminiscence, nostalgia, and past vs future have been widely praised, especially the execution of the idea of the adults adhering to the nostalgia of the 20th century contrasting with the children growing up in the dawning 21st century.
The scene of Hiroshi's reminiscence, in particular, is considered to be one of the greatest scenes in animation in the countries the film screened in, and has been compared to Pixar's UP's opening sequence for its emotional impact even on adults.

==
Honors ==
日本のメディア芸術100選 Anime Section
Rank #19
Kinema Junpo's Top Anime Films of All Time #4
Kinema Junpo's Top Japanese Films of All Time #103
The movie was voted as the best Crayon Shin-chan movie on the 20th anniversary of the series, in an award ceremony called "Bakademy Awards" in 2012.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Crayon Shin-chan: Fierceness That Invites Storm!
The Adult Empire Strikes Back at IMDb
Alderaan () was a fictional planet featured in the Star Wars franchise.
It was blue-green in appearance, depicted as a terrestrial planet with humanoid inhabitants, and characterized by a peaceful culture.
It was the home planet of Princess Leia Organa, one of the lead characters in the film series.
In the original 1977 film, Alderaan was destroyed by the Death Star's superlaser.

== Depiction ==
Early drafts of the Star Wars story include references to at least two planets which later evolved into the concept of Alderaan.
Star Wars author George Lucas included a planet called Alderaan in early treatments; in The Star Wars (1973), Alderaan is a city-planet and the capital planet of the galaxy (prefiguring the planet Coruscant which later featured in the films).
The draft script opens with a scene in which an "eerie blue-green" planet called Aquilae is threatened by an armed space fortress.
In Lucas's 1975 draft, Adventures of the Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars, the capital planet of Alderaan is described as a floating city in the clouds, "suspended in a sea of cirrus methane".
A planet described in Lucas's draft script as being "under siege by the Imperial Legions of Alderaan" and which is later destroyed is named as Ogana Major.
Early sketches commissioned by Lucas from conceptual illustrator Ralph McQuarrie show a design which very closely resembles Cloud City, as featured in the later sequel, The Empire Strikes Back.
In Lucas's third draft, the Imperial City of Alderaan has become the home world of the Sith Lords, and Darth Vader holds Princess Leia captive here.
Lucas continued to hone his script, aided by screenwriters Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz; names of planets and characters were revised and the narrative was improved, and by the fourth draft, scenes on the Imperial capital planet had been moved to a space station called the Death Star and the peaceful world destroyed by the Empire had taken the name Alderaan.
The on-screen depictions of Alderaan in the Star Wars films are scant; the distant planet is seen momentarily in Star Wars (1977) prior to its destruction, and in Revenge of the Sith (2005) a short scene shows a city amid a snow-covered, mountainous landscape.

===
Film ===
Alderaan was originally featured in the first film, Star Wars, released in 1977.
The opening scene depicts the capture of a small spaceship from Alderaan, the Tantive IV, by the Galactic Empire, and introduces the character of Princess Leia Organa, a princess of the Royal House of Alderaan who is played by Carrie Fisher.

Alderaan appears in a later scene in the film, but is only shown on-screen in a distant view from space as the Empire's gigantic space station, the Death Star, moves into orbit around the planet.
The battle station's commander, the Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) orders the Death Star's superweapon to be fired at the planet.
Alderaan explodes instantly in a ball of fire.
It is later shown that the shattered planet has been reduced to a cloud of asteroids as the Millennium Falcon spaceship attempts to visit the planet.
The destruction of Alderaan meant that it was not depicted in subsequent Star Wars films until the series of prequel films was produced.
The planet made its first on-screen appearance since 1977 in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), appearing briefly at the end of the film.
The adoptive father of Princess Leia, Bail Organa (Jimmy Smits) is seen piloting a starship to the planet's surface, which is shown as a mountainous, alpine region covered in snow.
Landing his ship in a citadel among the mountains, he brings the newborn Princess Leia into his royal palace.
The backdrop for these scenes was created by compositing landscape footage of Grindelwald in Switzerland with CGI images of the city.
The planet is not featured in the 2016 film Rogue One, but the character Bail Organa makes an appearance, stating that he will return to Alderaan to wait for his daughter, Leia, to bring the Jedi Master Obi-Wan Kenobi.
This precedes the narrative of the 1977 film, A New Hope.
It is assumed he dies when the Death Star destroys the planet.

===
Television ===
In an episode of the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars entitled "Assassin", Ahsoka Tano has premonitions of Padmé's death on Alderaan.

The mercenary Carasynthia "Cara" Dune, in The Mandalorian, is a former Republic Shock Trooper from Alderaan, according to Moff Gideon, which she later confirms.

===
Comics ===
The comic series
Star Wars: Princess Leia (2015) deals with Princess Leia and Evan (a female rebel pilot also native from Alderaan), rescuing survivors from Alderaan's destruction.
It also features a brief flashback to Leia's childhood on the planet and her relationship with her adoptive father Senator Bail Organa.
In Star Wars #33 (2017), Leia tells Luke that sometimes she can see Alderaan among the stars as, from certain perspectives in the galaxy, its light has not ceased to emit.

===
Legends ===
Alderaan is mentioned frequently and also serves as a location in several works in the Star Wars Expanded Universe, the collection of books, comics and other material considered outside official canon, now branded Star Wars Legends.
In various stories, Alderaan is presented as the home of the characters Tycho Celchu, and of Ulic Qel Droma who fought in the Great Sith War in 4000 BBY.

====
Radio drama ====
The 1981 NPR/BBC  radio drama adaptation of Star Wars features scenes set on Alderaan, in which Princess Leia discusses her mission to acquire the Death Star plans from agents of the Rebel Alliance with her father, Bail Organa (Prestor Organa).
In a later scene, she is confronted by the Imperial commander Lord Tion and accused of treason.
It is established that Alderaan has a strict policy against weapons.

====
Novels ====
In Michael A. Stackpole's 1998 novel, I, Jedi, Alderaan features as the sanctuary of the Caamasi when their home world of Caamas is devastated by the Galactic Empire.

Alderaan is featured in a 1991 role-playing game, Graveyard of Alderaan (part of Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game).
It describes how, after the Clone Wars, Alderaan's massive war machine was dismantled, and the weapons were placed aboard an armory warship called Another Chance.
The ship was programmed to continually jump through hyperspace until called home by the Alderanian Council.
Bill Slavicsek, who wrote the game's sourcebook, later drew from it for his edition of A Guide to the Star Wars Universe.

====
Comics ====
In the Dark Horse comic Dark Empire (1991–1992), New Alderaan is a Rebel Alliance colony planet populated by Alderaanians who were off-world when Alderaan was destroyed.
Mon Mothma's daughter lives there.

== Description ==
In Alan Dean Foster's 1976 novelization of the original film, Alderaan is described as a "small green gem of a world".

The planet appears more substantially in Star Wars reference guides to fictional locations.
According to Kevin J. Anderson's The Illustrated Star Wars Universe (1995) and Wallace, Kolins and McKinney's Star Wars: The Essential Guide to Planets and Moons (1998), Alderaan is covered by wild grasslands, plains, forests and mountain ranges.
The planet has no ocean, but has a semi-frozen polar sea, and thousands of lakes and rivers.
It is rich in biodiversity, populated by a wide variety of flora and fauna, such as the nerf and the thranta.
Human life on the planet is evidenced by a number of cities, built to harmonize with the natural environment such as on canyon walls, on stilts along the shoreline or under the polar ice.
The capital city, Aldera, has been built on a small island in the center of a caldera.
The Alderaanian people value arts and education highly, and place high importance on their participation in the Galactic (later Imperial) Senate and the promotion of peace through demilitarization.
The largely democratic society is formed as hereditary constitutional monarchy, ruled by the King or Queen of Alderaan from the Royal House of Antilles and later, due to marriage, the House of Organa.

The planetary government is the High Council of Alderaan, presided over by a First Chairman and Viceroy.

==
Cultural analysis ==
The destruction of Alderaan is considered by some as an artistic depiction of the danger of nuclear weapons during the Cold War and some claim it is used as a pop-culture example of inadequate political and military action leading to negative effects.

== See also ==
List of Star Wars planets and moons
Star Wars:
The Han Solo Trilogy, Volume 3 – Rebel Dawn
Star Wars: X-Wing, Book 4 –
The Bacta War


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars:
Roleplaying Game – Coruscant and the Core Worlds, hardcover 2003, by Craig R. Carey, Chris Doyle, Jason Fry, Paul Sudlow, John Terra, Daniel Wallace, ISBN 0-7869-2879-4
Windham, Ryder (2015).
Ultimate Star Wars.
DK.
ISBN 9781465436016.

==
External links ==
Alderaan in the StarWars.com Databank
Alderaan on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars: Droids – The Adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO is a 1985 animated television series spin off from the original Star Wars trilogy.
It focuses on the exploits of droids R2-D2 and C-3PO between the events of Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope.
The series was produced by Nelvana on behalf of Lucasfilm and broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).The series ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
The opening theme, "Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters, and encounter minor characters from the original trilogy such as Boba Fett and IG-88.
==
Premise ==
Droids follows the adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO as they face off against gangsters, criminals, pirates, bounty hunters, the Galactic Empire and other threats.
During their adventures, the droids find themselves in the service of successive new masters and in difficult situations as a result.

The series was retroactively placed four years after Revenge of the Sith and fifteen years before the events of A New Hope.
In the latter film, C-3PO tells Luke Skywalker that his and R2-D2's "last master was Captain Antilles.
"
The droids are placed in Antilles' care by Bail Organa at the end of Revenge of the Sith, creating an apparent continuity error.
This is explained by the droids being accidentally separated from Antilles during the events of the animated series.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
; Daniels also portrayed the character in the films.

R2-D2


===
Recurring/Guest ===
Don Francks as Jann Tosh, Boba Fett, Kybo Ren-Cha
Winston Rekert as Sise Fromm, Mungo Baobab
Graeme Campbell as Proto One, Admiral Terrinald Screed, and Lord Toda
Peter MacNeill as Jord Dusat
Taborah Johnson as Jessica Meade
John Stocker as Vlix Oncard, Greej, Zatec-Cha, and Sollag
Rob Cowan as Thall Joben
Dan Hennessey as Jord Dusat (episode 4), Uncle Gundy, Jyn Obah, Vinga, Yorpa, Governor Koong, and Captain Cag
Cree Summer as Princess Gerin
Jan Austin as Auren Yomm
Long John Baldry as the Great Heep
Lesleh Donaldson as Kea Moll
Chris Wiggins as Mon Julpa
Stephen Ouimette
as the narrator
Winston Rekert
as Tig FrommOther guest stars include George Buza, Andrew Sabiston, Eric Peterson, Jamie Dick, Donny Burns, Alan Fawcett, Don McManus, and Gordon Masten.

==
Production and broadcast ==
The series was produced by the Canadian company Nelvana for Lucasfilm.
Several episodes were written by Star Wars sound designer Ben Burtt.
Hanho Heung-Up Co. was the Korean company hired to animate the series.
In the UK, BBC Television bought rights to screen the series in its entirety between 1986 and 1991 as part of the Children's BBC programming strand.
The entire series was shown twice within this time (in 1986 and 1988 to coincide with the full release of the Star Wars trilogy as well as Droids on VHS).
The Great Heep only made one showing in 1989 on BBC's Going Live!
,
which was a Saturday morning children's show—it was split into two parts over two weeks.
Different episodes from different cycles were also screened across the five-year licence, with the Trigon cycle being shown in full in early 1991 on another Saturday morning children's show called The 8:15 from Manchester.

The opening theme, "In Trouble Again", was performed by Stewart Copeland of the Police and written by him and Derek Holt.

The series was broadcast on ABC with its sister series Ewoks (as part of The Ewoks and Droids Adventure Hour).
It debuted in 1985 as part of a fitness special hosted by Tony Danza and live-action versions of the droids.
It ran for one season of 13 half-hour episodes; an hour-long special broadcast in 1986 serves as the finale.
Droids and Ewoks were later shown in reruns on Sci-Fi Channel's Cartoon Quest in 1996, although somewhat edited for time.

==
Episodes ==
Over the course of the series, the droids team up with three different sets of masters.
The series falls into three cycles or arcs; the droids usually run into their new masters at the beginning of each, and at the end are forced to leave.

The Great Heep, a 48-minute television special following the series, is set before the final arc.

==
Merchandising ==
In 1985, Kenner produced a toy line based on the series, including action figures, ship models, and other items.
Two action figures, Boba Fett and A-wing Pilot, were repackaged figures from the main Star Wars line.
The toy line was canceled after the first group of 12 figures due to decreasing popularity with Star Wars.
In 1987 and then 1988, Glasslite of Brazil issued remaining Kenner stock and produced a very limited run of remaining Return of the Jedi and Droids toys from a sell off.
Certain vehicles, mini-rigs and action figures were issued by the company in new packaging.
The character Vlix (Tig Fromm's henchman) was an action figure exclusive from unused molds by Kenner.
Like the remainder of the Glasslite line, very few were made, even less were sold and most were recycled due to the failing economy when money was tight across the country.
Vlix was the most valuable Star Wars action figure (at about $6,000 carded or $1,200 loose), until a Fett figure sold for £69,000 ($USD 92,000) at an auction.
A book was issued in the UK of the Episode "A Race to the Finish" as well as another book that had limited print runs.
Plans to release a storybook and cassette of the Trigon cycle for the publishing company Rainbow were abandoned after they lost the rights to re-issue their Star Wars run which included A New Hope
, The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, Planet of the Hoojibs, Droid World and Return of the Jedi:
The Battle of Endor due to poor reflective sales of Buena Vista's "Further Adventure" series overseas which included Mission to Ord Mantell, An Ewok Adventure and Ewoks: The Battle for Endor.

A computer game was released in 1988 for the ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC and Commodore 64 by Mastertronic.
The game went largely unnoticed and was pulled from production due to licensing rights of the end title theme tune being used.

===
Comic book series ===
In 1986, Marvel's Star Comics imprint published a Star Wars:
Droids comic series spun off from the cartoon.
The bi-monthly series ran for eight issues.
Four issues and issue 5's cover of the series were drawn by John Romita, Sr.
The "Lost in Time" crossover story from Droids #4 was continued in an issue of Ewoks.
The last three issues are part of an arc recounting the original Star Wars film from the droids' point of view.
Additionally, Spanish comics publisher Editorial Gepsa produced two-page Droids comics as part of an anthology series.

==
Home media ==
Almost all episodes of the series (except "Coby and the Starhunters") were released on VHS in the 1980s and 1990s, most notably the UK PAL releases over four cassettes (Droids 1–3 and The Great Heep), which had the opening sequences and credits edited out.
In 1996, Rick McCallum produced The Pirates and the Prince, a direct-to-video film compiled from four episodes.
In late 2004, McCallum and 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment produced a DVD titled Star Wars: Animated Adventures – Droids, which featured The Pirates and the Prince and Treasure of the Hidden Planet, a new compilation film including narration from Mungo Baobab (voiced by Alex Lindsay).
Both titles included some soundtrack changes.
On April 2, 2021, it was announced that the entire series would be released on Disney+
later in 2021.

== Reception ==
According to David Perlmutter, compared with Ewoks, Droids "was rudimentary, with short enough story lines for as many as four narratives in a single episode.
Obviously, neither Lucas nor the animation studio had enough faith in the characters to trust them as anything other than second bananas."
SyFy Wire writes that "Droids struggles to find a way to make the duo's live-action antics as entertaining on the small screen as they are on the silver one; the show tries to serve up a very, very kid-friendly take on that galaxy far, far away
and it doesn't always hit the mark."
==
Legacy ==
Ben Burtt wrote liner notes for the Shadows of the Empire soundtrack, which referenced the Roonstones he had written about in Droids; Burtt made a cameo appearance in Episode I – The Phantom Menace, and named his character after the Baobabs.
Several references to the animated series are made in the prequels, such as the Boonta Eve Classic in The Phantom Menace, the planet Bogden and a four-armed cook in Attack of the Clones, and General Grievous' wheel bike design in Revenge of the Sith.
Genndy Tartakovsky gave C-3PO moving, expressive eyes in Clone Wars (2003) to pay homage to his previous animated appearances in Nelvana's Star Wars Holiday Special (1978) and Droids.
While Droids was excluded in the 2014 rebranding of Star Wars canon, recurring villain Admiral Screed—whom
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe describes as "the Emperor's right-hand man during the early days of the Empire"—makes appearances in canon novels such as Tarkin (2014) and Aftermath:
Life Debt (2016).
Additionally, possible sources of inspiration for sequel trilogy main characters Rey and Kylo Ren have been noticed.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Star Wars: Droids 1985, George Lucas, Ben Burtt
Star Wars Insider #27
A Guide to the Star Wars Universe
The Star Wars Encyclopedia by Stephen J. Sansweet, ISBN 0-345-40227-8 Del Rey; first edition (June 30, 1998)


==
External links ==
Star Wars: Droids at IMDb
The Great Heep at IMDb
The Pirates and the Prince at IMDb
Treasure of the Hidden Planet at IMDb
Star Wars:
Droids at the Big Cartoon DataBase
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part 1 - StarWars.com
The Droids
Re-Animated, Part
2 - StarWars.com
starwars.com
DVD
"Closer look"
A history of home video releases of Star Wars:
Droids
Episode review of The White Witch
A fan "Droids encyclopedia" blog at StarWars.com
Star Wars Battlefront II is a 2017 action shooter video game based on the Star Wars franchise.
It is the fourth main installment of the Star Wars: Battlefront series, and a sequel to the 2015 reboot of the series.
It was developed by EA DICE, in collaboration with Criterion Games and Motive Studios, and published by Electronic Arts.
The game was released worldwide on November 17, 2017, for the PlayStation 4, Xbox One, and Microsoft Windows.
It features both single-player and multiplayer game modes, including a story-driven campaign, set in between the films Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens, which depicts the climax of the Galactic Civil War and the Galactic Empire's downfall from the perspective of Imperial commander-turned-New Republic soldier Iden Versio.

Upon release, Battlefront II received mixed reviews from critics, with praise for the multiplayer, gameplay, balancing, visuals, and variety, but criticism for its single-player modes, campaign, microtransactions and progression system.
The game was also subject to widespread criticism regarding the status of its loot boxes, which could give players substantial gameplay advantages if purchased with real money.
A response from EA's community team on Reddit on the topic became the single most down-voted comment in the site's history, amassing over 600 thousand down-votes.
In response, EA decided to remove microtransactions from the game.

Since its release, the game received numerous content additions through free title updates in an attempt to repair its reputation after launch, which brought in a large number of new players.
These updates ended on April 29, 2020, after Electronic Arts concluded that the game had reached its desired number of players and had substantially improved since the initial release.
A Celebration Edition of the game, which includes all cosmetic options, was released on December 5, 2019.

==
Gameplay ==
Star Wars Battlefront II is a third and first-person shooter, featuring both single-player and multiplayer game modes.
Gameplay is split in two main categories: ground battles and space battles.
Both occur across three eras:
the Clone Wars, with battles taking place between the Galactic Republic and the Confederacy of Independent Systems; the Galactic Civil War, where battles between the Rebel Alliance and Galactic Empire take place; and the war between the Resistance and the First Order.
Each faction has its own unique type of soldiers that players control, such as clone troopers for the Republic, battle droids for the CIS, and stormtroopers for the Empire and the First Order; however, they all control identically.
Every faction also has specific starfighters, which, unlike soldiers, play differently from one another.
Battles take place across a variety of maps, and every era has its own exclusive maps.
At launch, the game featured a total of 15 locations from the Star Wars universe, including Kamino, Kashyyyk, Naboo, Mos Eisley, Yavin IV, Hoth, Cloud City, Endor, the Death Star II, Jakku, Takodana, and Starkiller Base, as well as some space battles exclusive locations, namely Ryloth, Fondor, and the Unknown Regions.
Since then, eight more maps have been added: Crait, Jabba's Palace, Kessel, Geonosis, Felucia, Ajan Kloss, Scarif, and another space only location, D'Qar.
Some of the ground locations are exclusive to certain game modes as well.

===
Classes ===
Gameplay in Battlefront II is class-based.
Every faction has four soldier classes—Assault, Heavy, Officer, and Specialist—and three starfighter classes—Fighter, Interceptor, and Bomber; although the Resistance and First Order factions do not include the Bomber class.
The ground battles feature additional Reinforcement classes, which cost battle points to be played as, earned from defeating enemies and completing objectives.
All factions have three soldier Reinforcements—the Enforcer, Aerial, and Infiltrator—and two vehicle Reinforcements—the Speeder and Armor; the Republic, CIS, Rebels, and Empire
have a third vehicle Reinforcement class—the Artillery—which is featured only in specific maps for the Galactic Assault mode (e.g. the MTT for the Separatists, available only on Naboo and Kashyyyk).

Sans the Artillery, all classes can be leveled up.
After reaching a new level, the player is awarded with a Star Point, which can be used to unlock or upgrade Star Cards that increase certain stats or unlock new abilities for each class; up to three Star Cards can be equipped at the same time.
Players can also customize their soldier classes by purchasing new appearances, or unlocking new weapons and attachments for said weapons via milestones.
The weapon customization is more than purely cosmetic, and blasters have a different damage output, range, fire rate etc.
The Reinforcement classes can also be leveled up and customized, but their weapons and abilities cannot be changed.

===
Heroes ===
Aside from the basic and Reinforcement classes, players can take on the role of heroes or villains based on iconic Star Wars characters.
Unlike in 2015's Battlefront, heroes are an actual class rather than a bonus, and can be leveled up and receive new appearances.
In the multiplayer modes, heroes are only available in Galactic Assault and Supremacy, where, much like the Reinforcement classes, they cost battle points to be played as; in the former, players can select any hero from the roster offered by the game, while in the latter, only era-specific heroes are available.
Every faction can have a maximum of two heroes on the battlefield at the same time.
There are also game modes where heroes are the only playable characters, such as Heroes vs. Villains and Hero Showdown, wherein they do not cost any battle points to be used.

At launch, the hero roster consisted of Luke Skywalker (Matthew Mercer), Leia Organa (Misty Lee), Han Solo (John Armstrong), Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams), Yoda (Tom Kane), and Rey (Daisy Ridley), while the villain roster included Darth Vader (Matt Sloan), Emperor Palpatine (Sam Witwer), Boba Fett (Temuera Morrison), Bossk (Dee Bradley Baker), Iden Versio (Janina Gavankar), Darth Maul (Sam Witwer), and Kylo Ren (Matthew Wood/Roger Craig Smith).
Since then, Finn (John Boyega), Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie), Obi-Wan Kenobi (James Arnold Taylor), Anakin Skywalker (Matt Lanter), General Grievous (Matthew Wood), Count Dooku (Corey Burton), BB-8, and BB-9E have also been added.
The game also features hero and villain starfighters, namely Boba Fett's Slave I, Darth Maul's Scimitar, Darth Vader's TIE Advanced x1, Han Solo and Chewbacca's Millennium Falcon, Kylo Ren's TIE Silencer, Luke Skywalker's T-65B X-Wing, Poe Dameron's T-70 X-Wing, Rey and Chewbacca's Millennium Falcon, Yoda's Actis-class Light Interceptor, Iden Versio's TIE/in Fighter, Tallie Lintra's RZ-2 A-Wing, and Lando Calrissian and L3-37's Millennium Falcon.

===
Multiplayer modes ===
There are a total of twelve online multiplayer game modes, some of which were only for a limited time.
The largest mode, Supremacy, supports up to 40 simultaneous players with 24 additional AI-controlled players.

Galactic Assault
: This mode pits a team of 20 attackers who attempt to complete an objective, against a team of 20 defenders who must stop them.
A match is split into multiple phases and, if the attackers manage to complete the objective of one phase, the match moves onto the next one.
If all objectives are completed, the attackers win; if the defenders manage to hold them off until the timer expires, they will win.
At the time of the game's launch, this was the largest game mode.

Supremacy: This mode pits two teams of 20 players, with an additional 12 AI bots per team, against each other as they fight to capture and hold a majority of Command Posts across the map.
In the Clone Wars and Resistance/First Order era versions of the mode, once one side has maintained control of the most Command Posts for long enough, the match moves onto the second phase, which has the winning side from phase one attempting to destroy the reactor of the losing side's ship, who are in turn trying to stop them.
If the defenders manage to hold off the attackers until the timer expires, the match returns to phase one, but the damage that the attackers dealt to the reactor remains; otherwise, the attackers win the entire match.
In the Galactic Civil War era version of the game mode, the second phase is omitted, and whoever wins the first phase wins the entire match.
The mode was added in March 2019, initially only for the Clone Wars era, but eventually was made available for both the Resistance/First Order era, in January 2020, and the Galactic Civil War era, in April 2020.

Starfighter Assault:
This mode pits a team of 12 attackers against 12 defenders, both teams being reinforced with an additional 20 AI ships.
The mode is very similar to Galactic Assault, but battles take place in space and players control starfighters instead of soldiers.

Heroes vs. Villains:
This mode pits a team of four heroes against four villains, and whichever side can get 35 combined eliminations first will win the match.
The mode initially used a targeting system, where one member of each team would be randomly selected, and whichever side eliminated the rival target
first earned a point; the first team to get 10 points would win the match.
This system was removed in favour of a new mode in May 2019.

Hero Showdown:
This mode pits a team of two heroes against two villains, with defeated players not being able to respawn until the next round.
Whichever team eliminates the other one wins the round, and the team that wins three rounds first wins the overall match.
This mode was added in May 2018.

Hero Starfighters:
This mode pits four hero starfighters against four villain starfighters.
Defeated players respawn as normal starfighters and can play again as a hero ship in the following round after either one team loses all their hero ships or there is a draw.
The first team to win three rounds wins.
The mode was added in July 2018.

Co-Op Missions: This game mode is a Player vs. Entity mode, pitting a team of four players and AI bots against another team of AI bots.
One team will be the attackers and have to capture one out of three (sometimes two or only one)
Command Posts, while the others are the defenders and try to hold them off until the timer expires.
Like Galactic Assault, this mode is split into three phases and, if the attackers get through all of them, they will win, otherwise the defenders win.
This mode with an improvement of the game's AI, as enemy bots can be both heroes and reinforcements.
The mode was added in September 2019, initially only for the Clone Wars era, but eventually was made available for both the Resistance/First Order era, in December 2019, and the Galactic Civil War era, in February 2020.
It was initially called simply Co-Op until the name was changed in April 2020.

Strike: This mode pits a team of eight attackers against eight defenders in close quarter battle scenarios.
There are two possible scenarios for this mode: in the first one, the attackers must escort cargo through several checkpoints to their final destination; in the second one, the attackers attempt to arm and destroy two different objectives.
The defenders win by holding them off until the timer expires.

Blast
: This mode is a standard team deathmatch between two teams of eight players each.
The first team to reach 100 total combined eliminations first wins.

Extraction
: This mode has a team of eight attackers escorting cargo through several checkpoints to their final destination while a team of eight defenders tries to stop them.
The mode was added in June 2018; it was later removed and merged with Strike in September 2019.

Ewok Hunt:
Inspired by the original Battlefront II's Hunt mode, this game mode pits two Ewoks against a team of 18 stormtroopers.
Each defeated stormtrooper respawns as an Ewok.
The Ewoks win by eliminating all stormtroopers,
while the stormtroopers win by surviving long enough to board a ship that arrives to pick them up after several minutes; it's enough for one stormtrooper to board the ship in order for the entire team to win.
This mode was added in April 2018, and was originally on rotation with Jetpack Cargo as a limited-time event, but an improved, permanent version was brought back with the October 2019 update.

Jetpack Cargo:
This mode pitted two teams of eight players, all equipped with jetpacks, against each other to capture cargo.
It was added in February 2018 as a limited time event, and was on rotation with Ewok Hunt.
===
Single-player modes ===
Battlefront II  features three single-player game modes that are separate of those from the multiplayer component of the game.

Instant Action:
Inspired by the original Battlefront II's Instant Action mode, this is a large scale mode where the player can choose the map and faction they want to play as.
To win, the player's team must control the battlefront by securing the most command posts, thereby accruing points.
Unlike the similar multiplayer mode ‘Supremacy’, the match ends when a team accrues the maximum number of points.
The mode was added in October 2019.
In April 2020, the mode was changed to also include Instant Action Missions, which are similar to the Co-Op Missions, pitting the player against a team of AI soldiers in either offensive or defensive scenarios.

Custom Arcade:
A smaller scale mode where the player can select between four different scenarios: Team Battles, Starfighter Battles, Onslaught, or Starfighter Onslaught.
The first two have the player and a team of AI bots pitted against another team of AI bots in a battle to get a certain number of eliminations before the other team.
The last two have the player, controlling a hero character or starfighter, taking on a team of AI bots all by themselves, and attempting to get a certain number of eliminations within a time limit that they chose.

Battle Scenarios:
A set of classic encounters across all eras of Star Wars, which also grants the player rewards for the multiplayer experience.

==
Synopsis ==


===
Setting and characters ===
Star Wars Battlefront II's single-player campaign has players explore various locations across the Star Wars galaxy, including familiar planets featured in the films, such as Endor, Naboo, Takodana, Bespin, and Jakku, as well as Fondor, Pillio, and Vardos, all three of which are new to the franchise.
The events of the campaign begin around the time of Return of the Jedi's climax, and depict the final year of the Galactic Civil War, which ended with the Battle of Jakku that marked the Galactic Empire's defeat.
The final level takes place 29 years after the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War, around the time of The Force Awakens.
The Resurrection DLC expands upon the game's ending, featuring three additional levels that take place during The Force Awakens.

The campaign's protagonist and main playable character is Iden Versio (voiced by Janina Gavankar), the commander of Inferno Squad, a group of elite Imperial soldiers.
Inferno Squad also includes Del Meeko (T. J. Ramini) and Gideon Hask (Paul Blackthorne), and is supervised by Iden's strict father, Admiral Garrick Versio (Anthony Skordi).
In certain levels of the game, players take control of iconic Star Wars characters from the films instead of Iden, such as Luke Skywalker (Matthew Mercer), Leia Organa (Misty Lee), Han Solo (John Armstrong), Lando Calrissian
(Billy Dee Williams), and Kylo Ren (Matthew Wood).
Supporting characters include Rebel soldier and Inferno Squad member Shriv Suurgav (Dan Donohue), Imperial Protectorate Gleb, former smuggler and pirate-turned-tavern keeper Maz Kanata (Grey Griffin),
Imperial defector Ralsius Paldora (Oliver Vaquer), and Iden and Del's daughter Zay (Brittany Volcy).
===
Plot ===
Iden Versio is captured by the Rebel Alliance and interrogated for the codes to unlock an Imperial transmission aboard a Mon Calamari Star Cruiser.
She activates her droid, Dio, which sneaks to her cell and frees her; Iden had allowed herself to be captured in order to erase the Imperial transmission, which would reveal the Emperor's plan to ambush the Rebels at Endor.
She successfully erases it, then escapes the ship by launching herself into space, whereupon she is intercepted by the Corvus, Inferno Squad's flagship.
Aboard the Corvus, Iden confirms the mission's success to fellow squad members Del Meeko and Gideon Hask.

Later on Endor, Inferno Squad secure the perimeter around the shield generator protecting the Death Star II, which was destroyed by a Rebel squad, and watch with shock and horror as the Death Star II explodes moments later.
Vice Admiral Sloane orders a full retreat, and Inferno Squad escapes the moon aboard TIE fighters before it is overrun by Rebel forces.
After destroying a squadron of Rebel starfighters around the Death Star II's ruins, Inferno Squad arrives on Admiral Garrick Versio's Star Destroyer, the Eviscerator, where he informs Iden of the Emperor's death.
A messenger droid then displays a hologram of the late Emperor issuing his last command: to initiate Operation: Cinder.
Admiral Versio sends Iden and Hask to an Imperial shipyard over Fondor to protect Moff Raythe's Star Destroyer, the Dauntless, which hosts experimental satellites vital to the success of Operation: Cinder.
The Dauntless comes under attack from a Rebel Star Cruiser, but Iden and Hask manage to board it and destroy its ion cannons, before freeing the Star Destroyer, allowing it to open fire on the Cruiser and destroy it.

Meanwhile, Del arrives on Pillio to destroy one of the Emperor's hidden bases.
He encounters Luke Skywalker, who helps him fend off the local wildlife and gain access to the base, discovering it contains the Emperor's spoils of conquest, one of which Luke claims for himself.
The pair part amicably, as Del begins to question the Empire's goals and motives.
Later, Inferno Squad are sent to Iden's homeworld, the Imperial-controlled planet Vardos, to retrieve Protectorate Gleb, just as Operation:
Cinder is about to begin.
After witnessing the satellites for Operation: Cinder slowly destroying Vardos with storms, Iden and Del, disillusioned by the Empire's actions, abort their mission to try to evacuate civilians, causing Hask to betray them.
The pair return to the Corvus and make their escape, now traitors to the Empire.
Seeking out the Rebel Alliance, they meet General Lando Calrissian, who gives them the choice of helping stop Operation: Cinder, or escaping to start new lives.
Choosing to help, they aid Leia Organa in protecting Naboo, destroying the satellites for Operation:
Cinder and reactivating the planet's defenses.
After Naboo is liberated, Inferno Squad joins the New Republic.

Months later, Inferno Squad – Iden, Del, and Shriv Suurgav – is sent to Takodana to find General Han Solo, who has gone missing during his mission to extract critical data from an Imperial defector that can help liberate Kashyyyk.
After Solo and the defector make their way past a squad of stormtroopers and back to the Millennium Falcon, Inferno Squad arrives to help them flee the planet.
The recovered data reveals that Admiral Versio is commanding Imperial operations on both Bespin and Sullust.
On Bespin, Iden and Del attempt to capture the Admiral, but are led into a trap by Hask.
The pair escape, destroying a Star Destroyer fueling station in the process.
On Sullust, Lando and Shriv investigate a hidden Imperial weapons cachet and find a weapons factory instead, which they destroy.

With both operations crippled, the Imperial fleet makes a last stand at Jakku.
During the battle, Iden shoots down Hask and boards the Eviscerator, intending to rescue her father.
Admiral Versio decides to go down with his ship, feeling obligated to die with the Empire he fought to protect, and urges Iden to escape and live a new life, commending her for seeing the Empire's weaknesses.
Iden takes an escape pod and reunites with Del and Shriv.
Iden and Del embrace and kiss, as the battle marks the end of the Galactic Empire.

Three decades later, Del is captured on Pillio by Protectorate Gleb, who hands him over to Kylo Ren and the First Order.
Ren uses the Force to interrogate Del about the location of the map leading to Luke Skywalker, before leaving him to Hask, who expresses disgust at Del choosing to father a daughter with Iden instead of becoming a soldier, and kills him.
Hask then tells Gleb that the New Republic cannot find out about "Project Resurrection" and orders her to leave the Corvus on Pillio as bait to lure Iden out of hiding.

====
Resurrection DLC ====
Shriv Suurgav, now an agent for the Resistance, discovers the abandoned Corvus and informs Iden and her daughter Zay, revealing that Del had been helping the Resistance investigate rumors of mass disappearances that may be connected to Project Resurrection.
They head to Athulla, where Del was last seen, and ambushed by a Jinata Security fleet, which they destroy.
The survivors admit that they had been kidnapping children on the behalf of the First Order, and that Project Resurrection had been moved to Vardos.

On Vardos, Iden and Shriv investigate, leaving Zay on the Corvus, and are captured by Hask, who reveals that he killed Gleb and Del and that the First Order has used Starkiller Base to destroy the Hosnian system, effectively wiping out the New Republic.
He then orders his Star Destroyer, the Retribution, to destroy the Corvus, though Zay survives by taking an escape pod.
Iden and Shriv escape after the Jinata Security, angry at the First Order for betraying them, attack Hask's men, and make their way to Zay.
Deciding to help the Resistance, the trio use stolen TIE fighters to board the Retribution, whereupon they search the ship for information on Project Resurrection, eventually discovering that it involves the First Order kidnapping children and indoctrinating them to become stormtroopers.
They also learn that First Order has built up a massive fleet large enough to retake the galaxy, and steal the plans of a First Order Dreadnought.

While Shriv goes to look for a ship to escape with, Iden and Zay destroy the Retribution's hyperspace generators, causing it to pull out of hyperspace near Starkiller Base, just as the Resistance destroys it.
Hask ambushes them and shoots Iden before she throws him to his death.
Iden then succumbs to her injury, not before ordering Zay to escape with the Dreadnought plans and without her.
Zay reunites with Shriv and the pair escape the Retribution, before linking up with the Resistance.
They transmit the plans to Leia Organa, who orders them to head to the Outer Rim to gather more allies.

== Post-launch content ==
It was confirmed during EA Play 2017 that Star Wars: Battlefront II will not feature a Season Pass.
Instead, all downloadable content was released via free title updates, split into multiple "seasons".

===
The Last Jedi Season ===
The first season, based on the 2017 film Star Wars: The Last Jedi, was released on December 5, 2017, ten days before the release of the film.
It added content based on the film, including a space map over D'Qar, a new Galactic Assault map on the planet
Crait, Finn and Captain Phasma as heroes for the Resistance and First Order, respectively, and Tallie Lintra's RZ-2 A-Wing as a new hero ship.
The Last Jedi season also included a continuation of the single-player campaign, titled Battlefront II:
Resurrection, which was made available on December 13.
===
Solo:
A Star Wars Story Season ===
On May 3, 2018, EA Star Wars announced on Twitter stating that the second season of content would be based on the film Solo: A Star Wars Story.
The first part of the season was released on May 16 and added a new game mode called Hero Showdown, starfighters to the Arcade, and a returning map from 2015's Star Wars Battlefront, Jabba's Palace, along with skins for Leia Organa and Lando Calrissian based on their disguises in Return of the Jedi.
The second part was released on June 12 and added a new map set in the mines of the planet Kessel and a new variation of the Millennium Falcon (based on its appearance in Solo) as a hero ship, along with reintroducing the game mode Extraction, initially available only on the two new maps added with this season.
New skins were also released for Han Solo, Lando Calrissian, and Chewbacca, based on their appearances in Solo.

===
Clone Wars Season ===
In February 2018, the game's design director, Dennis Brännvall, teased that content based on the Clone Wars era, primarily the animated series Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, will be released at some point in the future.
At EA Play 2018 it was revealed that said content will be released in the fall of the same year, and will include a new Galactic Assault map set on Geonosis, new clone trooper skins, and Anakin Skywalker, Obi-Wan Kenobi, General Grievous and Count Dooku as new playable heroes, with the actors who voiced them in The Clone Wars recording new voice lines for them.
On October 30, Grievous was added as a new villain for the Separatists, along with an alternative skin.
On November 28, the Geonosis map and Obi-Wan Kenobi were added to the game, along with new reinforcement classes, 212th Attack Battalion clone skins, and new skins for Grievous and Obi-Wan.
An update released on January 23, 2019, added Count Dooku to the game and made the Geonosis map available for other game modes.
On February 27, Anakin Skywalker was added, along with new skins for him, Dooku, and clone troopers, voice lines for all heroes, and a rework of emotes.
On March 26, the widely anticipated Capital Supremacy mode was released, along with the Infiltrator class and a major gameplay overhaul.
On April 24, a new Kashyyyk map for Capital Supremacy was added, alongside some challenges and a new skin for Leia Organa, in celebration for Star Wars Day.
On May 22, a new Kamino map for Capital Supremacy was added.
On June 21, a new Naboo map for Capital Supremacy was added, alongside new skins for Anakin Skywalker and clone troopers, the Droideka as a new variation of the Enforcer class for the Separatists, and the TX-130 assault tank as a new variation of the Armor class for the Republic.
An update released on August 28, 2019, added new skins for battle droids, the maps from Capital Supremacy to the Heroes vs. Villains mode, and new Star Cards to replace the Health on Kill ones, with Health on Kill now becoming a passive ability for all heroes.
On September 25, a new Felucia map for Capital Supremacy was added, along with Clone Commandos as a new variation of the Enforcer class for the Republic, a new skin for Luke Skywalker, and two game modes: an offline mode called Instant Action, and a PvE game mode called Co-Op, both of which included all Capital Supremacy maps released thus far.
Furthermore, the Daily Crates and the Extraction mode were removed (the latter being merged with Strike).
On October 23, the Ewok Hunt and Co-Op modes received major overhauls, and a Felucia map for Heroes vs. Villains was added, alongside new skins for the Jet Trooper, Luke Skywalker, and Han Solo.
===
The Rise of Skywalker Season & Celebration Edition ===
On December 5, 2019, a Celebration Edition of the game was released, including all cosmetic options released thus far; it can be bought both separately and as an upgrade to the original version.
Along with the Celebration Edition came an update, originally meant for late November, which added new skins for the Infiltrator and Enforcer classes and a gameplay overhaul.
On December 17, an update was released that added content based on the film Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker, including a new Ajan Kloss map,
Co-Op to the sequel trilogy era, new skins for Rey, Finn and Kylo Ren, and new Reinforcement classes for the sequel trilogy era (the Ovissian Gunner as the Enforcer and the Caphex Spy as the Infiltrator for the Resistance, and the Sith Trooper as the Infiltrator and the Jet Trooper as the Aerial for the First Order).
On February 3, 2020, an update originally meant for late January added BB-8 and BB-9 as new heroes for the Resistance and First Order, respectively, Capital Supremacy and Instant Action to the sequel trilogy era, and several gameplay changes.

===
Original Trilogy updates ===
On February 26, 2020, a major update added content based on the original Star Wars trilogy, including the Co-Op mode, four new weapons (three of them returning from 2015's Star Wars: Battlefront), and the Infiltrator class, along with new skins for this era's pre-existing Reinforcement classes.
It also added a new Geonosis map to Heroes vs. Villains, and the maps from the prequel era Capital Supremacy to Co-Op, along with several changes to the gameplay.
The next update, initially meant for late March, was delayed twice: once for "mid-April", and the second time for late April.
The update was released on April 29, and added content based on the film Rogue One, including a Scarif map and new skins for both Rebel soldiers and Imperial stormtroopers.
It also added a new offline game mode called Instant Action Missions (which was merged with the original Instant Action), Capital Supremacy to the original trilogy era, and new skins for Rey, Kylo Ren, Emperor Palpatine, and Darth Maul, and made Palpatine and Chewbacca available as heroes for the sequel trilogy era, and Yoda and Darth Maul for the original trilogy era.

==
Development and marketing ==
On May 10, 2016, the development of Star Wars Battlefront II was announced, led by EA DICE, with Motive Studios being responsible for the single player campaign and Criterion Games responsible for the starfighters gameplay and mechanics.
The sequel to 2015's rebooted Star Wars Battlefront features content from the sequel trilogy of films.
Creative director Bernd Diemer has stated that the company has replaced the Season Pass system of paid expansion of content, because that system was determined to have "fragmented" the player community of the 2015 predecessor game.
The new expansion system is designed to allow all players "to play longer".
Executive producer Matthew Webster announced on April 15, 2017, at Star Wars Celebration that the worldwide release of the game would be November 17, 2017.
The Battlefront II beta test period started on October 4, 2017, for players who pre-ordered the game.
It was expanded to an open beta on October 6, and ran until October 11.
A 10-hour trial version was made available to EA Access and Origin Access subscribers on November 9, 2017.A tie-in novel, Star Wars Battlefront II:
Inferno Squad, was released on July 25, 2017.
Written by Christie Golden, it serves as a direct prelude to the game and follows the exploits of the Galactic Empire's titular squad as it seeks to eliminate what was left of Saw Gerrera's rebel cell after the events of the 2016 film Rogue One.
On November 10, 2017, Electronic Arts announced the first in a series of free downloadable content for the game, featuring the planets D'Qar and Crait and the playable hero characters Finn and Captain Phasma.
This content is a direct tie-in to December's Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.

== Reception ==
Star Wars Battlefront II received "mixed or average" reviews, according to review aggregator Metacritic.
Metacritic user reviews for the PlayStation 4 version reached a low rating of 0.8/10, labeled as "overwhelming dislike", due to the controversies (see below) and review bombing.
In his 4/5 star review for GamesRadar+, Andy Hartup praised the multiplayer but criticized the single player modes, saying the game has a "very strong multiplayer offering tarnished by overly complicated character progression, and a lavish, beautiful story campaign lacking in substance or subtlety.
"
Game Revolution felt the campaign started strong but weakened as it progressed, praising the multiplayer gameplay while criticizing the microtransactions, loot box progression system, and locking of heroes.
For EGM's review, Nick Plessas praised the multiplayer combat, balancing, and variety, but criticized the game's sustained focus around loot crates.
Andrew Reiner of Game Informer gave the game 6.5/10, writing "Answering the call for more content, Star Wars Battlefront II offers a full campaign and more than enough multiplayer material, but the entire experience is brought down by microtransactions.
"
IGN's Tom Marks also gave the game 6.5/10, saying "Star Wars Battlefront 2 has great feeling blasters, but its progression system makes firing them an unsatisfying grind.
"The
game was nominated for "Best Shooter", "Best Graphics" and "Best Multiplayer" in IGN's Best of 2017 Awards, and was a runner-up for "Most Disappointing Game" in Giant Bomb's 2017 Game of the Year Awards.
In Game Informer's Reader's Choice Best of 2017 Awards, fewer readers voted for the game for "Best Co-Op Multiplayer".
The website also awarded the game for "Best Graphics", "Best Audio" and "Biggest Disappointment" in their 2017 Shooter of the Year Awards.
Ben "Yahtzee" Croshaw of Zero Punctuation ranked the game at No.
1 on his list of the Five Blandest Games of 2017.
===
Sales ===
In the U.S., Star Wars Battlefront II was the second best-selling title in November, behind Call of Duty: WWII.
Within its first week on sale in Japan, the PlayStation 4 version sold 38,769 copies, placing it at number four on the all format sales chart.
By December 2017, the game had sold 9 million copies worldwide.
In January 2018, EA announced that the game missed their sales target as they had hoped to sell 10 million copies in that time, and blamed the loot crate controversy.

===
Accolades ===


==
Microtransactions controversy ==
During pre-release beta trials, the game's publisher EA was criticized by gamers and the gaming press for introducing a loot box monetization scheme that gave players substantial gameplay advantages through items purchased in-game with real money.
Although such items could also be purchased with in-game currency, players would on average have to "grind" for approximately 40 hours to unlock a special hero character such as Darth Vader.
Responding to the controversy, developers had adjusted the number of in-game items a player receives through playing the game.
However, after the game went into pre-release a number of players and journalists who received the pre-release copy of the game reported various controversial gameplay features, such as rewards being unrelated to the player's performance in the game.
The poorly-weighed reward system combined with a weak inactivity detection allowed many players to use rubber bands to tightly tie their game controllers for automatically farming points during multiplayer battles, ruining the experience of other active online players.
On November 12, 2017, a Reddit user complained that although they spent US$80 to purchase the Deluxe Edition of the game, Darth Vader remained inaccessible for play, and the use of this character required a large amount of in-game credits.
Players estimated that it would take 40 hours of gameplay to accumulate enough credits to unlock a single hero.
In response to the community's backlash, EA's Community Team defended the controversial changes by saying their intent to make users earn credits to unlock heroes was to give users "a sense of pride and accomplishment" after unlocking a hero.
This led to many Reddit users becoming frustrated at the response, which generated 667,821 down-votes, making it the most down-voted comment in the site's history.
In 2019, the comment was inducted into the Guinness World Records.
In response to the community's outrage, EA lowered the cost of credits to unlock heroes by 75%.
However, the credits rewarded for completing the campaign were also reduced.
On the day before release, EA disabled microtransactions entirely, citing players' concerns that they gave buyers unfair advantages.
They stated their intent to reintroduce them at a later date after unspecified changes had been made.
The uproar from social media and poor press reception on its microtransactions had a negative impact on EA's share price which dropped by 2.5% on the launch day of the game.
Analysts in Wall Street also lowered their expectation of the game's financial prospect.
A Wall Street analyst writing for CNBC noted how video games are still the cheapest entertainment medium per hour of use, and even with the added microtransactions, playing Battlefront II was still notably cheaper than paying to see the theatrical release of a film.
By the end of November 2017, EA had lost $3 billion in stock value since the launch of the game.
On March 16, 2018, developer DICE announced an overhaul for the progression and economic system.
Loot crates will only contain credits, one of the in-game currencies, and cosmetic items while crystals, the other in-game currency, can be bought solely for the purpose of purchasing cosmetic items for characters in the game.
Progression for player abilities, or "Star Cards", is now linear as players must play a certain class or hero in order to unlock a "Skill Point" for that trooper or hero, which can then be used to purchase a new card or upgrade one the player already owns.
The first part of this update was released on March 21, which included permanently unlocking all heroes and vehicles for players regardless of progression, while the second part was released in April.

===
Government responses ===
On November 15, two days before release, the Belgian gambling regulator announced that it was investigating the game, alongside Overwatch, to determine whether loot boxes constituted unlicensed gambling.
In response to the investigation, EA claimed that Battlefront II's loot boxes do not constitute gambling.
The Belgian Gaming Commission ultimately declared loot boxes to be illegal under gambling laws, but found that Battlefront II was not in violation as EA had temporarily removed micro-transactions from the game.
After the investigation reported its conclusion, the Minister of Justice of Belgium Koen Geens expressed that if they prove loot boxes violate gambling laws he would start working on banning loot boxes in any future video games sold in the entire European Union.
Reacting to the conclusion of the Belgian gambling regulator's investigation, the head of Dutch Gambling commission announced a start of their own investigation of Battlefront II and the issue in general, and asked parents "to keep an eye at the games their children play".
Chris Lee, a member of the Hawaii House of Representatives, called Star Wars: Battlefront II "an online casino designed to trap little kids" and announced his intention to ban such practices in the state of Hawaii.
Another representative compared playing Battlefront II to smoking cigarettes, saying: "We didn't allow Joe Camel to encourage your kids to smoke cigarettes, and we shouldn't allow Star Wars to encourage your kids to gamble."
Singapore's National Council on Problem Gambling are monitoring the situation following the uproar on the game, as loot boxes do not fall under the Remote Gambling Act.
Authorities in Australia are also investigating the situation.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Battlefront II on starwars.com
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade is an arcade game released in 1998.
The game is a 3D rail shooter based on the original trilogy of Star Wars films and was released along with the special editions of these films.
Accompanied by the Star Wars Trilogy pinball game, it is the second in Sega's Star Wars Arcade series; it is preceded by 1993's Star Wars Arcade and followed by 2000's Star Wars Racer Arcade.

==
Gameplay ==
The gameplay has two main themes: three missions that reenact key scenes from the original Star Wars film trilogy, plus a final unlockable mission; and two boss battles against Darth Vader and Boba Fett.

Normal gameplay involves the player moving a crosshair around the screen using a joystick and pressing the fire button atop the joystick to shoot.
A "special event" button lights at certain points of the game and when pressed, triggers an event to happen onscreen.
The game puts the player in several key battles of the Star Wars films with one mission for each original Star Wars film.
The player selects which film's mission to play first and each mission has three parts.
The A New Hope mission reenacts the final space battle at Yavin, with Luke Skywalker piloting an X-wing fighter against TIE fighters.
The second part of the mission involves flying along the Death Star's surface, shooting TIE fighters and XX-9 heavy turbolaser turret guns, and confronting Darth Vader's TIE fighter.

The third part of the mission pits the player within the battle station's trench, using proton torpedoes aimed at the exhaust port to destroy the Death Star.
In The Empire Strikes Back mission, the player reenacts the film's opening battle on Hoth.
The first part of the mission involves shooting AT-ST walkers and probe droids, and helping other snowspeeders to take down the giant AT-AT walkers.
The second part of the mission reenacts the escape from Hoth, running through corridors of the rebel base, shooting Snow Troopers and wampas while traveling to the Millennium Falcon.

The third part of the mission takes place in the hangar, again shooting snowtroopers and one last wampa before escaping.
The Return of the Jedi mission begins with a reenactment of the speeder bike sequence on Endor from the film, where the player must shoot scout troopers on their own speeder bikes.
The second part of the stage has the player moving towards the Empire's base on Endor, shooting any enemies on the way.
In the third part of the mission, the player must rapidly fire a blaster at an AT-ST walker.
The game's final mission, which is unlocked after clearing the other three missions, directs the player as Wedge Antilles, to destroy the second Death Star.
The game features two boss stages that are accessed immediately after beating the conventional missions, although the player is not required to win either to finish the game.
In both stages, the player controls Luke Skywalker wielding a lightsaber.
In the first boss battle, which is played after clearing two missions, the player has to reflect Boba Fett's blaster shots back at him, in order to knock Fett into the Sarlacc pit behind him.
The second, which is played after clearing all three missions, involves the player dueling Darth Vader on the second Death Star.

== Reception ==
Reviews are generally positive.

Christopher Michael Baker of
AllGame rates the game at 4.5 out of 5, finding it virtually flawless, with excellent graphics, sound, and play control.

The joystick controller is said to provide a reactive feel which meaningfully mimics a lightsaber, but the game's only flaw is a minor imperfection in play control during the two bonus stages against Boba Fett and Darth Vader.
Destructoid's Anthony Burch finds the game at a balance between gameplay (focusing on shooting and lightsabers) and story (focusing on the immersive cinematic reenactment of being part of the Star Wars universe).

He says that the game's mission designs generally range from "awesome" to "more awesome", and the A New Hope missions follow 1983's Star Wars arcade game exactly.

He finds the bonus missions' play control to be "clunky and linear" but nevertheless to feel like a realistic lightsaber could, and to generally be a "delight".

== See also ==
Star Wars: Racer Arcade
Star Wars Battle Pod


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade at the Killer List of Videogames
Star Wars Resistance is an American 3D animated science fiction television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation.
The series uses a cel-shaded look.
It follows Kazuda Xiono, a New Republic pilot who is recruited by the Resistance to spy on the growing threat of the First Order shortly before and during the events of the sequel trilogy.

The series premiered on Disney Channel on October 7, 2018, and the next day it debuted on Disney XD in the United States and worldwide.
Twelve shorts debuted on the Disney Channel YouTube channel in December 2018.

The second and final season premiered on October 6, 2019 on Disney Channel, Disney XD, and DisneyNow.
The series ended on January 26, 2020 after forty episodes.
Resistance received generally positive reviews from critics, but mixed reactions from fans.
Resistance was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program for both of its seasons.
It won the Saturn Award for Best Animated Series on Television in 2019 for its debut season.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Christopher Sean as Kazuda Xiono
Scott Lawrence as Jarek Yeager
Josh Brener as Neeku Vozo
Suzie McGrath as Tam Ryvora
Bobby Moynihan as Orka
Jim Rash as Flix
Donald Faison as Hype Fazon
Myrna Velasco as Torra Doza
Lex Lang as Major Elrik Vonreg
Stephen Stanton as Griff Halloran
Jason Hightower as Captain Imanuel Doza
Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Freya Fenris and 4D-M1N
Dave Filoni
as Bo Keevil
Sumalee Montano as Agent Tierny


===
Recurring ===
Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron
Gwendoline Christie (season 1) and Ellen Dubin (season 2)
as Captain Phasma
Liam McIntyre as Commander Pyre
Elijah Wood as Jace Rucklin
Carolyn Hennesy as General Leia Organa
Tovah Feldshuh as Aunt Z
Nazneen Contractor as Synara San
Gary Anthony Williams as Kragan Gorr
Antony Del Rio as Kel
Nikki SooHoo as EilaThe droid BB-8 appears for most of the first season.

===
Guest ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
Rachael MacFarlane as Lin Gaava
Tzi Ma as Senator Hamato Xiono
Frank Welker as Chelidae
Matthew Wood as Ello Asty and Kylo Ren
Domhnall Gleeson (season 1) and Ben Prendergast (season 2) as General Hux
Joe Manganiello as Ax Tagrin
Daveed Diggs as Norath Kev
Lucy Lawless as the Aeosian Queen
John DiMaggio as Vranki the Blue
Sam Witwer as Hugh Sion
Cherami Leigh as Mia Gabon
Tudi Roche as Mika Grey
Tasia Valenza as Venisa Doza
==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2018–19) ===
The series follows Kazuda Xiono, a New Republic pilot who is recruited by the Resistance to spy on the growing threat of the First Order.
The first season begins six months before The Force Awakens and crosses over with it at the end of the 17th episode.

===
Season 2 (2019–20) ===
The second and final season picks up immediately afterwards, crossing over with The Last Jedi and leading up to The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Shorts ==
"The Search for Kaz" (December 10, 2018)
"
Dart and Cover" (December 10, 2018)
"Neeku's Reward" (December 10, 2018)
"When Thieves Drop By" (December 17, 2018)
"Treasure Chest" (December 17, 2018)
"G-LN" (December 17, 2018)
"
Bucket's Quest" (December 23, 2018)
"Unmotivated" (December 24, 2018)
"The Need for Speed" (December 24, 2018)
"Sixty Seconds to Destruction" (December 31, 2018)
"Buggles' Day Out" (December 31, 2018)
"The Rematch" (December 31, 2018)


==
Production ==


===
Development ===
On February 22, 2018, /Film reported that Lucasfilm had trademarked the name Star Wars Resistance for a wide range of merchandise and a potential animated series.

On April 26, the series was officially announced and scheduled for a Fall 2018 debut.
The show was created by Dave Filoni, who previously directed the 2008 film Star Wars: The Clone Wars, developed the subsequent television series, created, developed, and executive produced Star Wars Rebels, and in 2017 became the head of Lucasfilm Animation.
Filoni said the show was influenced by anime and by his grandfather's experiences in World War II.
By August 1, 2018, Polygon Pictures was selected as the animation production company.
On August 12, 2018, Filoni stated that he would not work as directly on Resistance in a day-to-day capacity as he had on previous projects due to his work on The Clone Wars revival.
However, he provided direction and notes to the story team, a role he compared to George Lucas' input on The Clone Wars.

===
Casting ===
Along with the official series announcement, it was announced that Oscar Isaac and Gwendoline Christie would reprise their roles as Poe Dameron and Captain Phasma, respectively.
They are joined by  Christopher Sean, Bobby Moynihan, Suzie McGrath, Scott Lawrence, Myrna Velasco, Josh Brener, Donald Faison, and Jim Rash.
General Leia Organa, Kylo Ren and BB-8 have appeared in the series.

==
Release ==


===
Marketing ===
A trailer was released on August 17, 2018, showcasing the new animation style and characters.
It received a negative reaction from fans, including criticism for its apparent targeting of younger viewers and both praise and criticism for the anime-style CGI.
Blair Marnell of Nerdist compared the initial reaction to the early stigma
The Clone Wars and Rebels suffered for similarly targeting younger demographics during release, only for both to become more positively received with subsequent seasons.

=== Broadcast ===
The series debuted in the United States on the Disney Channel on October 7, 2018, with Disney XD airing the series later in the United States and worldwide, with the exception of Southeast Asia, where all live-action shows are sold by Disney's Southeast Asian channel.
The series was renewed for a second season, which aired in October 2019.
Its first episode, which picks up directly after the end of the first season, was screened at Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.
Season two premiered on Sunday, October 6, (10 p.m. EDT/PDT) on Disney Channel and DisneyNOW, with subsequent airings on Disney XD.
Season two was the final season of the show and consisted of 19 episodes.

===
Home media ===
As announced on July 23, 2019, Lucasfilm released the first season on DVD on August 20.
It includes all 21 episodes of Season One, as well as an exclusive sneak-peek at the making of the show with cast and crew, 4 audio commentaries with Sean, Lawrence, Brener and Velasco, the 12 shorts and Resistance Rewind.
The first season of Star Wars Resistance became available for streaming on November 12, 2019, the launch date for Disney+.
The second season became available on February 25, 2020.

== Reception ==
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, season 1 has an approval rating of 92% based reviews from 13 critics, with an average rating of 6.72/10.
The site's critics consensus states that "Star Wars: Resistance's streamlined story sets the stage for exciting adventures—and seems poised to explore a canvas stocked with immediately relatable characters and plenty of potential.
"William
Hughes of The A.V. Club praised the first episode saying "At the end of its first hour, Resistance feels pleasantly primed with potential."
He gave it a grade B.
Brian Lowry of CNN gave it a mixed review, he notes that previous Star Wars shows offered plenty for older fans but that this show was more clearly made for a younger audience, and "Star Wars Resistance paints with a much brighter, more colorful palette, but at least initially settles for more pallid characters and situations -- the kind that don't immediately suggest
this is the animated show you're looking for.
"
SyFy Wire notes that "Resistance's cel-shading animation style stands out amongst the franchise’s traditional CG-animated fare."

===
Awards ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Resistance at Starwars.com
Star Wars Resistance at IMDb
Star Wars Resistance on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker (also known as Star Wars: Episode IX –
The Rise of Skywalker) is a 2019 American epic space opera film produced, co-written, and directed by J. J. Abrams.
Produced by Lucasfilm and Abrams' production company Bad Robot Productions, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the third installment of the Star Wars sequel trilogy, following The Force Awakens (2015) and The Last Jedi (2017), and the final episode of the nine-part "Skywalker saga".
The film's ensemble cast includes Carrie Fisher, Mark Hamill, Adam Driver, Daisy Ridley, John Boyega, Oscar Isaac, Anthony Daniels, Naomi Ackie, Domhnall Gleeson, Richard E. Grant, Lupita Nyong'o, Keri Russell, Joonas Suotamo, Kelly Marie Tran, Ian McDiarmid, and Billy Dee Williams.
The Rise of Skywalker follows Rey, Finn, and Poe Dameron as they lead the Resistance's final stand against Supreme Leader Kylo Ren and the First Order, who are aided by the return of the deceased Galactic Emperor, Palpatine.

Following initial reports that The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson would write the script for Episode IX, in August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was hired to direct and to write a script with his collaborator Derek Connolly; both ultimately retain story credit with Abrams and Chris Terrio.
In September 2017, Trevorrow left the project following creative differences with producer Kathleen Kennedy, and Abrams, having directed The Force Awakens, returned as director.
John Williams, composer for the previous episodic films, returned to compose the score for the last time for the franchise.
Principal photography began in August 2018 at Pinewood Studios in England and wrapped in February 2019, with post-production completed in November 2019.
With an estimated budget of $275 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made.

The film premiered in Los Angeles on December 16, 2019, and was released in the United States on December 20.
Unlike The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, which received positive reviews, The Rise of Skywalker received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the acting, action sequences, musical score, and visual effects, but criticized the story, pacing, and its perceived departures from the plot and themes of The Last Jedi.
It grossed over $1.074 billion worldwide, becoming the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2019, and, although it was the lowest-grossing installment of the sequel trilogy, turned an estimated net profit of $300 million.
The film received three nominations at the 92nd Academy Awards (Best Original Score, Best Visual Effects, and Best Sound Editing) as well as three at the 73rd British Academy Film Awards (also Best Original Music, Best Special Visual Effects, and Best Sound).
==
Plot ==
Following a threat of revenge by the revived Emperor Palpatine, Kylo Ren obtains a Sith Wayfinder, leading him to the uncharted planet Exegol.
There, he finds Palpatine, who reveals that he created Snoke as a puppet to control the First Order and lure Kylo to the dark side.
Palpatine unveils the Final Order—a secret armada of Star Destroyers—and tells Kylo to find and kill Rey, who is continuing her Jedi training under Resistance leader Leia Organa.
Finn and Poe Dameron deliver intelligence from a spy that Palpatine is on Exegol; Rey has learned from Luke Skywalker's notes that a Sith Wayfinder can lead them there.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, BB-8, and C-3PO depart in the Millennium Falcon to Pasaana, where a clue to a Wayfinder is hidden.

Kylo initiates a Force bond with Rey to discover her location; he travels to Pasaana with his warrior subordinates, the Knights of Ren.
With the help of Lando Calrissian, Rey and her friends find the clue—a dagger inscribed with Sith text, which C-3PO's programming forbids him from interpreting—and the remains of a Jedi hunter named Ochi and his ship.
Rey senses Kylo nearby and faces him.
The First Order captures the Falcon, Chewbacca, and the dagger; attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys a First Order transport with Force lightning.
Believing Chewbacca to be dead, the group escapes on Ochi's ship.

The group travels to Kijimi, where a droidsmith extracts the Sith text from C-3PO's memory, revealing coordinates to a Wayfinder.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive, and the group mounts a rescue mission to Kylo's Star Destroyer.
Rey recovers the dagger and has visions of Ochi killing her parents with it.
Kylo informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter; the Sith Lord had ordered Ochi to recover Rey as a child, but her parents hid her on Jakku to protect her.
General Hux saves Poe, Finn, and Chewbacca from execution, revealing himself as the spy.
He permits the group to escape on the Falcon but is discovered and killed by Allegiant General Pryde.
The group flies the Falcon to the Wayfinder's coordinates on a moon in the Endor system.

Rey retrieves the Wayfinder from the remains of the second Death Star, but she is met by Kylo, who destroys the Wayfinder and duels her.
In a dying act, Leia calls to Kylo through the Force, distracting him as Rey impales him.
Sensing Leia's death, Rey heals Kylo and takes his ship to exile herself on Ahch-To.
There, Luke's Force spirit encourages Rey to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber.
Rey leaves for Exegol in Luke's X-wing fighter, using the Wayfinder from Kylo's ship.
Meanwhile, Kylo converses with a memory of his father, Han Solo; he throws away his lightsaber and reclaims his identity as Ben Solo.
Sensing Leia's death and Ben's redemption
, Palpatine sends one of his superlaser-equipped Star Destroyers to destroy Kijimi as a show of force.

Rey transmits her coordinates to R2-D2, allowing the Resistance—now led by Poe and Finn—to follow her to Exegol.
There, she confronts Palpatine; he demands that she kill him, allowing his spirit to pass into her.
Lando brings reinforcements from across the galaxy to join the battle.
Ben overpowers the Knights of Ren and joins Rey, but Palpatine drains their power to rejuvenate himself.
He incapacitates Ben and attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing Palpatine before dying herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive her at the cost of his own life; they share a kiss before he dies.
The Resistance defeats Palpatine's armada, while people across the galaxy rise up against the First Order.
The Resistance returns to their base to celebrate.

After the celebration, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries his and Leia's lightsabers.
A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, "Rey Skywalker."
== Cast ==
Carrie Fisher as Leia Organa, the Force-sensitive leading general of the Resistance, mother to Ben Solo, Luke Skywalker's twin sister, and Anakin Skywalker's daughter.
Fisher, who died in late 2016, appears through the use of repurposed unreleased footage from The Force Awakens.

Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi Master and maternal uncle of Kylo Ren.
He became one with the Force in The Last Jedi.

Adam Driver as Ben Solo / Kylo Ren, the Supreme Leader of the First Order.
He is the son of Leia Organa and Han Solo, and the grandson of Anakin Skywalker.

Daisy Ridley as Rey, a former scavenger from Jakku, member of the Resistance, and the next JediCailey Fleming and Josefine Irrera Jackson as young Rey
John Boyega as Finn, a member of the Resistance and a former stormtrooper (FN-2187) who defected from the First Order
Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron, a high-ranking X-wing fighter pilot and commander of the Resistance who later inherits the rank of general from Leia
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a humanoid protocol droid in the service of General Organa
Naomi Ackie as Jannah, a former stormtrooper of the First Order (TZ-1719) living on the planet Kef Bir, who aids the Resistance
Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux, the First Order's third in-command
Richard E. Grant as Allegiant General Pryde, a high-ranking general in the First Order, who previously served in the Galactic Empire
Lupita Nyong'o as Maz Kanata, a former space pirate and ally of the Resistance
Keri Russell as Zorii Bliss, an old acquaintance of Poe's from Kijimi
Joonas Suotamo as Chewbacca, a Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon
Kelly Marie Tran as Rose Tico, a mechanic in the Resistance and friend of Finn
Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the resurrected Dark Lord of the Sith and Rey's paternal grandfather
Billy Dee Williams
as Lando Calrissian, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, a former owner of the Millennium Falcon, and an old friend of ChewbaccaBillie Lourd and Greg Grunberg reprise their roles as Lieutenant Kaydel Ko Connix and Temmin "Snap" Wexley respectively.
Additionally, Dominic Monaghan portrays Resistance trooper Beaumont Kin, Shirley Henderson voices Babu Frik, and Nick Kellington portrays Klaud via capture performance.
Hassan Taj and Lee Towersey perform the role of R2-D2, Dave Chapman and Brian Herring return as the puppeteers of BB-8, and director J. J. Abrams provides the voice for D-O. Martin Wilde, Anton Simpson-Tidy, Lukaz Leong, Tom Rodgers, Joe Kennard, and Ashley Beck
appear as the Knights of Ren.
Amanda Lawrence reprises her role as Commander Larma D’Acy, while Vinette Robinson plays her wife, Pilot Wrobie Tyce.
Jodie Comer and Billy Howle briefly appear as Rey's parents; Tom Wilton and screenwriter Chris Terrio briefly appear as, respectively, the performer and voice for Aftab Ackbar, the son of Admiral Ackbar; and Mike Quinn and Kipsang Rotich return as, respectively, the performer and voice of Nien Nunb.
Denis Lawson and Warwick Davis briefly reprise their roles as Wedge Antilles, a veteran of the Rebel Alliance, and Wicket W. Warrick, now the leader of the Ewoks.
Harrison Ford reprises his role as Han Solo in an uncredited cameo.
Composer John Williams cameos as Oma Tres, a Kijimi bartender;
Kevin Smith cameos as a Kijimi inhabitant; Abrams' frequent composer collaborator Michael Giacchino cameos as a Sith Trooper; and Lin-Manuel Miranda and Jeff Garlin cameo as a human and an alien Resistance trooper, respectively.
Ed Sheeran, Karl Urban, Dhani Harrison, Nigel Godrich, J. D. Dillard, and Dave Hearn all cameo as stormtroopers.
Actors making reprisal vocal cameos include James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, Andy Serkis as Snoke, and the voices of several past Jedi, including Ewan McGregor and Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi (the latter via digitally altered archive audio), Hayden Christensen as Anakin Skywalker, Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, Olivia d'Abo as Luminara Unduli, Frank Oz as Yoda, Liam Neeson as Qui-Gon Jinn, Jennifer Hale as Aayla Secura, Samuel L. Jackson as Mace Windu, and Angelique Perrin as Adi Gallia.

==
Production ==


===
Development ===
In October 2012, Star Wars creator George Lucas sold his production company Lucasfilm to The Walt Disney Company.
Disney subsequently announced the Star Wars sequel trilogy.
In June 2014, it was announced that Rian Johnson, writer and director of The Last Jedi, would write a story treatment for Episode IX.
However, Johnson later stated that he was not involved in writing the film.
In August 2015, Colin Trevorrow was announced as the director of the film; he was to write the script with frequent collaborator Derek Connolly.

=== Pre-production ===

In February 2016, Disney chief executive officer Bob Iger confirmed that pre-production on Episode IX had begun.
Carrie Fisher died in December 2016.
It had been planned for her character General Leia Organa to appear in the film; prior to its release, her brother Todd Fisher revealed that "she was going to be the big payoff in the final film" and "she was going to be the last Jedi, so to speak.
"In
August 2017, it was announced that Jack Thorne would rewrite the script.
In September 2017, Lucasfilm stated that Trevorrow had left the production following creative differences; sources said his working relationship with Kathleen Kennedy became unmanageable after he failed to deliver what she saw as a satisfactory script, despite writing several drafts.
That same month, Johnson was rumored as the top choice to replace Trevorrow as director, though he stated "it was never in the plan for me to direct Episode IX", and J. J. Abrams, the director of The Force Awakens, was announced to be returning as director for Episode IX.The story team met with George Lucas before writing the new script to discuss the nature of the Force.
Abrams co-wrote the script with Chris Terrio, though Trevorrow and Connolly retain story credits.
The story was rewritten to some extent before filming was completed.
The film was produced by Abrams' company Bad Robot Productions, Kathleen Kennedy, and Michelle Rejwan.
According to Terrio, the film's script had to include certain narrative beats provided by Kennedy and Rejwan, including the redemption of the character Kylo Ren.
Before filming, Episode IX was initially given the working title Black Diamond, which was then changed to TrIXie in 2018, so that the roman numeral "IX" would be included in the working title.
The film's title, The Rise of Skywalker, was announced at April 2019's Star Wars Celebration in Chicago.

===
Casting ===
Carrie Fisher, who played Leia Organa, died on December 27, 2016.
Variety and Reuters reported that it had been planned for her to play a key role in Episode IX.
In January 2017, Lucasfilm stated that there were no plans to digitally generate Fisher's performance as they had for Rogue One (2016).
The following April, Fisher's brother Todd revealed that Fisher's daughter, Billie Lourd, had granted Disney the rights to use recent footage of Fisher.
However, a week later, Kathleen Kennedy stated that Fisher would not appear in the film.
In July 2018, J. J. Abrams announced that unused footage of Fisher from The Force Awakens would be used to help complete the story.
In flashback scenes, digital de-aging was used for the appearance of Luke and Leia through the use of facial shots of both characters from the Empire Strikes Back, and Return of the Jedi respectively.

In July 2018, Keri Russell was in talks to play a part with some "action-heavy fight scenes", and it was confirmed that Billy Dee Williams would return as Lando Calrissian, his first time playing the character onscreen since 1983's Return of the Jedi, marking one of the longest intervals between portrayals of a character by the same actor in American film history.
At the end of July, Russell was confirmed to have been cast, and there was an announcement of returning and additional new cast members.
In late August, Deadline Hollywood announced that Dominic Monaghan and Matt Smith had been cast in unspecified roles, but Smith later denied his involvement.
Greg Grunberg reprises his role as Temmin "Snap" Wexley.
At the Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, it was revealed via the film's teaser trailer that Ian McDiarmid would return to portray Palpatine.
Since the event was held after principal photography wrapped, Abrams was thrilled that news of McDiarmid on the set never leaked.
Kathleen Kennedy said they decided to reveal Palpatine's return ahead of the film's release because he was not a new character, like Baby Yoda (the character from The Mandalorian) had been, and they wanted to invite speculation from fans about what role he would play in the story.

===
Filming ===
Principal photography began on August 1, 2018, at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England.

Filming also took place in Wadi Rum, Jordan.

Oscar Isaac stated that Abrams was allowing more improvised acting than in the previous two films.
Due to the tight schedule, some editing took place on set.
Principal photography wrapped on February 15, 2019.
Footage from the film was shown at The Walt Disney Company's annual shareholders meeting on March 7, 2019.
Two weeks of reshoots took place at Pinewood involving Hamill, Ridley, and Isaac in July 2019.
Another round of reshoots took place between late September and October.

===
Post-production ===
The visual effects were created by Industrial Light & Magic and supervised by Roger Guyett.
The film finished post-production on November 25, 2019.
After Boyega accidentally left a copy of the script in his apartment when he moved out, it was listed on eBay for around £65; the filmmakers were able to get it back before it sold.

===
Music ===
In January 2018, it was confirmed that John Williams would return to compose and conduct the score for The Rise of Skywalker.
The next month, Williams announced it would be the last Star Wars film for which he would compose the score.
In August 2019, it was revealed that Williams had written about 35 of an expected 135 minutes of music for the film, which, according to Williams' brother Don, would incorporate all of the major themes of the Skywalker saga.
Scoring began in July 2019 with Williams and William Ross conducting and orchestrating the sessions over the course of six months.
The official soundtrack album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 20, 2019.

==
Marketing ==


===
Promotion ===
Despite staying silent about many details of the film, Abrams expressed his hopes that fans and general audiences would be "satisfied".
He headed a panel dedicated to the film on April 12, 2019, during the Star Wars Celebration in Chicago, where the film's title was revealed.
Additionally, the story events of the Disneyland themed area Star Wars: Galaxy's Edge precede the film, including the Millennium Falcon:
Smugglers Run motion simulator, which features Chewbacca.
On August 24, a new poster and "sizzle reel" for the film were released at D23; the latter was released to the public two days later.
The footage includes a montage of the Skywalker saga so far, as well as several new shots from the film.

===
Tie-in literature and merchandise ===
A publishing campaign titled "Journey to Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker" was announced on May 4, 2019.
It includes the novel Resistance Reborn, set between The Last Jedi and The Rise of Skywalker, and various other titles.
From December 18, 2019, to March 11, 2020, a prequel graphic novel titled The Rise of Kylo Ren, telling the story of how Ben Solo became Kylo Ren and elaborating upon the character's backstory, was published by Marvel Comics, written by Charles Soule and illustrated by Will Sliney.
The official novelization of The Rise of Skywalker is by Rae Carson:
hardcover and audiobook versions were released on March 19, 2020.
The novel details Palpatine's return in more depth
: he transferred his consciousness into a clone body following his death in Return of the Jedi, and his "son", Rey's father, was a failed clone of Palpatine.
The junior novel and corresponding audiobook are by Michael Kogge and were released on April 21, 2020.
Additionally, a five-issue Marvel Comics adaptation written by Jody Houser and illustrated by Will Sliney was originally planned to debut in mid-2020, but this was later canceled, making the film the first in the franchise not to receive a comic adaptation.

===
Video games ===
The video game Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) released a free level set on Ajan Kloss.
In December 2019, the video game Fortnite Battle Royale released several cosmetics featuring character skins for Rey, Finn, a Sith Trooper, Kylo Ren, and Zorii Bliss along with a TIE fighter glider, a Millennium Falcon glider (which was given to players for free from the Winterfest Event), four emotes, and two free banners.
On December 14, Fortnite's publisher Epic Games released a preview of the film on an in-game theater screen as a live event.
At the end of the event, a message from Palpatine (the one mentioned in the film's opening crawl) was heard.

==
Release ==


===
Theatrical ===
The film was originally planned to be released in the United States on May 24, 2019, before being pushed back to December 20, in IMAX and 3D.
It had its world premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles on December 16.
Unlike most studio films, Disney reportedly did not hold test screenings for The Rise of Skywalker, instead only showing it to Abrams' friends and family, as well as a terminally-ill fan.
Before the film's release, Disney issued a warning that the scenes with strobe-like flashing lights may trigger photosensitive migraines and seizures during some of those scenes.

===
Home media ===
The Rise of Skywalker was scheduled to be released on Digital HD on March 17, 2020, but was released four days early in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Its DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K Ultra HD releases by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment followed on March 31; the 4K version of the film was also released in "The Skywalker Saga" Ultra HD Blu-ray box set that same date.
The film was released on Disney+
on May 4, which is reportedly two months ahead of its previously scheduled release date.

== Reception ==


===
Box office ===
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker grossed $515.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $558.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.074 billion.
Deadline Hollywood calculated the net profit of the film to be $300 million, with costs such as production budgets, P&A, and talent participations offset by box office grosses and ancillary revenues from home media; it placed ninth on their list of 2019's "Most Valuable Blockbusters".
Pre-sale tickets went on sale on October 21, 2019, and the film sold more tickets in their first hour of availability on Atom Tickets than the previous record-holder for ticket sales, Avengers: Endgame (2019).
It became Atom Tickets' second-best first-day seller of all time behind Endgame, selling more than twice the number of tickets as The Last Jedi sold in that same timeframe, while Fandango reported it outsold all previous Star Wars films.
Box office tracking had The Rise of Skywalker grossing around $200 million in its opening weekend, though some firms predicted a debut closer to $175 million.
The film made $90 million on its first day, including $40 million from Thursday night previews.
It went on to debut to $177.3 million, and it was also noted that Saturday (which saw a 47% drop from Friday's gross) was the busiest shopping day of the year, likely affecting ticket sales.
The film made $32 million on Christmas Day, the second-best total ever for the holiday after The Force Awakens' $49.3 million in 2015, and went on to have a five-day total of $138.8 million, including $76 million for the weekend.
In its third weekend, the film made $34.5 million, remaining in first, before being dethroned in its fourth weekend by newcomer 1917
(2019).Worldwide, the film was projected to gross around $450 million in its opening weekend, including $250 million from 52 international territories.
It made $59.1 million from its first day of international release in 46 countries.
The biggest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.3 million), Germany ($7.2 million), France ($5.3 million), and Australia ($4.3 million).
In China, the film made $1.6 million (RMB11.6 million) through its first day.
It went on to open to $198 million from overseas countries and $373.5 million worldwide, coming in below projections and 47% lower than The Last Jedi's total.
Its biggest opening totals remained the UK ($26.8 million), Germany ($21.8 million), France ($15.2 million), Japan ($14.6 million), Australia ($12.6 million), and China ($12.1 million).

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 51% of 507 reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.1/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The Rise of Skywalker suffers from a frustrating lack of imagination, but concludes this beloved saga with fan-focused devotion.
"
As of January 2020, the film is the lowest-rated live-action film of the Star Wars series.
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, which sampled 61 reviews and calculated a weighted average of 53 out of 100, The Rise of Skywalker received "mixed or average reviews".
Richard Roeper, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, gave the film three stars out of four, writing that it "rarely comes close to touching greatness, but it's a solid, visually dazzling and warmhearted victory [for] quality filmmaking."
The A.V. Club's A. A. Dowd gave the film a C+, stating that it "is so freighted with obligation that it almost groans under the weight, flashing a weak smile as it vaguely approximates the appearance of a zippy good time."
Michael Phillips of Chicago Tribune wrote that the film "does the job.
It wraps up the trio of trilogies begun in 1977 in a confident, soothingly predictable way, doing all that is cinematically possible to avoid [upsetting the] tradition-minded quadrants of the Star Wars fan base.
"Mick
LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described the film as "a disappointment" and wrote, "For all the movie's faults, it's likely that most people will consider The Rise of Skywalker and accept the trade: Sit through a
so-so 110 minutes to get to a strong half hour.
"
Owen Gleiberman of Variety called the film "the most elegant, emotionally rounded, and gratifying Star Wars adventure since the glory days of Star Wars (1977) and The Empire Strikes Back (1980) [...]
but given the last eight films, the bar isn't that high.
"
The BBC's Nicholas Barber praised the film's acting and wrote, "The Rise of Skywalker has been lovingly crafted by a host of talented people, and yet the best they can do is pay tribute to everything
[Lucas] did several decades ago.
"Scott
Mendelson of Forbes described the film as "possibly worse" compared to the previous Skywalker saga films, ending the main saga while "denying this new trilogy its artistic reason for existence".
He also criticized the film for retconning The Last Jedi and its plot, saying it contains "patronizing reversals in the name of mollifying the fans who merely want to be reminded of the first three movies."
Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times said the film is trying to be "a Last Jedi corrective," but that a "more accurate way to describe it, I think, is as an epic failure of nerve.
This "Rise" feels more like a retreat,
a return to a zone of emotional and thematic safety from a filmmaker with a gift for packaging nostalgia as subversion.
"
Writing for The New Yorker, Richard Brody stated that the film's faults "are those of the franchise over all," distilled and magnified by Abrams, who "brings virtually no originality to it."
Brody goes on to say that he thinks even Michael Bay would have done a better job directing the film.
Whereas Asian actress Kelly Marie Tran was a main character in The Last Jedi, she onlyappears for about a minute in The Rise of Skywalker.
The reduced role was interpreted by some critics as a concession to fans who disliked her character; Tran had been a target of online harassment following the release of The Last Jedi.
People involved in the previous film defended her, with some claiming some of the attackers were racist and body shamers.
Critics said she was "sidelined" into a minor character, and commented on how she was written out "without any explanation" and her minor role was considered by one critic to be "one of the film's biggest disappointments".
In regards to the criticism towards her reduced screen-time, screenwriter Chris Terrio said it was due to the difficulty of including the deceased Carrie Fisher archive footage in scenes planned to feature both characters.

===
Audience response ===
According to CinemaScore, American audiences gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest among the live-action films.
On PostTrak, audiences gave the film an average four stars out of five, with 70% saying they would definitely recommend it; parents and children under 12 years old (who made up 16% of opening night attendance) gave it a full five stars out of five.
Men (who made up 67% of the audience) gave the film an overall positive score of 80%, while women (32%) gave it an 84%.
RelishMix, which tracks social media posts and online presence, "noticed a divided reaction to Skywalker online, though it leaned slightly positive".
Months prior to the film's trailer release, it was review bombed on Rotten Tomatoes to the point where the "Want to See" percentage went down as far as 5% within a day, with many of the reviews focusing on lingering negativity towards The Last Jedi.
Similar bombing with Captain Marvel (2019) caused Rotten Tomatoes to completely remove the "Want to See"  feature after temporarily changing it to a number.
===
Accolades ===
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at StarWars.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Lucasfilm.com
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at IMDb
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at AllMovie
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker at Disney A to Z
Star Wars is an American epic space-opera media franchise, centered on a film series created by George Lucas that includes Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980), and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The series depicts the adventures of various characters "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away".
Many derivative Star Wars works have been produced in conjunction with, between, and after the original trilogy of films, and later installments.
This body of work was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe for decades.

In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $4.06 billion.
In April 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canon to the franchise.
The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.
The first new canon adult novel was Star Wars:
A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014.This is a list of original novels, novel adaptations, original junior novels, junior novel adaptations, young readers, and short stories in the Star Wars franchise.
This list does not include journals, graphic novels or comic books, which can be found in the list of Star Wars comic books.
Reference books and roleplaying gamebooks can be found at the list of Star Wars reference books.

==
Film and television adaptations ==
The novelizations offer an alternate take on the events of the movies.
Many include discarded or slightly altered plot-lines.
It should be remembered that those published before 25 April 2014 are considered Legends like all other media.

Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999), by Terry Brooks (32 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (junior novel) (1999), by Patricia Wrede (32 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), by R.A. Salvatore (22 BBY) (A)
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (junior novelization) (2002), by Patricia Wrede (22 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), by Matthew Stover (19 BBY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (junior novel) (2005), by Patricia Wrede (19 BBY) (Y)
Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker/Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1976), by Alan Dean Foster as George Lucas (0 BBY-0 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980), by Donald F. Glut (3 ABY) (A)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)
(A)
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi –
The Illustrated Edition (1983), by James Kahn (4 ABY)


===
William Shakespeare's Star Wars ===
William Shakespeare's The Phantom of Menace:
Star Wars Part the First (2015), by Ian Doescher (32 BBY)
William Shakespeare's The Clone Army Attacketh:
Star Wars Part the Second (2015), by Ian Doescher (22 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Tragedy of the Sith's Revenge:
Star Wars Part the Third (2015), by Ian Doescher (19 BBY)
William Shakespeare's Star Wars (Verily, A New Hope) (2013), by Ian Doescher (0 BBY–0 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Empire Striketh Back (2014), by Ian Doescher (3 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Jedi Doth Return (2014), by Ian Doescher (4 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Force Doth Awaken (2017), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's Jedi the Last (2018), by Ian Doescher (34 ABY)
William Shakespeare's The Merry Rise of Skywalker (2020) by Ian Doescher (35 ABY)


==
Original canon stories (2014–present) ==
Since 2014, the official Star Wars canon includes all of the movie episodes, The Clone Wars film and the television shows Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels, and Star Wars Resistance, as well as any books, comics, and video games published after April 2014.
===
Short stories ===


====
Star Wars Insider (2014–present) ====
Since 2014, various short stories have been published in Star Wars Insider.

====
The Rise of the Empire (October 2015) ====
"Mercy Mission" by Melissa Scott (14 BBY)
"Bottleneck" by John Jackson Miller (12 BBY)
"
The Levers of Power" by Jason Fry (4 ABY)


====
"The Perfect Weapon" ====
"The Perfect Weapon" (November 2015) by Delilah S. Dawson (34 ABY).
This story is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Printed in the paperback edition of the Star Wars: The Force Awakens novelization.

====
Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens ====
The collection Tales from a Galaxy
Far, Far Away: Aliens is part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Force Awakens promotional campaign.
Some stories were originally published as individual e-books, and later collected with other new stories.
However, they were all published together as a book called Star Wars: Tales From a Galaxy
Far, Far Away
"All Creatures Great and Small" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
High Noon on Jakku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
The Crimson Corsair and the Lost Treasure of Count Dooku" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (31 ABY;
flashbacks to 19 BBY)
"
The Face of Evil" (November 2015) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)
"
A Recipe for Death" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker
(Pre–32 BBY)
"True Love" (April 2016) by Landry Q. Walker (34 ABY)


====
From a Certain Point of View (October 2017) ====


====
Canto Bight (December 2017) ====
"Rules of the Game", by Saladin Ahmed (34 ABY)
"Hear Nothing, See Nothing, Say Nothing", by Rae Carson (34 ABY)
"
The Wine in Dreams", by Mira Grant (34 ABY)
"The Ride", by John Jackson Miller (34 ABY)


===
Children's books ===
Canon storybooks for younger readers that are shorter than a standard novel or young adult novel.

==
Original Star Wars Legends stories ==
This body of work represents the original Star Wars expanded universe, which was rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Beginning with the 1999 release of Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, Lucasfilm has divided its titles by fictional "era" with symbols designating such.
===
Before the Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place more than 25,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Old Galactic Republic era ===
This era contains stories taking place 25,000 to 1,000 years before Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
===
Rise of the Empire era ===
This era contains stories taking place within 100 years before Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ====


====
The Clone Wars ====
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008), by Karen Traviss (21.5 BBY) (Y)
The Clone Wars: Wild Space (2008), by Karen Miller (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Clone Wars: No Prisoners (2009), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
(A)


====
Clone Wars: Gambit by Karen Miller (21 BBY) ====
Stealth (2010)
(A)
Siege (2010)
(A)


====
Clone Wars:
Secret Missions by Ryder Windham (21 BBY) ====
Breakout Squad (2009)
(Y)
Curse of the Black Hole Pirates (2010)
(Y)
Duel at Shattered Rock (2011)
(Y)
Guardians of the Chiss Key (2012)
(Y)


====
Republic Commando ====
Republic Commando:
Hard Contact (2004), by Karen Traviss (22 BBY)
"Omega Squad: Targets" (2005), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #81 and Republic Commando:
Triple Zero
Republic Commando:
Triple Zero (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
"Republic Commando: Odds" (2006), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #87 and Republic Commando: True Colors
Republic Commando:
True Colors (2007), by Karen Traviss (21 BBY)
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2008), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


=====
Imperial Commando =====
Imperial Commando: 501st (2009), by Karen Traviss (19 BBY)


====
Clone Wars ====
Shatterpoint (2003), by Matthew Stover (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Cestus Deception (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY)
(A)
The Hive (2004), by Steven Barnes (21.5 BBY) (E)
(A)
Jedi Trial (2004), by David Sherman & Dan Cragg (21.5 BBY)
(A)
Yoda: Dark Rendezvous (2004), by Sean Stewart (20 BBY)
MedStar
I:
Battle Surgeons (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
MedStar II:
Jedi Healer (2004), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (20 BBY)
(A)
Labyrinth of Evil (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)


====
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ====
Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader (2005), by James Luceno (19 BBY)
(A)
Kenobi (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY)
(A)
"Incognito" (2013), by John Jackson Miller (19 BBY) in Star Wars Insider #143 and Kenobi (A)


====
Coruscant Nights (18.8 – 17 BBY) ====
Jedi Twilight (2008), by Michael Reaves (18.8 BBY)
Street of Shadows (2008), by Michael Reaves (19 BBY–18.46 BBY)
Patterns of Force (2009), by Michael Reaves with Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (uncredited) (18.3 BBY)
The Last Jedi (2013), by Michael Reaves & Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (18–17 BBY)


====
The Last of the Jedi by Jude Watson (18 BBY) ====
The Desperate Mission (2005)
(Y)
Dark Warning (2005)
(Y)
Underworld (2005)
(Y)
Death on Naboo (2006)
(Y)
A Tangled Web (2006)
(Y)
Return of the Dark Side (2006)
(Y)
Secret Weapon (2007)
(Y)
Against The Empire (2007)
(Y)
Master of Deception (2008)
(Y)
Reckoning (2008)
(Y)


====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (15 BBY – 4 ABY) ====
A New Hope:
The Life of Luke Skywalker (2009), by Ryder Windham (Y)


====
The Han Solo Trilogy ====
The Paradise Snare (1997), by A.C. Crispin (10 BBY)
(A)
The Hutt Gambit (1997), by A.C. Crispin (5-4 BBY)
(A)
Rebel Dawn (1998), by A.C. Crispin (3-0 BBY)
(A)


====
The Adventures of Lando Calrissian ====
Lando Calrissian and the Mindharp of Sharu (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Flamewind of Oseon (1983), by L. Neil Smith (4 BBY)
Lando Calrissian and the Starcave of ThonBoka (1983), by L. Neil Smith (3 BBY)


====
The Force Unleashed (3 – 1 BBY) ====
The Force Unleashed (2008), by Sean Williams (3-2 BBY)
(A)
The Force Unleashed II
(2010), by Sean Williams (1 BBY)
(A)


====
The Han Solo Adventures (2 BBY) ====
Han Solo at Stars' End (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo's Revenge (1979), by Brian Daley
Han Solo and the Lost Legacy (1980), by Brian Daley


====
Death Troopers ====
Death Troopers (2009), by Joe Schreiber (1 BBY)
(A)


===
Rebellion era ==
=
This era contains stories taking place within five years after the events of Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.

====
Death Star ====
Death Star (2007), by Michael Reaves & Steve Perry (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Shadow Games ====
Shadow Games (2011), by Michael Reaves and Maya Kaathryn Bohnhoff (1 BBY – 0 BBY)


====
Episode IV:
A New Hope ====
====
Rebel Force by Alex Wheeler (0 – 1 ABY) ====
0
ABY
Target (2008)
(Y)
Hostage (2008)
(Y)
Renegade (2009)
(Y)
0.5 ABY
Firefight (2009)
(Y)
Trapped (2010)
(Y)
Uprising (2010) (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Scoundrels
====
Winner Lose All
—A Lando Calrissian Tale (2012), by Timothy Zahn (1-0 BBY) (E)
Scoundrels (2013), by Timothy Zahn (0 ABY)
(A)


====
Galaxy of Fear by John Whitman (0.5 ABY) (Y) ===
=
Eaten
Alive (1997)
City of the Dead (1997)
Planet Plague (1997)
The Nightmare Machine (1997)
Ghost of the Jedi (1997)
Army of Terror (1997)
The Brain Spiders (1997)
The Swarm (1998)
Spore (1998)
The Doomsday Ship (1998)
Clones (1998)
The Hunger (1998)


====
Hand of Judgment (0.5 – 0.8 ABY) ====
Allegiance (2007), by Timothy Zahn (0.5 ABY) (A)
Choices of One (2011), by Timothy Zahn (0.8 ABY)


====
Smuggler's Gambit (0 – 3 ABY) ====
Smuggler's Gambit (2012), by Kyle Newman, F.J. DeSanto (A)


====
Star Wars Galaxies ====
Star Wars Galaxies:
The Ruins of Dantooine (2003), by Voronica Whitney-Robinson & Haden Blackman (1 ABY) (Y)


====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye ====
Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978), by Alan Dean Foster (2 ABY)
(A)


====
Empire and Rebellion (2 – 3 ABY)
(A) ====
Razor's Edge (2013), by Martha Wells (2 ABY)
Honor Among Thieves (2014), by James S. A. Corey (2–3 ABY)


====
The Further Adventures ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

Droid World (1983), by Archie Goodwin (adapter) and Dick Foes (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)
Planet of the Hoojibs (1983), by David Michelinie (adapter) and Greg Winters (illustrator) (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell ====
Vinyl record only, no book.

Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell (1983), by Brian Daley (3 ABY) (Y)


====
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back ====


====
Shadows of the Empire ====
Shadows of the Empire (1996), by Steve Perry (3.5 ABY)
(A)


====
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ====
24-page read-along book with color illustrations accompanied by a 7-inch 33 1/3 record or cassette.

The Ewoks Join the Fight (1983), by Bonnie Bogart (adapter) & Diane de Groat (illustrator) (4 ABY) (Y)


====
Golden Books ====
24-page illustrated children's books by Golden Books

Journey to Mos Eisley (1998), by Jay Rudko (0 BBY) (Y)
The Hoth Adventure (1998), by Jay Rudko (3 ABY)
(Y)
Escape from Jabba's Palace (1998), by Jay Rudko (4 ABY)
(Y)In 2015, the original six Star Wars films were adapted as Little Golden Books.
In 2017, A New Hope was also released as a Big Golden Book.
Additionally, Solo:
A Star Wars Story and the sequel trilogy were adapted.
Many other original titles featuring scenes from throughout the saga have been released, including I Am a Padawan by Ashley Eckstein.
An upcoming release will adapt The Mandalorian.

====
The Bounty Hunter Wars ====
The Mandalorian Armor (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Slave Ship (1998), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)
Hard Merchandise (1999), by K.W. Jeter (0–4 ABY)
(A)


====
The Truce at Bakura ====
The Truce at Bakura (1993), by Kathy Tyers (4 ABY) (A)


===
New Republic era ===
This era takes place from five to 25 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
Dark Forces by William C. Dietz (0 – 5 ABY) ====
Soldier for the Empire (1997) (0 ABY) (Y)
(A)
5 ABY
Rebel Agent (1998)
(Y)
(A)
Jedi Knight (1998)
(Y)
(A)


====
Jedi Prince by Paul & Hollace Davids (5 ABY) ====
The Glove of Darth Vader (1992) (Y)
The Lost City of the Jedi (1992)
(Y)
Zorba the Hutt's Revenge (1992)
(Y)
Mission from Mount Yoda (1993) (Y)
Queen of the Empire (1993) (Y)
Prophets of the Dark Side (1993) (Y)


====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor ====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor (2008), by Matthew Stover (5.5 ABY)
(A)


====
X-wing ====
Rogue Squadron (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY)
(A)
Wedge's Gamble (1996), by Michael Stackpole (6.5 ABY) (A)
The Krytos Trap (1996), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
The Bacta War (1997), by Michael Stackpole (7 ABY)
(A)
Wraith Squadron (1998), by Aaron Allston (7 ABY) (A)
Iron Fist (1998), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Solo Command (1999), by Aaron Allston (7.5 ABY) (A)
Isard's Revenge (1999), by Michael Stackpole (9 ABY)
(A)
Starfighters of Adumar (1999), by Aaron Allston (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Courtship of Princess Leia ====
The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994), by Dave Wolverton (8 ABY) (A)


====
A Forest Apart ====
A Forest
Apart (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY) (E)


====
Tatooine Ghost ====
Tatooine Ghost (2003), by Troy Denning (8 ABY)
(A)


==== Mixed up Droid ====
Mixed up Droid (1995), by Ryder Windham (8 ABY)
(A)


====
The Thrawn Trilogy ====
Heir to the Empire (1991), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
Dark Force Rising (1992), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)
The Last Command (1993), by Timothy Zahn (9 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Empire Trilogy ====
Dark Empire (1991–1992), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY) (A)
Dark Empire II (1994–1995), by Tom Veitch (10 ABY)
(A)
Empire's End (1995), by Tom Veitch (11 ABY) (A)


====
Crimson Empire ====
Crimson Empire (1997), by Mike Richardson, Randy Stradley (11 ABY)
(A)


====
The Jedi Academy Trilogy ====
Jedi Search (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Dark Apprentice (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)
Champions of the Force (1994), by Kevin J. Anderson (11 ABY)
(A)


====
I, Jedi ====
I, Jedi (1998), by Michael Stackpole (11 ABY) (A)


====
The Callista Trilogy ====
Children of the Jedi (1995), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Darksaber (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson (12–13 ABY)
(A)
Planet of Twilight (1997), by Barbara Hambly (12–13 ABY)
(A)


====
The Crystal Star ====
The Crystal Star (1994), by Vonda McIntyre (14 ABY) (A)


====
The Black Fleet Crisis Trilogy ====
Before the Storm (1996), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Shield of Lies (1997), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)
Tyrant's Test (1998), by Michael P. Kube-McDowell (16 ABY)
(A)


====
The New Rebellion ====
The New Rebellion (1996), by Kristine Kathryn Rusch (17 ABY)
(A)


====
The Corellian Trilogy ====
Star Wars Legends:
Ambush at Corellia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Assault at Selonia (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)
Showdown at Centerpoint (1995), by Roger MacBride Allen (18 ABY)
(A)


====
The Hand of Thrawn ====
Specter of the Past (1997), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)
Vision of the Future (1998), by Timothy Zahn (19 ABY)
(A)


====
Scourge ====
Scourge (2012), by Jeff Grubb (19 ABY) (A)


====
Survivor's Quest ====
Fool's Bargain (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY) (E)
Survivor's Quest (2004), by Timothy Zahn (22 ABY)
(A)


====
Junior Jedi Knights ====
The Golden Globe (1995), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Lyric's World (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Promises (1996), by Nancy Richardson (22 ABY) (Y)
Anakin's Quest (1996), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Vader's Fortress (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)
Kenobi's Blade (1997), by Rebecca Moesta (22 ABY) (Y)


====
Young Jedi Knights ====
Heirs of the Force (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shadow Academy (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Lost Ones (1995), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Lightsabers (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Darkest Knight (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Under Siege (1996), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Shards of Alderaan (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Diversity Alliance (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Delusions of Grandeur (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Bounty (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
The Emperor's Plague (1997), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Return to Ord Mantell (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Trouble on Cloud City (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Crisis at Crystal Reef (1998), by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Shadow (Omnibus – Heirs of the Force, Shadow Academy & The Lost Ones) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Jedi Sunrise (Omnibus – Lightsabers, Darkest Knight, & Jedi Under Siege) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)
Under the Black Sun (Omnibus – Return to Ord Mantell, Trouble on Cloud City, & Crisis at Crystal Reef) by Kevin J. Anderson & Rebecca Moesta (23–24 ABY)
(Y)


===
New Jedi Order era ===
This era takes place within 25 to 39 years after Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
====
A Practical Man ====
Boba Fett:
A Practical Man (2006), by Karen Traviss (25 ABY) (E)


====
The New Jedi Order ====
Vector Prime (1999), by R.A. Salvatore (25 ABY) (A)
Dark Tide
I: Onslaught (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Dark Tide II:
Ruin (2000), by Michael Stackpole (25 ABY)
(A)
Agents of Chaos
I: Hero's Trial (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY) (A)
Agents of Chaos II:
Jedi Eclipse (2000), by James Luceno (25 ABY)
(A)
Balance Point (2000), by Kathy Tyers (26 ABY)
(A)
Recovery (2001), by Troy Denning (26 ABY) (E)
Edge of Victory I: Conquest (2001), by Greg Keyes (26 ABY) (A)
Edge of Victory II: Rebirth (2001), by Greg Keyes (27 ABY)
(A)
"Emissary of the Void" (2002), by Greg Keyes (26–27 ABY), serialized epic published in Star Wars Gamer, issues 8–10, and Star Wars Insider, issues
62–64
(A)
Star by Star (2001), by Troy Denning (27 ABY)
(A)
Dark Journey (2002), by Elaine Cunningham (27 ABY)
(A)
Enemy Lines
I: Rebel Dream (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY) (A)
Enemy Lines II: Rebel Stand (2002), by Aaron Allston (27 ABY)(A)
Traitor (2002), by Matthew Stover (27 ABY)
(A)
Destiny's Way (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY)
(A)
Ylesia (2002), by Walter Jon Williams (28 ABY) (E)
Force Heretic
I: Remnant (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic II:
Refugee (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28 ABY)
(A)
Force Heretic III: Reunion (2003), by Sean Williams & Shane Dix (28–29 ABY)
(A)
The Final Prophecy (2003), by Greg Keyes (29 ABY) (A)
The Unifying Force (2003), by James Luceno (29 ABY)
(A)


====
The Dark Nest trilogy ====
The Joiner King (2005), by Troy Denning (35 ABY) (A)
The Unseen Queen (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)
The Swarm War (2005), by Troy Denning (36 ABY) (A)


===
Legacy era ===
This era takes place
40+ years after Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope.
====
Legacy of the Force ====
Betrayal (2006), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Bloodlines (2006), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY)
(A)
Tempest (2006), by Troy Denning (40 ABY) (A)
Exile (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY) (A)
Sacrifice (2007), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Inferno (2007), by Troy Denning (40 ABY)
(A)
Fury (2007), by Aaron Allston (40 ABY)
(A)
Revelation (2008), by Karen Traviss (40 ABY) (A)
Invincible (2008), by Troy Denning (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Crosscurrent ====
Crosscurrent (2010), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)
Riptide (2011), by Paul S. Kemp (41 ABY)
(A)


====
Millennium Falcon ====
Millennium Falcon (2008), by James Luceno (60 BBY, 19 BBY, 10 BBY, 5 BBY, 43 ABY) (A)


====
Fate of the Jedi ====
Outcast (2009), by Aaron Allston (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Omen (2009), by Christie Golden (43.5 ABY) (A)
Abyss (2009), by Troy Denning (43.5 ABY)
(A)
Backlash (2010), by Aaron Allston (44 ABY) (A)
Allies (2010), by Christie Golden (44 ABY)
(A)
Vortex (2010), by Troy Denning (44 ABY) (A)
Conviction (2011), by Aaron Allston (44.5 ABY) (A)
Ascension (2011), by Christie Golden (44.5 ABY)
(A)
Apocalypse (2012), by Troy Denning (44.5 ABY) (A)


====
Crucible ====
Crucible (2013) by Troy Denning (45 ABY)
(A)


===
Short story anthologies ===
These books contain short Star Wars stories from several notable science-fiction authors with stories that span different timelines.

Tales from the Mos Eisley Cantina (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (0–3 ABY) (E)
Tales from Jabba's Palace (1995), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (4 ABY)
Tales of the Bounty Hunters (1996), edited by Kevin J. Anderson (3 ABY)
Tales from the Empire (1997), edited by Peter Schweighofer (Various) (4 ABY)
Tales from the New Republic (1999), edited by Peter Schweighofer and Craig Carey (Various) (4 ABY)
Star Wars:
Science Adventures (1999) were authored by Jude Watson and K.D. Burkett.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (KOTOR) is an RPG video game series, based on an earlier comic book series, and with a subsequent new comic book series, all based on the fictional universe of Star Wars by George Lucas.
The first and third video game installments were developed by BioWare, while the second was done by Obsidian Entertainment per LucasArts' request.
All were published by LucasArts.
Both comic series were published by Dark Horse Comics.
Both series act as prequels to the video games.

With the discarding of the Expanded Universe on April 25, 2014 and rebranding it as Star Wars Legends, KotOR multimedia project is the only remaining source that continues to produce Legends information.

==
Gameplay ==
The game's system is based on Wizards of the Coast's Star Wars Roleplaying Game, which is based on the d20 role-playing game system derived from the Third Edition Dungeons & Dragons rules.
Combat is round-based; time is divided into discrete rounds, and combatants attack and react simultaneously.
However, the number of actions a combatant may perform each round is limited.
While each round's duration is a fixed short interval of real time, the player can configure the combat system to pause at specific events or at the end of each round.

The alignment system tracks actions and speech – from simple word choice to major plot decisions – to determine whether the player's character aligns with the light or dark side of the Force.
In the first game, the player's speech and actions have no effect on their teammates.
However, the player has influence over their companions in The Sith Lords, the player's actions determining not only what side the player is on, but their teammates as well.
The influence the player has on another character can be minor, from converting a character from the dark side to the light, to something as major as teaching them the ways of the Jedi themselves.
Influence can be lost, however, if the player makes an action inconsistent with past decisions, causing the player to pay very close attention before reacting in any way.

==
New introductions ==


===
Characters ===


===
Lightsabers and corresponding classes ===
The KotOR series introduces more than just new characters; it also introduces new lightsaber types and colors, as well as Jedi classes.
The new colors include silver, cyan, and orange.

Along with new lightsabers are new classes:
"Gray Jedi," who tend to follow their own path as far as the Force is concerned rather than obeying the light or dark side.

Lastly, a new type of lightsaber is introduced: the short lightsaber.
This weapon is different from the longer lightsaber as it is easier to wield, making it more suitable for the off (defensive) hand and inflicting less damage.

In MMO
The Old Republic there are eight player classes, each four assigned to one of two faction: Galactic Republic or Sith Empire.
While the Jedi Knight, Jedi Consular, Sith Warrior and Sith Inquisitor are Force-sensitive characters and use lightsabers, the Smuggler, Trooper, Agent and Bounty Hunter are focused on using ranged weapons and require more tactical approach.
Each class has a distinct storyline, and all of them are integrated with the game's overall arc.
Each class may also choose from two advanced classes, resulting in a total of 8 advanced classes per faction.
The advanced classes affect only on gameplay, not storyline.
Lightsaber and blaster colors are not faction or class restricted, but some are restricted based on level and/or Lightside or Darkside alignment.
For example, some lightsabers can only be bought if Light or Darkside aligned.

=== Locations ===
Several new planets make appearances in the series as major locations.
These include, for example, Dantooine and Korriban, the locations for the Jedi Academy and the Sith Academy, respectively; aboard the Star Forge space station where the final battle between master and apprentice takes place in KotOR; and war-ravaged Telos and its orbiting Citadel Station.
Travel between locations happens aboard the freighter Ebon Hawk, which is also a playable location, though no combat takes place on board, except for three instances in KotOR 2 where you have to fight off Sith attackers, the character Visas Marr, and members of the Red Eclipse slavers.
A space station near Yavin is also playable location in the PC version of KotOR and is available to Xbox players via download from Xbox Live.
In The Old Republic, players have access to even more planets, like Ord Mantell, Nal Hutta, Balmorra, Alderaan, Tatooine, Dromund Kaas, Taris, Belsavis, Voss, Hoth, Corellia, Ilum and Quesh, and the moon Nar Shaddaa.

==
Video games ==


===
Synopsis ===
Four thousand years prior to the Star Wars films, Darth Malak – Darth Revan's apprentice – has unleashed a Sith armada against the Republic.
Many Jedi, scattered and left vulnerable by Malak's aggression, die in battle while others swear loyalty and allegiance to Malak.
The game opens with the player's character – whom the player can customize to be either male or female, though the gender is canonically male – awakening aboard a doomed Republic capital ship with no recollection of his past.
After escaping the ship and crash-landing on Taris, the player gradually gathers companions and pieces together his past while attempting to stop Malak's forces.
To accomplish this, the main character and his companions search for Star Maps that together reveal the location of the Star Forge, an ancient space station that creates massive amounts of material for Malak.

The main character's actions and speech influence
whether he aligns with the light or dark side of the Force.
Depending on the character's alignment, he eventually reaches the Star Forge either to defeat the Sith (the light-side path) or to usurp control of the Sith from Malak (the dark-side path).
A light-aligned character and his companions are hailed as saviors and heroes; a dark-side character stands before the remaining Sith forces as the new Sith Lord.

The Sith Lords takes place five years after the events of Knights of the Old Republic, in a time when the Jedi have been nearly exterminated by the Sith.
The player's character – a former Jedi Knight exiled from the Jedi Order.

is referred to as "the Exile" or "Jedi Exile."

During the Mandalorian Wars, the Exile served under Revan who ordered the activation of the devastating mass shadow generator that caused so many deaths to the point where they stripped themself of all connections to the Force unconsciously to save themself, and was removed from the Jedi Order.
Throughout the game, the player's character restores a connection to the Force while, with the help of her new companions, try and stop the Sith.
Unlike the previous game where your actions affect the fate of the galaxy, here your actions affect only the planets you visit.
You can choose to either help or hinder the Republic's attempt to rebuild these planets.
In the end, if the character is light-aligned, the mass shadow generator is activated and destroys Malachor V and the Exile goes into unknown space to find Revan and help him if she can.
A dark-aligned character, however, takes over the Sith academy on Malachor V and the shadow generator is destroyed.

The Old Republic takes place 300 years after the previous two games, shortly after the establishment of a tenuous peace between the re-emergent Sith Empire and the Galactic Republic.
The Jedi are held responsible for the success of the Sith and chose to relocate from Coruscant to Tython, where the Jedi order had been initially founded, to seek guidance from the Force.
The Sith control Korriban, where they re-established a Sith Academy.
The game begins as new conflicts arise.

===
History ===


====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic ====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (often abbreviated as KotOR) is the first installment in the Knights of the Old Republic series.
KotOR is the first computer role-playing game set in the Star Wars universe.
The game was released on the Xbox on July 15, 2003 in North America and on September 12, 2003 in Europe.
The PC version was released on November 19, 2003 in North America and on December 5, 2003 in Europe.
The iOS version was released on May 30, 2013, and an Android release followed on December 28, 2014.

====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords ====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II –
The Sith Lords (KotOR II) is the second installment in the video game franchise.
The game was released on the Xbox in North America on December 6, 2004, in Europe on February 11, 2005, and in Australia on February 15, 2005.
The PC version was released in North America on February 8, 2005 and in Europe on February 11, 2005.
Per request as to have time to deal with other matters, BioWare, the original developer, handed over the job to Obsidian Entertainment.
In addition to technical changes – such as more combat animation and interface scaling – The Sith Lords includes several drastic changes from the original game's features.
As mentioned earlier in the gameplay section, the player's actions now affect not only the player themselves but their teammates as well.
The player can also teach some teammates the ways of the Jedi.
The player also has more diversity when upgrading items, and can even create certain items, such as computer spikes and explosives, themselves.

In a similar way the player's actions and alignment with the light or dark side affects their teammates (both a teammate's alignment and who teams with the player in the first place), gender is also a factor when it comes to companionships and gameplay in general.
In addition the appearance (due to choices) also affects your teammates.
For example, choosing a female character teams the player with Mical the Disciple, while being male teams the player with Brianna the Handmaiden.

====
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic 3 (cancelled) ====
In 2003, LucasArts cancelled the Proteus console MMOG project during its design phase (the game was intended to be an in-house sibling to Star Wars Galaxies).
Upon its cancellation, the Proteus project's team and elements of its designs were applied to developing Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic 3.
According to designer John Stafford, the team "wrote a story, designed most of the environments/worlds, and many of the quests, characters, and items.
"
The game was cancelled as part of cuts initiated in 2004 aimed at positioning LucasArts for future success.
Concept art from the cancelled Knights of the Old Republic 3 project was published in the book Rogue Leaders:
The Story of LucasArts (2008); the artwork includes depictions of Taloraan, Rodia, and a Mandalorian city, as well as a Coruscant vehicle and a new character named Naresha.

====
Star Wars:
The Old Republic ====
On July 17 at E3 2008, Electronic Arts CEO John Riccitiello confirmed a Knights of the Old Republic MMORPG.

On October 6, 2008 LucasArts and BioWare sent an invitation to the press, inviting them to attend the unveiling of their next game on October 21, 2008.
As stated in the invitation: "BioWare and LucasArts invite you to attend the official unveiling of the game that has been rumored about for years.
"
This official unveiling was widely believed to be about Knights of the Old Republic 3 or the much rumored Old Republic era MMO game.
On October 21, Bioware and Lucasarts confirmed their next project was an MMO titled Star Wars: The Old Republic.
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (SWTOR) was released for the Microsoft Windows platform on December 20, 2011 in North America and Europe, and released in Australia on March 1, 2012.
The game was developed by BioWare, who developed the first Knights of the Old Republic game.
It takes place 300 years after the first two installments, as new conflicts arise between the Republic and the Sith Empire.
Players participate in a period of time known as the Cold War in the galaxy, after the First Great Galactic War, which leads into events in the Second Great Galactic War.

The game has received five storyline expansions and two smaller addons focusing on new gameplay mechanics:


=====
Rise of the Hutt Cartel =====
Rise of the Hutt Cartel is the first storyline expansion centered on the rising threat of the Hutt Cartel, which has arisen to challenge the Galactic Republic and the Sith Empire for control of the galaxy.
The level cap was raised to 55, with the leveling from 50 onwards centered on the new planet Makeb.
It was released on April 14, 2013.
It was extended by free gameplay addons:

Galactic Starfighter - which introduces 12v12 space-based PvP combat on two maps, with 2 'capture-the-flag' combat missions.
It was released on February 4, 2014.

Galactic Strongholds - introduced player housing and flagships for guilds.
It was released on October 14, 2014.

=====
Shadow of Revan =====
Shadow of Revan is the second storyline expansion centered on the Order of Revan, an army seeking to establish a new galactic rule, led by the reborn Revan himself.
The campaign raised the level cap to 60, and takes place on two new worlds: Rishi, a tropical pirate haven on the edge of the galaxy, and Yavin 4 (which first appeared in the original Star Wars film), home of an ancient Sith warrior sect called the Massassi.
It was released on December 9, 2014.

====
=
Knights of the Fallen Empire =====
Knights of the Fallen Empire is the third storyline and largest expansion to date, features a renewed focus on cinematic storytelling, as well as new planets, new companions, and a dynamic story affected by player choices.
It focuses on the new threat of the Eternal Empire and its leader, the Emperor of the Eternal Throne.
At Level 60, the player's character is frozen in carbonite and awakens five years later to find that the Eternal Empire has become the dominant force in the galaxy.
The player becomes the "Outlander" and builds an alliance to wage war against the Eternal Empire.
The first nine chapters of Knights of the Fallen Empire were launched on October 27, 2015, with additional chapters starting in early 2016.

=====
Knights of the Eternal Throne =====
Knights of the Eternal Throne is the fourth expansion, set in the aftermath of Fallen Empire events.
It was released on December 2, 2016, in celebration of the game's five-year anniversary.
The story continues on from the previous expansion, Knights of the Fallen Empire, with the Outlander leading the Alliance against the forces of Empress Vaylin.
Eternal Throne also features two new gameplay features, Galactic Command and Uprisings, allowing the player to participate in new battles and expand their influence across the galaxy.

=====
Onslaught =====
Onslaught is a fifth expansion, focusing on the reignited war between the Republic and Sith Empire.
It was released on October 22, 2019.
The player chooses to support the Republic or the Sith Empire.
The Nautolan species is now available to the player.

====
Other games ====
Select characters from the series have also made a non-canon appearance in the mobile turn-based role-playing game Star Wars:
Galaxy of Heroes, released on iOS and Android in November 2015, also published by Electronic Arts.

While most of the game's playable characters come from the 2012 mainstream Star Wars continuity that Lucasfilm established under The Walt Disney Company, several characters from the Knights of the Old Republic series are also included, mostly due to Electronic Arts being responsible for both Heroes and Knights.

All new players are given a Jedi Consular who wields a green lightsaber and has the ability to heal.

==
Comics ==
The original Star Wars: Tales of the Jedi (and specifically Star Wars: Tales of the Jedi - Knights of the Old Republic)
comic book series preceded these games, first published in 1993 by Dark Horse Comics.

They formed the basis for the game setting, as well as inspiration for the game characters and story.

The second Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic comic book series takes places around 3964 BBY, the Sith era, approximately eight years prior to the story of the video game series.
The publisher and publishing company for all issues are Mike Richardson and Dark Horse Comics, respectively.
Art work was done by Brian Ching, while the series’ script was done by John Jackson Miller.
Each issue was released monthly.

===
Synopsis of the 2006 Comic Series ===
Zayne Carrick, a young Padawan training at the Jedi Academy on Taris, is given one last chance at capturing a notorious Snivvian smuggler Marn "Gryph" Hierogryph, which will allow him to be promoted to Jedi Knight at the academy graduation ceremony the very same day.
After numerous hurdles along the way, Zayne manages to capture Gryph, but is late to the graduation ceremony.
Upon arriving back at the academy, Zayne is horrified to find the Jedi Masters, his own included, standing before the slain corpses of his fellow Padawans.
Instinctively, he flees from the scene with Gryph and the two are soon framed for the murders.
With no other option, Zayne must now learn the ins and outs of being an outlaw, with Gryph as his mentor, hoping to stay alive long enough to clear his name and discover the reason why the Jedi Masters murdered the academy students.

===
List of the 2006 Comic Series ===
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Commencement is the first story arc in the comic book series.
The arc consists of six issues; the first issue was released on January 25, 2006, while the last was released on June 28, 2006.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Flashpoint is the second story arc in the comic book series.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Reunion is the third story arc in the comic book series.
The arc consists of two issues, the first issue released on December 27, 2006 and the second released on January 10, 2007.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Crossroads is a comic flip-book included in the Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic/Rebellion 25¢ flip-book, released on March 1, 2006.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Days of Fear is a fourth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Nights of Anger is a fifth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Daze of Hate is a sixth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Knights of Suffering is a seventh story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Vector is an eighth story arc in KotOR comic book series and first story arc in standalone crossover storyline Star Wars: Vector.
The storyline proceeded from Knights of the Old Republic, to Dark Times, then to Rebellion, and finally to Legacy.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Exalted is a ninth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Turnabout is a tenth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Vindication is an eleventh story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Prophet Motive is a twelfth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Faithful Execution is a thirteenth story arc.

Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic - Dueling Ambitions is a fourteenth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Masks is a fifteenth story arc.

Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic -
The Reaping is a sixteenth story arc.

Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic - Destroyer is a seventeenth story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - Demon is an eighteenth and final story arc.

Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic - War is  a standalone miniseries story arc, set after Demon.

==
Novel ==
Revan is a novel released by author and lead writer of Knights of the Old Republic, Drew Karpyshyn.
It is focused on the time period between the first and second games and that which follows the second.
Promoted as revealing the fate of series protagonist Revan, the novel also reveals the death of the hero of the next game in the series, the Jedi Exile.
It then has Revan defeated and imprisoned in stasis by the Sith Emperor.
Novel serves as a bridge between The Sith Lords and The Old Republic and also provides a backstory for the events of the first game.

Others novels in the series include Star Wars: The Old Republic: Deceived,
Star Wars:
The Old Republic:
Fatal Alliance and  Star Wars:
The Old Republic: Annihilation.

== Reception ==
The general critical response of Knights of the Old Republic was overwhelmingly positive.
KotOR won numerous awards, including Game Developers Choice Awards' game of the year, BAFTA Games Awards' best Xbox game of the year, and Interactive Achievement Awards for best console RPG and best computer RPG.
KotOR has seen success as the game of the year from many sources including IGN, GameSpot, Computer Gaming World, PC Gamer, GMR Magazine, The Game Developers Choice Awards, Xbox Magazine, and G4TV.

Interactive Achievement Awards awarded it for best story and best character development.
IGN gave KotOR additional awards in Best Sound (Xbox category), Best Story (PC category), Xbox RPG Game of the Year 2003, PC RPG Game of the Year 2003, Xbox Game of the Year 2003, PC Game of the Year 2003, and Overall Game of the Year 2003 across all platforms.
G4TV's game review show X-Play picked KotOR as the second "best game ever" since the show began.
The game is also part of the Xbox Platinum Series/Classics for sales in excess of one million units.
In 2007, a story twist within the game was ranked number two in Game Informer's list of the top ten video game twists of all time.
The Sith Lords was generally well received by fans and critics alike.
Mirroring the success of the first game, The Sith Lords has garnered over thirty-five "Game of the Year" awards.
The game received high marks from major reviewers - 8.5/10 from GameSpot, 4.5/5 from Gamespy and 93% from IGN.
Based on 30 professional reviews, Metacritic gave the game an average rating of 85 out of 100, compared 93 for Knights of the Old Republic.
The game was however criticized for being incomplete due to a rushed deadline.
The Old Republic has received generally positive reviews from critics, with a score of 85 on Metacritic and an 83.87% on GameRankings.
G4TV gave a review of 5/5 and praised the game for "Top notch music and voice acting" and "hundreds of hours of content.
"
PC Gamer gave a 93/100, praising the story, voice acting, and the amount of content available.
Gamespy gave a review of 4/5, praising the story lines and companion system but criticising the "standard kill and fetch" quests.
GameSpot gave the game 8.0/10, saying "[The Old Republic] isn't the next step in online role-playing games.
Instead, it's a highly entertaining refinement of what has come before it."
GamesRadar gave the game 8/10 calling it "an extremely satisfying experience that sets the stage for a bright future".
The game has received a 9.0/10 "Amazing" rating from IGN.com.
== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Smith, Rob (2008).
Rogue Leaders:
The Story of LucasArts.
San Francisco, CA:
Chronicle Books.
ISBN 978-0-8118-6184-7.
==
External links ==
BioWare's Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic site
TheForce.net editorial about game problems
Gamespy editorial on the storyline
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic 0: Crossroads on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Official CargoBay comic listing
Kanan Jarrus (born Caleb Dume) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr.
He is featured as one of the main characters in the animated series Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018) and related works.
Kanan also appears as a disembodied voice in the film
The Rise of Skywalker (2019), while a young Caleb Dume makes appearances in the seventh season of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (released in 2020) and Star Wars: The Bad Batch (2021).

In the Star Wars universe, Kanan is a Jedi Padawan who survived the Great Jedi Purge after his master, Depa Billaba, sacrificed herself to save him.
From that point onwards, Kanan lived most of his life on the run, hiding from the Galactic Empire, before eventually meeting Hera Syndulla and joining the Ghost crew as its de facto leader.
Although he initially keeps his Force abilities hidden from his comrades, he re-embraces his Jedi role after meeting Ezra Bridger, whom he begins training in the Jedi arts, while also attempting to complete his own training and become a Jedi Knight.
Later, Kanan and his crew join the Rebel Alliance to assist them in their fight against the Empire.
While Kanan ultimately sacrifices himself to save his friends, his legacy lives on through their memories of him, as well as his and Hera's son, Jacen Syndulla.

Kanan's character was received positively by fans and critics, and has been highlighted as one of the better aspects of Rebels.

== Creation and development ==


===
Concept ===
Executive producer Dave Filoni describes the character as a "cowboy Jedi".
Animation supervisor Keith Kellogg said: "He is a Jedi
but he's not a Jedi in the traditional sense that we've had before on the show.
He's a little more rough around the edges.
He's kept his lightsaber locked away, so he hasn't used it in a long time."
After being blinded, Kanan has been compared to the Star Wars Legends character Rahm Kota from Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed, another blinded Jedi, which led Pablo Hidalgo from the Lucasfilm story group to say on Twitter that both characters were inspired by Zatoichi.
Filoni compared Kanan to Gandalf from Lord of the Rings.

Prior to auditioning, Prinze Jr. was unaware that he was about to audition for a Star Wars series; he only learned of this immediately beforehand in the studio parking lot, when a unknown "legendary voice actor" informed him what he was actually auditioning for.
Although Disney originally did not want Prinze Jr. in the role, Filoni disagreed.
Prinze Jr. was officially hired later that day.
During the development of the second season, the character was originally slated to be killed by Maul in the episode "Twilight of the Apprentice."
However, Disney objected to the idea, as they thought that the character should be in "every episode" of the series.
In regards to the character's eventual death in the episode "Jedi Night" of the fourth season of Star Wars Rebels, Filoni felt this was a natural end to Kanan promising he will see Hera again before being blinded and said: "In that moment he's not bound as this material thing that the physicality of sight would be a limitation to him."
While sketching storyboards for Kanan's death, Filoni became reluctant to kill the character, but Prinze, who "was resolute about the fact that his character needed to die" since the beginning of the series, encouraged him to write the scene.

===
Voice acting ===
Kanan is voiced by Freddie Prinze Jr. in Star Wars Rebels, Star Wars:
Episode IX -
The Rise of Skywalker, and the episode "Aftermath" of Star Wars: The Bad Batch, and by Michael Benyaer in the micro-series Lego Star Wars: Droid Tales.
==
Appearances ==


===
Animated series ===


====
The Clone Wars ====
A young Caleb Dume makes a cameo appearance in the episode "Old Friends Not Forgotten" of the final season of The Clone Wars, where he is shown as a hologram alongside his master, Depa Billaba, during a meeting with other Jedi.

====
The Bad Batch ====
A young Caleb appears alongside Depa Billaba in the premiere episode of The Bad Batch, "
Aftermath".
While on a misson with the Bad Batch on Kaller, Order 66 is activated and Billaba is killed by clone troopers while Hunter, the leader of the Bad Batch, lets Caleb escape.
The events depicted here directly contradict Kanan's backstory shown in his self-titled comic book series.

====
Rebels ====
Kanan first appears in a short film released prior to the series, "The Machine in the Ghost", and his voice is heard in another one,
"Entanglement".
In the two-part series premiere "Spark of Rebellion", Kanan is introduced as the de facto leader of the crew of the Ghost, a Rebel starship, who mostly operate on their own and try to survive.
Although he never finished his own Jedi training, Kanan sees great potential in young Ezra Bridger of Lothal, and decides to train him as his own Padawan.
In the season 1 finale "Fire Across the Galaxy", Kanan, who was captured by the Empire, is rescued by Ezra.
Kanan then fights and defeats the Grand Inquisitor, before he and the rest of the Ghost crew are invited into the Rebel Alliance, now that the Empire has become aware of the threat they represent.
In "The Siege of Lothal", the two-part premiere of season 2, Kanan survives an encounter with Darth Vader, while in "The Lost Commanders", he initially finds it difficult to trust the clone trooper Captain Rex, because clones had murdered his master, Depa Bilaba, as well as most other Jedi, in obedience to Order 66.
In "Shroud of Darkness", Kanan is promoted to the rank of Jedi Knight following a series of adventures in the Jedi Temple on Lothal.
In "Twilight of the Apprentice", the two-part finale of season 2, Kanan travels with Ezra, Ahsoka Tano, and the astromech droid Chopper to the Sith world of Malachor in hopes of finding the knowledge they need to defeat the Sith.
There, they encounter the former Sith Lord Maul, posing as a frail hermit, who has been left stranded on the planet for years.
Though seemingly friendly at first, as he helps the three Jedi defeat a trio of Imperial Inquisitors, Maul ultimately betrays them and escapes after blinding Kanan with his lightsaber.
In season 3, a Force-sensitive creature called the Bendu mentors Kanan in the ways of Force-sight.
Kanan still participates in Rebel missions, with his mastery of the Force compensating for his blindness, but he takes a less active role in leadership.
In the two-part episode "Ghosts of Geonosis", Kanan meets Saw Gerrera, the leader of an independent Rebel group, much like the Ghost crew prior to joining the Rebel Alliance.
In "Trials of the Darksaber", Kanan trains Sabine Wren in lightsaber combat.
Season 4 portrays Kanan and Hera as being in a relationship, and at some point they conceive a child together.
However, Kanan soon dies in the episode "Jedi Night" while rescuing Hera from Imperial captivity.
He regains his eyesight moments before being consumed in an explosion, after containing the blast long enough for Hera and the rest of their group to escape harm.

Despite his death, Kanan makes minor appearances in most of the remaining episodes.
In "Wolves and A Door", while passing through the hyper tunnel on Loth-wolves, the remaining Spectres see several illusions of Kanan and hear his voice, like many others, such as the Grand Inquisitor, Hera, Ezra, Ahsoka and Zeb.
He appears later on in the same episode in Hera's imagination.
She imagines him as a Force ghost comforting her.
In the following episode, "A World Between Worlds", Kanan's voice is heard in the World Between Worlds by both Ezra and Ahsoka multiple times, until he finally appears through a portal.
Ezra makes up his mind to save him and goes to the portal that depicts Kanan's final moments.
Ahsoka stops Ezra from saving Kanan, because then they would all die and because he had found the moment when he was needed most and did what he had to do for everyone.
Though reluctant to do so, Ezra ultimately lets the blast consume Kanan.
The ending of the series finale "Family Reunion and Farewell", set after the Battle of Endor, shows both Kanan and Hera's young son Jacen Syndulla, and a mural on Lothal painted by Sabine, which depicts the Ghost crew, including Kanan.

====
Forces of Destiny ====
Kanan is briefly mentioned by Ezra in the episode "A Disarming Lesson".
===
Film ===


====
The Rise of Skywalker ====
Kanan is heard in The Rise of Skywalker as one of the Jedi spirits who help Rey defeat Palpatine.
He tells Rey that "In the heart of a Jedi lies her strength."
===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met.
===
Comics ===
The comic-book Kanan ran for 12 issues and was published by Marvel Comics, the  series is set during the events of the first season of Star Wars Rebels and focuses on Kanan Jarrus having flashbacks to his time as a Jedi Padawan (when he was known by his real name Caleb Dume).
Two story arcs were produced each ran for six issues, the first arc, The Last Padawan, focused on flashbacks which occur around the same time as Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, showing where Kanan was during Order 66.
The flashbacks of the second arc, First Blood, focused on how Kanan was assigned under Depa Billaba's mentorship, as well as his first battle alongside clone troopers during the Clone Wars.
It features an appearance from Rae Sloane, a character from the novel Star Wars: A New Dawn, as well as one from Fenn Rau, a Mandalorian character who would later appear in Rebels.

===
Lego ===


====
Lego Star Wars: Droid Tales ====
Kanan appears in the Lego Star Wars:
Droid Tales episode "Mission to Mos Eisley", which adapts his role in the Rebels first season episode "Droids in Distress".
===
Video games ===
Kanan also appears as a playable character in several Star Wars video games, as described below:


====
First half of the series ====
The following games depict Kanan as he appeared during the first two seasons of Rebels.

Kanan is a premium character in the now-defunct game Star Wars Rebels:
Recon Missions, released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android and Windows Store, a side-scrolling, run-and-gun platform game.

He has the ability to deflect blaster bolts from a stationary position.

Kanan is represented as Chuck, the yellow bird in Angry Birds Star Wars II, in its Rebels level set.

Kanan is a collectible add-on character for the toys-to-life video game Disney Infinity 3.0.

Kanan is one of the several bonus characters available as downloadable content for Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, as part of the Star Wars Rebels character pack.

====
Second half of the series ====
The following games depict Kanan as he appeared at the start of the third season, in which he is coping with the loss of his sight.

Kanan appears in the mobile MOBA Star Wars:
Force Arena as a summonable unique assistant for any Light Side squad led by Ezra Bridger, and was available on the game's initial launch in early 2017.

Kanan is a collectible, playable character added to the mobile turn-based role-playing game Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes in a special Rebels-themed update during the game's second year of operation.

He is classified as a tank that disrupts enemy offense, taunts and grants protection to allies.

==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
O'Neil, Shana. "
Ranking Rebels: 5 Highlights from "Jedi Night"".
www.starwars.com.

==
External links ==
Kanan Jarrus in the StarWars.com Databank
Kanan Jarrus on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Finn (Designation FN-2187) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise.

The character first appeared in the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens as a First Order stormtrooper who, shocked by the Order's cruelty in his first combat mission, flees and joins forces with Rey and later the Resistance.
He is portrayed by English actor John Boyega, who reprised the role in Star Wars: The Last Jedi and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker.
Boyega's performance and the character have received praise.
For his performance in The Force Awakens, Boyega won the BAFTA Rising Star Award, and was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor.

==
Casting and creation ==
The idea for the character, whose name during early pre-production was Sam, came from screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan.
Colleague Michael Arndt, who prepared an early draft of The Force Awakens, said:
And then we were struggling to figure out who the male lead was going to be.
I remember we talked about pirates and merchant marines and all this stuff, and finally Larry [Kasdan] got pissed at all of us
and he's just like, "
You guys, you're not thinking big.
What if he's a stormtrooper that ran away?"

For the roles of Finn and other new Star Wars characters for The Force Awakens, director J. J. Abrams intentionally looked for unknown actors, as he wanted audiences "to meet these characters [in the film] and not feel like it’s him from that thing
, it’s her from that thing.
"
Boyega, who had impressed Abrams in his debut role in British sci-fi film Attack the Block (2011), was invited to audition for the role of Finn, a process which lasted seven months before he was finally cast.
Kathleen Kennedy, one of the producers of The Force Awakens, stated: John Boyega was somebody we'd known of because of Attack the Block.
And we'd been sort of putting him on the top of our list right from the beginning.
But, then again, we went on a massive search just to see who was out there, and we kept coming back to realizing that John would be the perfect Finn.

Finn's stormtrooper code name, FN-2187, is a reference to the number of the cell in which Princess Leia was detained in the original 1977 film Star Wars. "
Cell 2187", in turn, references Arthur Lipsett's short film 21-87.Abrams stated that it was intentional that Finn was given no last name in promotional materials for The Force Awakens, suggesting that his full name and background would be revealed in future films.
However, the film itself revealed that "Finn" is an adopted name, derived from his stormtrooper number.

In 2021 whilst promoting the film Cherry, Marvel Cinematic Universe actor Tom Holland revealed he had also auditioned for the role of Finn before Boyega was cast.

==
Appearances ==


===
The Force Awakens ===
Finn, originally designated "FN-2187", is an ex-First Order stormtrooper who served under Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) and Kylo Ren (Adam Driver).
He was taken from his family at a young age and sold to the First Order to become a part of their ever-expanding army.
He was trained for most his life to be an effective, loyal, and merciless soldier.

In spite of his training, Finn becomes disillusioned with the First Order during his first combat mission on the planet Jakku.
He is traumatized when a fellow stormtrooper dies in front of him, and is later horrified when Ren, having failed to secure the map that will lead to the missing Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), orders his squadron to massacre a village of Jakku civilians.
The other stormtroopers follow Ren's order without hesitation.
Finn, however, lowers his weapon, aghast, in a silent but firm refusal.
While on Jakku, Phasma and Ren both notice Finn's inability to kill, and Phasma later instructs him to report for reconditioning to better follow her orders.
Instead of heeding her word, Finn resolves to flee the First Order, and convinces the captured Resistance pilot Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) to aid him in his escape.

With Poe piloting a stolen TIE fighter, the two escape from aboard the Finalizer—the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer where Poe was being held prisoner.
While piloting, Poe dubs FN-2187 "Finn" (from the "FN" in his designation), which the otherwise nameless stormtrooper embraces.
Moments after, their TIE fighter is shot down by the Finalizer's turrets and crash-lands back on Jakku.
When Finn comes to, he searches for Poe in the wreckage, but is only able to find the pilot's jacket before the shattered hull of their ship is swallowed by an enormous sinkhole.
Finn assumes that Poe is dead.
Alone, Finn decides to search for civilization, and dons Poe's jacket in place of his own stormtrooper armor.

Poe's astromech droid BB-8, now in the care of the junk scavenger Rey (Daisy Ridley), recognizes the jacket that Finn is wearing belongs to Poe.
Rey assumes Finn to be a member of the Resistance after mentioning that BB-8 has a partially completed map leading to Luke.
Finn goes along with her mistaken assumption, hoping that she will help him get BB-8 to the Resistance.
The three of them escape the First Order on the Millennium Falcon with help from Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew).
Han takes them to his friend Maz Kanata (Lupita Nyong’o) on Takodana, who promises to take them to the Resistance.
Finn decides to continue to flee the galactic conflict, but changes his mind when the First Order launches a preemptive strike on the capital of the New Republic and Ren's forces find them and take Rey prisoner.

Finn flies to the Resistance base, where he discovers that Poe is still alive and meets General Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher), C-3PO (Anthony Daniels), and the hibernating R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Finn reveals some details about the First Order's superweapon, Starkiller Base, and claims to be able to disable their shields.
When he arrives on the planet with Han and Chewbacca, however, Finn reveals that he only worked in the base's sanitation section.
Nevertheless, the team takes Phasma hostage and Finn forces her at gunpoint to disable the shields.
This allows the Resistance to attack, led by Poe.
They meet up with Rey, who has freed herself from captivity.
Later, Finn watches in horror with the others as Ren kills Han.
Ren confronts Finn and Rey in the woods, claiming that their fight is not over.
Finn picks up Luke’s old lightsaber after Rey is knocked out by Ren and tries to fight him, but Ren easily overpowers him and knocks him unconscious.
Rey stops Ren from killing Finn, and she and Chewbacca escape Starkiller Base in the Millennium Falcon and bring the comatose Finn to the Resistance base for medical care.

==== Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Finn is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Finn is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0, voiced by Boyega.

===
The Last Jedi ===
Finn awakens from his coma aboard the main Resistance cruiser, and immediately demands to know where Rey is, learning that Leia has a beacon that will lead Rey back to her when necessary.
Later, following the attack on the cruiser that killed most of the Resistance's main leadership and rendered Leia unconscious, Finn takes the beacon and attempts to board an escape pod in the hopes of keeping both himself and Rey out of danger.
Before he can board the pod, he is found by Rose Tico (Kelly Marie Tran), a maintenance worker whose sister Paige, a bomber for the Resistance, has recently died in an attack on the First Order.
Seeing Finn trying to escape, Rose stuns him and intends to turn him in for desertion, but stops when Finn tells her that the First Order has found a way to track the cruiser through lightspeed.
She tells Finn that she might be able to disable the tracker, and Finn says that, having worked aboard a Star Destroyer, he would be able to find where the tracker is.
Rose and Finn run their plan by Poe, who contacts Kanata for help, but she claims that she is too busy and instructs them to find a "master code breaker" in a casino in Canto Bight, a resort city on planet Cantonica.
Operating against acting Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo’s
(Laura Dern) wishes, Finn and Rose, along with BB-8, steal a ship and go to Canto Bight.

Finn is initially entranced by the lavish lifestyle of the casino, but becomes disillusioned when Rose tells him that most of the people there have become wealthy by dealing arms to the First Order.
While they find the master code breaker, they are unable to recruit him as they are arrested and jailed for a parking violation.
In their cell they meet DJ (Benicio Del Toro), a thief and codebreaker who offers to help them; they refuse, but he nonetheless breaks them out of their cell.
Finn and Rose escape from the prison, where they set free a horde of horse-like racing creatures called Fathiers, escaping atop one of them.
Outside the casino they are greeted by BB-8 and DJ, having stolen a ship together.
DJ agrees to help them, despite Finn’s misgivings.
Eventually, Finn, Rose, and DJ arrive aboard the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy and disguise themselves as First Order officers; Finn finds the location of the tracker and DJ breaks them in, but before Rose is able to disable the tracker they are caught by Phasma.
Upon being captured, DJ, having overheard the Resistance's plan of escaping to Crait via transports, secretly tells the First Order of the plans in exchange for money and his freedom, and Finn and Rose are to be executed.
Before they are, Holdo rams the Resistance cruiser into Supreme Leader Snoke’s
(Andy Serkis) flagship at lightspeed, damaging the ship and sending it into chaos.
Finn has a one-on-one fight with Phasma, ending with him proudly declaring himself "rebel scum" before Phasma falls to her demise.
BB-8, aboard a First Order AT-ST, rescues Finn and Rose from Stormtroopers and the three of them very narrowly escape to Crait aboard a damaged shuttle.

As the First Order prepares an attack on the formerly abandoned Rebel base on Crait, Finn recognizes the weaponry that they plan to use to destroy the blast doors and leads a small strike on the First Order with the intention of disabling the cannon.
The attack goes poorly, and Poe orders all fighters to retreat, but Finn is determined to destroy the cannon and flies directly into the blast, planning to sacrifice himself to defeat the First Order.
At the last second, Rose stops him by ramming her speeder into his, pushing him out of the blast.
Finn asks her why she stopped him, and she tells him that wars are won "not by fighting what we hate, but saving what we love;" she then kisses him before falling unconscious.
Finn brings her body back to the Rebel base and summons a medic for her.
When Luke appears on Crait, Finn's first instinct is to send forces to help him, but Poe realizes that Luke is stalling to give the Resistance time to escape.
Finn and Poe lead the Resistance off the planet.
Finn finally reunites with Rey, and embraces her before boarding the Millennium Falcon.
Finn is last seen putting a blanket over the still unconscious Rose.

====
Related works and merchandising ====
Finn is a playable Hero in Star Wars Battlefront II, voiced by Boyega.
He was added through the DLC of The Last Jedi.
Finn's outfit in The Rise of Skywalker update.
===
The Rise of Skywalker ===
Finn, along with Poe, intercepts a message from a First Order mole that Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has come back to life and is planning an attack on the Resistance and the New Republic in the form of the Final Order, a massive fleet of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal.
Finn then leaves along with Rey, Poe, C-3PO, and Chewbacca to the desert planet of Pasaana, where with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams)
they locate a dagger that contains a clue to a Sith wayfinder, a compass to the Sith planet Exegol.
Throughout the whole journey, Finn clearly has something he wants to tell Rey, but is unable to find the time to tell her.
Their journey takes them to Kijimi, where the location of the wayfinder is extracted from C-3PO's memory files, and later to the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast, where Finn and Poe go to rescue Chewbacca, who was taken by the First Order.
In the process, Finn and Poe are captured by Stormtroopers and set to be executed, but they are rescued by General Hux (Domnhall Gleeson), who reveals that he is the mole.
Going free, Finn and Poe rescue Rey aboard the Millennium Falcon and head to the Endor system, where the wayfinder is located among the wreckage of the second Death Star.

On Kef Bir, they encounter a group allied with the Resistance, led by a woman named Jannah (Naomi Ackie).
Finn gets to know Jannah, who reveals that she and the entire settlement on Kef Bir are former Stormtroopers who mutinied after a battle.
Finn tells her that he left the Order as well, and suggests that the Force brought them together and caused them all to leave the Order.
Finn and Jannah follow Rey aboard the wreckage to try and stop her from confronting Ren, but she does so and nearly kills him before healing him and leaving aboard Ren's ship.
Without Rey or the wayfinder, Finn, Poe, and Jannah return to the Resistance base, where they learn that Leia has died.
Poe is named Acting General, and Poe appoints Finn as Co-General.

Finn learns of Exegol's whereabouts based on Rey's transmissions, and he and Poe lead a strike against the Sith Eternal forces, with Finn and Jannah specifically leading a ground attack on the surface of the Steadfast to take out their navigation.
As the attack nears its end, Finn and Jannah are left on the surface of the damaged Resurgent Star Destroyer, but are ultimately rescued by Lando and Chewbacca in the Millennium Falcon and the rest of the Resistance fleet; Finn attributes his faith in his being rescued to a belief in the Force.
Following the successful attack, Finn celebrates among the Rebels on the Resistance base, reuniting with Rey and Poe.

===
The Lego Star Wars Holiday Special ===
Finn, having revealed what he was going to tell Rey to be of his own realization of being Force sensitive, is now training under her as her Jedi Padawan.
Rey accidentally hurts Finn's feelings during a training session, making Finn use a wooden toy lightsaber instead of her own.
Rey seeks out a path leading her to the World Between Worlds, allowing her to travel through time.
Meanwhile, Finn plans for Life Day celebrations with Poe, Jannah, Rose and Lando, as they await the arrival of Chewbacca's family.
During her travels, Rey learns from Yoda's ghost that patience and understanding is an important part of teaching a Padawan; Finn is shown to have prevented the Life Day tree from falling by using his wooden lightsaber.
When Rey returns home, she allows Finn to slice the Life Day roast with her lightsaber.
By mistake, Finn slices all the way through the table, but Rey reassures him that she'll help him get better.

==
Character ==
When asked about Finn's character traits, Boyega replied, I think the element of having to step up to a bigger calling, when your circumstances don't particularly reflect that.
Because I'm young, at the beginning of my life; you haven't really achieved much, and then you have to do that whole adulthood thing, get responsible,
work and all of that stuff, no more mommy and daddy taking care of things.
I feel like it's the same kind of journey that Finn has when he leaves the First Order.
He leaves a curriculum, he leaves a system and embarks on his own journey.
He also noted that initially "most of his decisions are based on adrenaline.
Like, 'Okay, you know what?
I'm just going to get this blaster and run away.'

" Boyega further noted that "[n]ot only is the character in over his head and someone who is just dropped into an extraordinary circumstance, the scenes and the script prove that
and it's not a problem that can just be erased.
"Finn was originally going to be accompanied to Canto Bight by Poe in The Last Jedi, but writer/director Rian Johnson found the storyline flat when he realized their dialogue was interchangeable.
This led to the creation of the character Rose Tico, who would challenge and contrast with Finn.
In The Rise of Skywalker, Finn tries to tell Rey something which he does not want to say in front of Poe, but this thread is never resolved within the film.
This was implied to involve him confessing he loved her, but Boyega denied this on Twitter.
The novelization of the film reveals that Finn is Force-sensitive, implying this to be what he intended to tell Rey.
Abrams later confirmed that Finn was indeed Force-sensitive shortly after the film's premiere.
The novelization also states that Rey believes this as well, speculating on the kind of Jedi he could become.

== Reception ==
The character and Boyega's portrayal were praised; reviewer Jamie Graham wrote, "of the new triangle of characters, Boyega brings intensity and surprisingly honed comic timing."
Reviewers also praised Finn's relationships with the other characters: The dynamic between Rey and Finn is something new for Star Wars, with her bright-eyed heroism complementing Boyega's roguish wit...
Gone is the clunky dialogue of the prequels—instead, it's replaced by some seriously clever writing that often leads to nice little moments, many with Han and Finn.
Drew McWeeny of HitFix notes, "Boyega has this great combination of self-interested fear and reluctant heroism that he plays beautifully, and he charts Finn's evolution as a person expertly here."
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described the character as "bracingly comic and cunning".
Robbie Collin writes that Boyega has a "(very funny) half-brave, half-anxious, would-be-heroic schtick" and notes that despite being "brave, charming, and funny", Finn "only wants to be thought of as the daring freedom-fighter
he's not quite sure he's cut out to be."
Some reviewers were less than positive, however.
Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that "Boyega's Finn is the new movie's one weak link, a character who vacillates between noble impulses and cowardice until our interest drops away.
The performance is fine
but it's just fine, with little of the iconic bite a Wagnerian cartoon like this needs.
"The
character was also subject to racist reactions by some fans online, to which Boyega responded, "I'm not going to lose sleep over people."
After the first trailer premiered, Boyega responded to critics with, "To whom it may concern ...
Get used to it", and further commented that, "All the films I've done have had a secret commentary on stereotypical mentalities.
It's about getting people to drop a prejudiced state of mind and realise, 'Oh shit we're just watching normal people.'
"
In response to those who desired to boycott the film over their disagreements with the existence of a black stormtrooper, Boyega replied, "I'm proud of my heritage, and no man can take that away from me.
I wasn't raised to fear people with a difference of opinion.
They are merely victims of a disease in their mind.
"In
2016, Boyega was nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Finn.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Finn in the StarWars.com Databank
Finn on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Finn on IMDb
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D CGI animated television series produced by Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation.
Beginning fourteen years after Revenge of the Sith and five years before A New Hope, Rebels takes place during an era when the Galactic Empire is securing its grip on the galaxy.
Imperial forces are hunting down the last of the Jedi Knights while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is taking form.

The series was previewed throughout August 2014 with a set of shorts introducing the main characters before the television film pilot episode premiered on Disney Channel on October 3, 2014.
The regular series premiered on Disney XD on October 13, 2014.
The second season started on June 20, 2015, and the third season premiered on September 24, 2016.
The two-part season three finale aired on March 25, 2017.
On March 31, it was announced that the show would return for a fourth season.
On April 15, executive producer Dave Filoni announced that the fourth season would also be the final season.
On September 2, 2017, a second trailer for season four was released during a panel at Fan Expo in Canada, and the date for the season's premiere was announced as October 16, 2017.

Season 4 premiered on October 16, 2017, with the two-part episode "Heroes of Mandalore", and continued to air until November 13, 2017.
The series picked up on February 19, 2018, after a winter break and preparations for the release of the film Star Wars: The Last Jedi.
Disney XD then proceeded to release two episodes a week, before airing the final two episodes on March 5, 2018.
A total of 75 episodes were aired.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Shorts (2014) ===


===
Season 1 (2014–15) ===


===
Season 2
(2015–16) ===


===
Season 3 (2016–17) ===


===
Season 4 (2017–18) ===


==
References ==
The Alliance to Restore the Republic, more commonly known as the Rebel Alliance,  the Rebellion or simply the Rebels, is a fictional stateless interstellar coalition of republican dissidents, revolutionary factions and anti-imperialist clandestine cell systems in a resistance movement against the imperialist Galactic Empire.
The Alliance's goal is to restore the Galactic Republic.
It is the main protagonist faction of the original Star Wars trilogy, parallel to the mostly fallen Jedi Order survived by Obi-Wan Kenobi, Yoda, and later Luke Skywalker.

As a direct reactionary movement to the formation of the Empire, the Rebel insurgency conducted covert operations on Imperial garrison-worlds and utilized a stateless strategy in conjunction with  wolfpack-guerrilla warfare against the Imperial Fleet throughout the galaxy.
Capital ships had no place in the Rebellion; they are expensive to build, maintain, and to keep fully crewed.
The Rebellion was far too limited in both manpower and resources to justify putting so much of both into a giant target.
When the Galactic Empire is capable of always fielding greater numbers and greater firepower, being able to hit high-valued targets and get out is much more important.
While the Empire considers all dissent and rebellion as acts of extremism and terrorism in Imperial propaganda, the Alliance is described and portrayed in various Star Wars media as a group of resilient freedom fighters, based on tolerance, self-empowerment, and hope for a better future using insurgency weapons and tactics.

The Rebel Alliance was first featured as the main protagonist-faction in the films Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The faction's origins were alluded to in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005), and their early activities are featured in the Disney XD television series Rebels and the anthology film Rogue One (2016).

== Depiction ==


===
Origins ===


====
Founding members ====
Senator Mon Mothma – Co-founder; current commander-in-chief
Senator Bail Organa – Co-founder; early constituting member and head of the Alliance Council
Died during Episode IV:
A New Hope, when the Death Star destroys Alderaan
Senator Padmé Amidala – Co-founder; early constituting member.
She died a few days after founding the Alliance.
(
While the scene from Revenge of the Sith was deleted from the film, the information was affirmed by other official sources.)Died during Episode III: Revenge of the Sith while giving birth to twins Luke and Leia; the latter was adopted by Organa.

====
Early insurgency ====
There is no consensus on when the Rebel Alliance was formed, be it de jure or de facto.
The three most commonly mentioned dates are:

19 BBY with the Delegation of 2000 Senators which demanded Chancellor Palpatine to lay down his emergency powers;
5 BBY with the formation of the rebel fleet and the start of major combat operations (beginning of the Age of Rebellion, ending in 4 ABY);
2 BBY with Mon Mothma's formal Declaration of Rebellionn after the Ghorman Massacre.

=====
Delegation of 2000 (19 BBY) =====
The earliest possible origins of the Alliance to Restore the Republic are told during the events of Revenge of the Sith (set in 19 BBY, 19 years before the Battle of Yavin IV portrayed in the first film A New Hope).
In deleted scene 2 called "A Stirring in the Senate", a group of six Senators including Padmé Amidala, Mon Mothma and Bail Organa meet in the latter's office to discuss ways to counter the already unjustified extraordinary powers of Supreme Chancellor Palpatine "subverting the Constitution" as the Clone Wars were waning, with Mothma stating their goal was "preserving democracy within the Republic".
Amidala was initially skeptical of Palpatine's evil intentions because he had supported her during the Trade Federation's occupation of Naboo (The Phantom Menace, 32 BBY), but Organa and Mothma announced the formation of an anti-Palpatine 'organisation'; the six Senators agreed to a pact of silence.
In deleted scene 3 called "Seeds of Rebellion" (in Amidala's apartment with two new Senators joining the group), it is explained that the Delegation of 2000 disgruntled Senators will present a petition to the Chancellor.
Amidala was more willing to oppose Palpatine now, but wanted to involve the Jedi, at least Anakin Skywalker.
However, aside from one Senator agreeing, the others doubted whether the Jedi Council would be loyal to the Republic or the Chancellor, and opted to wait.
Amidala died in premature childbirth not long after her last-ditch attempt to prevent Anakin's fall.
In The Imperial Handbook, Grand Moff Tarkin related that most members of the Delegation of 2000 were arrested; Mothma and Organa retained their Senatorship by remaining outwardly obedient to Palpatine, while secretly 'mastermind[ing]
the unification of disparate bands of insurgents into what they termed the Rebel Alliance'.
=====
First major battles, rebel fleet (5 BBY) =====
The Disney series Rebels depicts the development of the rebellion against the Galactic Empire beginning five years before A New Hope (5 BBY) and fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order in Revenge of the Sith (19 BBY).
The show focuses on a motley group of rebels (all of whom have been affected by the Empire in one form or another) that banded together aboard a freighter starship called Ghost.
They called themselves the Spectres and were led by Hera Syndulla.
By the end of the first season, it is revealed that there were various clandestine cell systems that were resisting the Empire, such as Jun Sato's Phoenix Squadron.
Senator Bail Organa (along with his wife, queen Breha Organa) of Alderaan and former Jedi Ahsoka Tano
both play a pivotal role in coordinating these splinter cells into a legitimate threat capable of challenging Imperial rule.
Funded primarily by the Royal House of Alderaan, the alliance began to allocate resources towards a united front against Imperial rule.
The Spectres and Phoenix Squadron were later integrated into the Massassi Group based on Yavin IV, which by Rogue One (1 BBY)
and A New Hope (0 BBY) was commanded by General Jan Dodonna.
One last important rebel cell that later became part of the Rebel Alliance was the Mon Calamari Exodus Fleet, commanded by Admiral Raddus and Admiral Ackbar, formed out of civilian spacecraft during the Imperial Occupation of Mon Cala in 18 BBY (1 year into the Empire, 18 years prior to the Battle of Yavin).
=====
Declaration of Rebellion (2 BBY) =====
Near the end of the third season of Rebels, in "Secret Cargo", Alliance co-founder Senator Mon Mothma, escaped assassination for condemning the Ghorman Massacre and speaking out against the Emperor (2 BBY).
She called out to the various rebel cells and insurgency factions to unite into a unified coalition:
We, the beings of the Rebel Alliance, do this day send forth this Declaration to His Majesty, the Emperor, and to all sentient beings in the Galaxy, to make clear to all the Purposes and Goals of this Rebellion.

We believe that the Galactic Empire has willfully and malignantly usurped the rights of the free beings of the Galaxy and therefore, it is our unalienable right to abolish it from the Galaxy.

We, the Rebel Alliance, do therefore in the name—and by the authority—of the free beings of the Galaxy
, solemnly publish and declare our intentions:

To fight and oppose you and your forces, by any and all means at our disposal;
To refuse any Imperial law contrary to the rights of free beings;
To bring about your destruction and the destruction of the Galactic Empire;
To make forever free all beings in the galaxy.

To these ends, we pledge our property, our honor, and our lives.

Many Rebel ships arrive at a rendezvous point above Dantooine to unite and form the "Alliance to Restore the Republic".
===
Government ===


====
Senior civil government and military high command ====
Gial Ackbar – Supreme Commander of the Alliance Fleet.

Died during Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi, when a squadron of TIE fighters destroys the bridge of a Resistance ship.

Cassian Andor – Pilot and Intelligence Officer.

Died during Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, in the Battle of Scarif.

Crix Madine – General of the Alliance Special Forces.

Ahsoka Tano – Former Jedi Padawan; covert operations spymaster and first 'Fulcrum' agent.

Breha Organa – Adoptive mother of Leia Organa; ruling monarch of Alderaan; manager of the Rebel Alliance's funds, as revealed in the 2017 novel, Leia: Princess of Alderaan.
Played a pivotal role in securing Alderaan's support for the Rebel Alliance as its primary galactic advocate.

Died during Episode IV:
A New Hope, when the Death Star destroys Alderaan.

Wedge Antilles – Imperial defector and Commander of Rogue Squadron; Marshal of the Alliance Starfighter Corps.

Raymus Antilles – Captain of the famous Alderaanian cruiser Tantive IV.
Escort to members of the Royal House of Alderaan.

Died during Episode IV: A New Hope, killed by Darth Vader.

Lando Calrissian – General and former Cloud City administrator.

Carlist Rieekan – General and Commander of the Alliance's Echo Base on Hoth.

Jan Dodonna – General and Commander of the Alliance's Base One on Yavin 4.

Hera Syndulla – General and pilot of the Ghost.

Luke Skywalker – Commander and Jedi Knight; former Commander of Rogue Squadron and former Grand Master of the New Jedi Order.

Died during Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi, of exhaustion.

Leia Organa – Representative of the planet Alderaan in the Imperial Senate and Senior diplomat of the Alliance; General of the Resistance.

Died during Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker, of exhaustion.

Han Solo – General and former smuggler pilot of the Millennium Falcon.

Died in Episode VII:
The Force Awakens, killed by his own son Kylo Ren (Ben Solo).
===
Military ===
The Alliance Military and its activities were overseen by Alliance High Command, who managed the logistical and strategic matters of the Rebellion's efforts against the dominant Galactic Empire.
Alliance Intelligence was headed by Spymaster Bail Organa and Spymaster Ahsoka Tano, which proved essential for maintaining communications, finding missions for the various Alliance Cells, and coordinating the Alliance's highly decentralized structure.
At the time of the Battle of Endor, its chief commanders were:
Gial Ackbar serving as Admiral of the Alliance Starfleet; Jan Dodonna serving as General of the Alliance Grand Army; Crix Madine serving as General of Alliance Pathfinders; and Wedge Antilles serving as Marshal of the Alliance Starfighter Corps.

====
Alliance Grand Army ====
The Alliance military could never decisively win a "land war" with the Empire.
Generally speaking, the quality of Alliance infantry varied greatly by unit.
Due to the highly decentralized structure of the Alliance, these units often operated independently with little oversight, and were frequently lacking in discipline, equipment, intelligence and combat skills.
They often consisted of convicts, street thugs, pirates, outlaws, and anyone whose profession placed them at odds with the Empire.
These infantry were tolerated by Alliance Command, both for their willingness to mount an insurgency against the Empire, and for their expendability.

====
Alliance Pathfinders ====
Mission critical operations were carried out by few standardized special forces units, dubbed "pathfinders", who had previous military training for infiltration, asymmetrical warfare, and were capable of operating without resupply.
Pathfinders volunteered in the Battle of Scarif under Cassian Andor, and spearheaded the ground assault during the Battle of Endor.

====
Alliance Starfleet ====
The Alliance military largely consisted of mothballed, improvised, repurposed, or stolen civilian ships from dozens of manufacturers; they lacked the means, resources or shipyards to build, maintain and crew thousands of military-grade capital ships.
The Alliance, constantly had to change bases and their carrier ships routinely had to escape into hyperspace before recovering their fighter complement.
The biggest and most powerful warship they had available were several MC80 star cruisers supplied to the Alliance by Mon Calamari, but the Alliance Fleet kept these in reserve and never risked deploying them, even when strategically-critical bases in Atollon, Yavin, and Hoth came under siege.
The Alliance fleet is geared towards fabian strategy, space superiority, wolfpack operations, hit-and-run tactics, secret missions, subterfuge, and general elements of a stateless military grand strategy.
They used gunships and corvettes to screen Imperial starfighters.
Their warships carried a complement of expensive endurance-capable starfighters that traveled alongside the fleet.
These were equipped with life support systems, deflector shields, and FTL-drives.
The Alliance's focus on small light combat ships and on starfighters allowed them to effectively fight the Galactic Empire's well-funded and well-armed military.

The Alliance Starfleet almost never placed their ships at risk; they avoided  pitched battles, frontal assaults, war of attrition and conventional engagements with the Imperials at all costs'.
Instead of engaging the Imperials in open firefights, the Rebel Alliance largely embraced flexible non-committal attack tactics utilizing mainly fast attack
CR90 corvettes supplied to the Alliance by Alderaan.
The Imperial leadership considered collateral damage as "acceptable margins" in rooting out insurgents; this contrasted against the Alliance's surgical precision to avoid civilian casualties.
To minimize losses, the Alliance military leadership heavily favored carrier battle groups supporting starfighter strike crafts for fast-attack style of warfare, thereby leveraging a decisive advantage over the Galactic Empire's "big powerful ships" doctrine.
Anti-Imperial operations emphasized depredation and delayed actions, covertly relocating compromised bases to another secured system, interdiction in slowing down the Imperials' momentum, and inflicting maximum damage on the enemy without, in principle, becoming decisively engaged.

====
Alliance Starfighter Corps ====
The Alliance finds its strength almost entirely in the starfighter arena, offering some of the most effective and versatile small strike craft within Star Wars canon.
The Alliance was plagued by lack of resources: it was low on fighters, manpower, real estate.
Jan Dodonna believed unsupported hyperspace-capable starfighters could undermine the Empire's control of space and demonstrated this to the galaxy by winning high-profile victories:
Star Destroyers, shipyards, local fleets and the Death Star.
Despite the Corps' high-maintenance costs and being chronically understaffed, with starfighter logistics, aerospace engineers and veteran pilots being limited in numbers, the Alliance doctrine—raiding targets before they could mount a defense, then leaving—proved flawless in singling out vulnerable targets and attacking only when they had strength, and only when the results were spectacular.
Seventy percent of sorties were reconnaissance missions: finding targets for starfighter raids became the top priority of Alliance intelligence.
The introduction of the A-wing, B-wing and X-wing, along with the former Imperial officers who piloted them, only improved upon that advantage.

Gold Squadron, commanded by Jon Vander, was an BTL-A4 Y-wing light bomber squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's elite starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
This unit was instrumental in escorting Senator Mon Mothma safely to Dantooine, participated in the Battle of Scarif, and was nearly wiped out by Darth Vader in the Battle of Yavin.
Under the command of Lando Calrissian, it succeeded in destroying the second Death Star's reactor during the Battle of Endor.

Green Squadron, commanded by Arvel Crynyd, was a RZ-1 A-wing Interceptor squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Atollon; the Battle of Scarif; and the Battle of Endor.
It was Arvel Cyrnyd who crashed his A-wing into the bridge of the Executor, thereby disabling the ship.

Red Squadron, commanded by Garven Dreis, was a T-65B X-wing starfighter squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Scarif; the Battle of Vrogas Vas; the Battle of Hoth; and the Battle of Endor.

Blue Squadron, commanded by Antoc Merrick, was an airspeeder and starfighter squadron that served as part of the Rebel Alliance's elite starfighter corps during the Galactic Civil War.
The squadron most notably participated in the Alliance's most decisive campaigns, including: the Battle of Scarif; the Siege on Tureen VII; the Battle of Hoth; and the Battle of Endor.

Rogue Squadron, commanded by Wedge Antilles, was a  starfighter squadron in the Star Wars franchise.
The squadron appears in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) as "Rogue Group".
In the 2016 film Rogue One, Rebel fighters on a suicide mission to steal the plans for the Death Star (which causes the Battle of Scarif) self-identify as "Rogue One", a possible precursor to Rogue Squadron.
===
Galactic Civil War ===
The fall of the Old Republic and the birth of the Empire, as depicted in Revenge of the Sith, signaled the beginning of the bloody Galactic Civil War.

====
Decisive losses and victories ====
The Rebels episode, "Zero Hour", demonstrates the Imperials' absolute naval supremacy when they successfully entrapped the "Phoenix Fleet" during the Battle of Atollon, and forced them in engaging on equal footing; resulting a decisive victory for the Imperials and the total decimation of the Rebel fleet.

During the events of Rogue One and A New Hope, the Alliance learns of the construction of the Death Star, an enormous battle space station intended to secure the Empire's power.
With the help of the Rogue One squad led by Jyn Erso and Cassian Andor, the Rebels successfully steal and transmit the schematics of the station from the Imperial Citadel on planet Scarif.
This win was the Alliance's first major battle against the Empire; but at a 75% starfleet casualty rate and with all remaining Imperial and Rebel forces planetside decimated either by the battle or by Grand Moff
Wilhuff Tarkin's order to fire the space station's superlaser on the Citadel
, it was ultimately a pyrrhic victory and none of the squad survived.
After successfully downloading the Death Star plans, Alderaanian soldiers aboard a Mon Calamari flagship barely manage to escape the 501st Legion and Death Squadron with the stolen data plans.
Right after the battle, the Tantive IV, an Alderaanian corvette carrying Princess Leia Organa is captured by Vader's flagship, Imperial I-class Star Destroyer Devastator, while attempting to deliver the plans to Bail Organa on Alderaan.
All members of the Alderaanian Consular Security onboard are either killed or taken prisoner and
Princess Leia Organa is held hostage for a time by Darth Vader.
In order to punish both her and her home planet government's central involvement in the Rebel Alliance, Leia is forced to witness Alderaan's destruction by the Death Star.
The Princess is subsequently rescued by Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, Chewbacca, and Obi-Wan Kenobi, who then deliver the station schematics to the Alliance.
This leads directly to the Alliance's victory in the Battle of Yavin and the loyalty of Luke Skywalker; the Rebellion's only remaining member with training in the Force.

In the Star Wars comics, the Rebellion wins numerous victories against the Empire after the destruction of the Death Star, destroying its major weapons factory on Cymoon 1, breaking an Imperial blockade around the Rebel world of Tureen VII by stealing the Imperial I-class Star Destroyer Harbinger and recruiting the Mon Calamari trading fleet to be refitted as an assault fleet.
Such firepower would finally allow the Alliance to attack the Empire on a larger scale.
However, one of the Rebellion's allies, Queen Trios of Shu-Torun (whose world's technology had been fitted into the ships of the new Rebel fleet), revealed herself as an undercover Imperial agent sent by Darth Vader to sabotage their efforts.
With their ships unexpectedly paralyzed by the Shu-Torun technology, the gathered Rebel fleet could do little as they were targeted for destruction by Vader's Imperial fleet.
Half the Rebel ships were destroyed in the battle before Leia found a way around the sabotage and allowed the remaining ships to escape.
However, Generals Jan Dodonna and Davits Draven, as well as several other high-ranking Rebel officers, were killed during the battle and the remaining Rebel ships were separated in their flight.
Mon Mothma instructed all Rebel cells to regroup in time while striking out at the Empire when and how they could.
Not until the Battle of Endor would the whole force of the Rebellion be once again united in a single place.

In The Empire Strikes Back, the Alliance suffers a crushing defeat on Hoth when one of their main command centers, Echo Base, is overrun by the Darth Vader's elite personal Imperial armed forces, the Death Squadron and the 501st Legion.
The remaining forces of the Rebellion are forced to stay mobile, using Admiral Ackbar's flagship, Home One, as their headquarters.

By Return of the Jedi, the Alliance has regrouped and learned that a new Death Star is being constructed, and will be completed under Emperor Palpatine's personal supervision.
Mon Mothma has Admiral Ackbar and Lando Calrissian command the Alliance fleet and dispatches Han Solo and Princess Leia in leading Alliance's elite special forces to disable the station's defenses while Luke distracts Darth Vader.
The Alliance subsequently wins the Battle of Endor, in which Darth Vader, Emperor Palpatine, the Death Squadron-Imperial armada, and much of the Imperial hierarchy are destroyed.
===
Successor ===
Following their victory at the Battle of Endor, a provisional New Republic was officially formed by the Alliance.
This, combined with the Imperial power vacuum, political infighting, and Operation: Cinder—Palpatine's scorched earth contingency plan—encouraged thousands of inhabited planets to either declare independence from the Empire, or defect to the Alliance.

The New Republic found itself with no shortage of recruits and resources: the declining popularity of the Empire pushed many long time
Imperial loyalists to the Rebel cause, including those of Inferno Squadron, who after Operation Cinder, which saw the destruction of countless Imperial worlds, opened the eyes of many to the atrocities of the Empire.
Even the most dedicated Imperials such as Inferno Squadron commander Iden Versio were moved to defect after the witnessing the destruction of her homeworld Vardos.
Finally realizing the Empire's propaganda had deceived them, many Imperials began to feel shame over their actions, in particular over the destruction of Alderaan.

Despite fact that the New Republic was now winning the war, had a lot more resources than before—and a lot more recruits—the New Republic was suffering from logistic nightmare.
The decentralized structure that served them well became a liability; described as "a ragtag force strategically ill-fed and cobbled together of incompatible ships and squadrons".
The Alliance Fleet shifted military doctrine; the guerrilla warfare aspect of the grand strategy was de-emphasized, and conventional forces took over the primary prosecution of the war.

Once the New Republic became powerful enough, the Alliance Fleet was reorganized into the New Republic Military, charged with the defense of the New Republic.

About a year after the Battle of Endor, the Rebellion defeated the Empire during the Battle of Jakku and formally established the New Republic.
Thus, the Galactic Civil War officially ended.
Three decades later, by the time of The Force Awakens, the New Republic backed the Resistance army, a successor of the Alliance, to stand against the First Order, a new military power formed by hardline remnants from the Empire.

===
Legends ===
After Disney's acquisition of the franchise, Lucasfilm announced in 2014 that previous works outside the theatrical films and The Clone Wars would no longer be considered canon, but began to be republished under the Legends banner.

According to Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, the Cantham House Meetings of Coruscant, including the participation of Senators Mon Mothma and Bail Organa, take place with the purpose of discussing the formation of a Galactic Alliance in opposition to Palpatine's Galactic Empire.
In addition, the RPG tells that although throughout the galaxy many sectors are already fighting against Imperial interests, resistance is relatively quiet until the incident on the planet Ghorman, which takes place 18 years before the Battle of Yavin.
The incident begins when an Imperial military cruiser commanded by Captain Wilhuff Tarkin is blocked by peaceful anti-Empire protesters who refuse to move off the ship's landing pad.
With implied permission from the Emperor, Tarkin lands the ship anyway, injuring and killing many, an incident that history would record as the Ghorman Massacre.
The myriad of civilizations which are fighting the Empire continue to grow in number and progressively coalesce into a ragtag organization known as the Resistance.
They intend upon removing the evil Emperor, but the growing ruthlessness of the Imperial state forces them into secrecy, as they are initially unable to undermine the Empire's regime.
The RPG tells that part of the strategy of the Rebel Alliance is the Doctrine of Space Denial, wherein the Rebellion would attack Imperial shipping frigates in hit and run raids, both to disrupt Imperial supplies and operations, and also to loot desperately needed materials.
These Rebel starfighters were equipped with hyperdrive capability along prearranged routes which would allow this kind of harassment and escape before the Empire may react.

The video game
The Force Unleashed presents a differing view of the Alliance's beginnings, hinting that the Emperor actually secretly pushed for its formation.
Palpatine clandestinely bids for the creation of another opposing force, intent on starting yet another war in order to consolidate his power with the fledgling Empire, just as he had done earlier with the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The Emperor orders his apprentice Darth Vader to use his own secret apprentice, Galen Marek (called "Starkiller"), as a pawn to gather together the Empire's enemies, manipulating him into believing that the intention is to start a rebellion.
Vader quickly realizes that this is obviously a ploy by Palpatine in order to lure any significant rebels into a trap; however, it is unclear whether Vader (or the Emperor) had intended for the Rebellion to survive.
At the supposedly secret meeting known as the Corellian Treaty, Mon Mothma, Bail Organa, Garm Bel Iblis, Jedi-General Rahm Kota, and others meet to formally create the Rebellion against the Empire.
However, the proceedings are ambushed by Vader under orders from the Emperor, whom had actually secretly orchestrated the Treaty himself in order to gather all the Rebel leaders together and eliminate them.
Starkiller, now aligned with the Rebellion after two betrayals by his former master, manages to save the principal founders from the Empire, though at the cost of his own life.
Regrouping on Kashyyyk, the Senators formally proclaim an open Declaration of Rebellion, which states the grievances of the Empire against the Alliance to Restore the Republic and concludes with an open threat to depose the Emperor.
This marks the formal "founding" of the Rebel Alliance, and Galen Marek's family crest is chosen by Leia as its official symbol.
Thus, the Rebel Alliance is effectively founded by Darth Vader himself, and, by extension, Emperor Palpatine, though it is clear neither had imagined that the Alliance would actually ever become a serious threat.
The Galactic Civil War consequently ensues, during which the Rebellion confronts the Empire many times throughout the galaxy.

Empire at War depicts various allies contributing secretly to the Alliance, slowly making the united Rebel Force more powerful.
The most notable equipment contributions include the defection of the Incom Corporation staff and all relevant material involved in the development of an advanced spacefighter, the X-wing.

A "Declaration of Rebellion" was depicted in the 1990 book The Star Wars Rebel Alliance Sourcebook.

After its victory on Endor, the Rebellion was temporarily stationed there and renamed the "Alliance of Free Planets".
====
Members ====
Canon members:
General Leia Organa
Senator Bail Organa
Admiral Raddus- Captain of the Profundity
Nien Nunb- Rebel Engineer and pilot
Han Solo-Captain of the Millennium Falcon
Hera Syndulla-Pilot, leader of the Phoenix Squadron
Commander Sato
Jyn Erso- Member of the Rogue One group


=====
Founders =====
Senator Bana Breemu – Co-founder; early constituting member (deceased)
Senator Garm Bel Iblis – Co-founder; financed private army to fight against the Empire; rejoined Alliance during the Thrawn campaign.

Senator Bail Organa of the Imperial Senate (deceased)
Senator Mon Mothma of the Imperial Senate


=====
Senior civil government and military high command =====
Col Serra – Commander of Renegade Squadron
Ylenic It'kla – Commander and Jedi Knight who escaped Order 66, serving as a personal aide to Bail Organa on Alderaan.
Works with Alderaanian authorities to coordinate rebel activity.

Qu Rahn – General and Jedi Master who survived Order 66, mostly due to his connection and training with Yoda.

Rahm Kota – General and former Jedi Master who survived Order 66,
thanks to the aid of his own private militia.

Echuu Shen-Jon – General and Jedi Master who survived Order 66, thanks to his exile on Krant.

Talon Karrde – General and former smuggler who aided the New Republic during the Thrawn campaign.

== See also ==
Galactic Republic
Galactic Empire
New Republic


==
Brief list of appearances ==
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005; founded in a deleted scene)
Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018)
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018)
Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story (2016)
Star Wars:
Episode IV – A New Hope (1977)
Star Wars:
Episode V –
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
Star Wars: Episode VI – Return of the Jedi (1983)
Star Wars Battlefront (2015)
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017)


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Rebel Alliance in the StarWars.com Databank
Rebel Alliance on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back is a 1993 run and gun game for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System.
It is the second game in the Super Star Wars trilogy and is based on the 1980 film The Empire Strikes Back.
The original Super NES game was released in 1992.
The game was followed by a sequel based on the next film in the Star Wars series, Super Star Wars: Return of the Jedi.
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back was re-released on the Virtual Console in North America on August 24, 2009 and in the PAL regions on October 2, 2009, alongside the other games in the Super Star Wars series.

==
Gameplay ==
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back follows closely the standard set by its predecessor, with multiple playable characters and Mode 7 quasi-3D vehicle sequences.
The controls are very similar to the first game, but feature a double-jump.
Luke Skywalker, Han Solo, and Chewbacca return as playable characters although the character-select option was removed.
Unlike the original game, this installment allows each character the use of a primary and secondary weapon.
Following one of the swamp planet Dagobah missions, Luke Skywalker can also collect Force Powers for use in later levels.
Luke can now block incoming attacks using his lightsaber, allowing him to deflect blaster fire.
Han Solo can now throw grenades and Chewbacca has a new power up: a spinning attack.
Sith Lord Darth Vader appears as the final boss in the video game.

==
Development ==
An "asteroid chase" stage using Mode 7 effects was cut from the game due to lack of cartridge space.
In late 1992 a contest was launched exclusively in Electronic Gaming Monthly, which required the contestants to answer six multi-choice questions, and for which the "Grand Prize" was to have the person's likeness appear in this forthcoming game.
The winner was Jeff Crosno, for whom the developers placed his appearance on a Rebel soldier in an Ice Fields of Hoth cut-scene, replacing the already existing facial graphics.

==
Release ==
In 1996 THQ announced that they would re-release Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back and Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi in February 1997 in order to coincide with the "Special Edition" of those films appearing in theaters.
The re-release is identical to the original version.

== Reception ==
The game was met with highly positive reviews.
IGN praised the games enhanced "Mode 7" graphics.

Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the game positive reviews noting the games graphics and sound, although there was criticism on the controls and hard difficulty.
Allgame gave a rating of 4.5 out of 5 stars praising the game’s soundtrack, voice effects, graphics and action scenarios for being faithful to the film and giving praise to the password feature making the game less frustrating to beat the game and giving criticism to the game’s blind jumps and cheap hits from enemies off screen concluding “but this doesn't spoil the overall greatness of the game.”
Super Gamer magazine gave the game a review score of 85% stating "Super Star Wars is reworked with new graphics.
A bigger, harder and marginally, better game.
The Mode 7 AT-AT attack is absolutely stunning."

===
accolades ===
Nintendo Power staff rated the game as the fourth best SNES game of 1993.
IGN placed the game 91st in their Top 100 SNES Games of All Time.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back at IMDb
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back at MobyGames
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back is a scrolling shooter video game written by Rex Bradford for the Atari 2600 and published by Parker Brothers in 1982.
It was the first licensed Star Wars video game.
An Intellivision version was released in 1983.

==
Gameplay ==
The player must control Luke Skywalker in a snowspeeder to battle against Imperial AT-AT walkers on the planet Hoth.
The objective is to hold off the walkers as long as possible before they blow up the power generator at the Rebels' Echo Base.
The difficulty levels included several variables, including the initial speed of the walkers, whether or not the walkers were solid, and whether or not the walkers included a "smart bomb".

The player can destroy a walker by shooting it repeatedly in the head or torso; shots to the legs are ineffective.
As the walker is damaged, it changes colors - transitioning from black (undamaged) through various shades of gray, red, and orange to yellow (critically damaged).
The player can also destroy the walkers by shooting a small flashing spot that randomly appears during gameplay.
On the Intellivision, the walkers require thirty hits to take down, compared to forty-eight hits on the Atari.

The walkers shoot back at the player, whose speeder also changes colors as it receives damage.
The player can land a damaged speeder to repair it.
On some game levels, the walkers are solid, meaning that the player can crash into them, damaging them and destroying the player.
Other levels include a smart bomb which periodically launches from the flashing port on a walker and follows the player for a time.
If the player is hit by the smart bomb his speeder is destroyed.
If the player survives for 20 minutes the speeder is granted the power of the Force for 20 seconds.
When this happens, the speeder flashes colorfully and becomes invulnerable for a short time.

The game ends when the player's fifth speeder is destroyed or when the lead walker reaches Echo Base, destroying it.
As the game progresses, the walkers move more rapidly, increasing the difficulty level.

== Reception ==
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back received mixed reviews.
It was reviewed in Video magazine shortly after its release.
Reviewers praised the game's "zingy graphics" and noted that "the audio-visual effects are absolutely first-rate".
Overall they characterized it as "an entertaining fast-paced contest that belongs in the cartridge libraries of most (Atari)VCS owners".
That same month, rival publication Video Review magazine ran a review of the game written by science fiction author Harlan Ellison.
Ellison blasted the game as a "shamelessly exploitative little toy", "the latest icon of the Imbecile Industry", and a "time-wasting enterprise" with "the potential to emerge as the most virulent electronic botulism of all".
According to Ellison, the game has "extremely simple-minded parameters" and it "bore[d]
[his] ass off"
; however, the brunt of Ellison's criticism came from his dissatisfaction with the game's ending.
Because the game's two end-conditions are both failure conditions (either all of the player's units are destroyed or the lead enemy reaches the player's base)
, Ellison suggested that the game cannot be won and is thus "an analogue for the Myth of Sisyphus" providing "one dreadful life-lesson in those of a youthful intelligence who play it. ...
You can only waste your life struggling and
struggling".
Ed Driscoll reviewed The Empire Strikes Back in The Space Gamer
No.
55.
Driscoll commented that "I'd have to say that the good points outweigh the bad, and it is fun to play.

I'd say that this is an excellent start for a company new to the VCS scene.

May the Force be with you!"

==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Empire Strikes Back at Atari Mania
The Empire Strikes Back at AtariAge
The Empire Strikes Back at Intellivision
Lives
Gametrailers' Star Wars
Retrospective Episode
I
Behind The Scenes of Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back on gamestm
The Atari 2600 version of Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back can be played for free in the browser at the Internet Archive
Stephen Stanton is an American voice actor and visual effects artist.
His roles include Sasha Nein in Psychonauts, Wilhuff Tarkin on Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, Star Wars Rebels and Star Wars: The Bad Batch, Admiral Raddus in Rogue One and Griff Halloran from Star Wars Resistance.
== Career ==
Stanton is well known as a voice double for actors Alec Guinness, John Cusack, Bruce Willis, Clive Owen, Nicolas Cage, Robert Downey Jr., Roger Ebert, Tim Allen, Peter Cushing, Jeff Goldblum, Vincent Schiavelli and many others.
He also provides original voices for Disney television shows and theme park attractions.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Video games ===


===
Theme parks ===
Disney California Adventure Jessie's Critter Carousel – Stinky Pete
Disney
California Adventure Toy Story Midway Mania! –
Stinky Pete
Disney D23 Expo Carousel of Projects – Narrator
Disneyland Club 33 – Alfred the Vulture
Disneyland Paris – Woody & Jessie's Wild West Adventure (Lucky Nugget Saloon) –
Stinky Pete
Disneyland Rivers of America –
Mark Twain Riverboat Captain
Disneyland
The Haunted Mansion Phantom Radio app – Phineas
Hong Kong Disneyland Mystic Manor – Lord Henry Mystic
Shanghai Disneyland Celebration of Dreams Show (2016) – Happy
Walt Disney World D23 Destination D:
Attraction Rewind – Father
Walt Disney World Seven Dwarfs Mine Train –
Happy


==
Visual effects work ==


===
Tippett Studio ===
Starship Troopers (1997) –
Digital Scanner Operator
Armageddon (1998) –
Digital Scanner Operator (uncredited)
Virus (1999) –
Digital Scanner Operator
Komodo (1999) – Digital Scanner Operator (uncredited)
My Favorite Martian (1999) – Digital Scanner Operator
Hollow Man (2000) – Digital Scanner Operator
Mission to Mars (2000) –
Digital Scanner Operator (uncredited)
Cats & Dogs (2001) – Digital Scanner Operator (uncredited)
Evolution (2001) –
Digital Scanner Operator


===
Boss Film Studios ===
Solar Crisis (1990) –
Production Assistant
The Last of the Mohicans (1992) –
Computer Graphics Coordinator
Alien 3 (1992) – Digital Camera Operator
Batman Returns (1992) –
Digital Camera Operator
Journey
To Technopia (1993)
- Digital Film
I/O
Cliffhanger (1993) –
Computer Graphics Coordinator
Last Action Hero (1993) –
Computer Graphics Coordinator (uncredited)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Stephen Stanton at IMDb
Luke Skywalker is a fictional character and the main protagonist of the original film trilogy of the Star Wars franchise created by George Lucas.
Portrayed by Mark Hamill, Luke first appeared in Star Wars (1977), and he returned in The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983).
Three decades later, Hamill returned as Luke in the Star Wars sequel trilogy, appearing in all three films: The Force Awakens (2015),
The Last Jedi (2017), and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
He reprised the role in The Mandalorian episode "Chapter 16:
The Rescue" (2020), voicing the character that was portrayed by a body double with digital de-aging.

Originally a farmer on Tatooine living with his uncle and aunt, Luke becomes a pivotal figure in the Rebel Alliance's struggle against the Galactic Empire.
The son of fallen Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (turned Sith Lord Darth Vader) and Padmé Amidala, Luke is the twin brother of Rebellion leader Princess Leia and eventual brother-in-law of the smuggler Han Solo.
Luke trains to be a Jedi under Jedi Masters Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda, and rebuilds the Jedi Order.
He later trains his nephew, Ben Solo, and mentors Rey.
Though Luke dies at the end of The Last Jedi, he returns as a Force spirit in The Rise of Skywalker, encouraging Rey to face her grandfather, the resurrected Emperor Palpatine.
At the end of the film, the spirits of Luke and Leia give Rey their blessing to adopt the Skywalker surname and continue their family's legacy.

The character also briefly appears in the prequel film Episode III – Revenge of the Sith as an infant.
In the de-canonized Star Wars Expanded Universe (renamed Legends), Luke is a main character in many stories set after Return of the Jedi, which depict him as a powerful Jedi Master, the husband of Mara Jade, father of Ben Skywalker and maternal uncle of Jaina, Jacen and Anakin Solo.

==
Appearances ==


===
Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In the original Star Wars trilogy, Luke Skywalker represents the hero archetype of "the young man, called to adventure, the hero going out facing the trials and ordeals, and coming back after his victory with a boon for the community".

===== A New Hope (1977) =====
In a deleted scene preceding the character's first appearance in the film (preserved in the film's radio dramatization), Luke says goodbye to his best friend Biggs Darklighter, who has just joined the Imperial Academy.
His childhood friends disparagingly call him "Wormie".
In the original 1977 film (later having the extended title, A New Hope), Luke lives at a moisture farm on the desert planet of Tatooine with his Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru.
Luke takes his first steps toward his destiny when he purchases the droids C-3PO and
R2-D2.
While examining R2-D2, he sees a message from Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan.
When R2-D2 goes missing, Luke goes out to search for the droid, and is saved from a band of Tusken Raiders by Obi-Wan Kenobi, an old hermit.
Luke and Obi-Wan retreat to the latter’s home, and R2-D2 plays the full message for Obi-Wan from Leia, beseeching him to help her defeat the Galactic Empire.
Obi-Wan says that he and Luke's father were once Jedi Knights, and that his father was murdered by a traitorous Jedi named Darth Vader.
Obi-Wan presents Luke with his father's lightsaber and offers to take him to Alderaan and train him in the ways of the Force, but Luke declines his offer, feeling obligated to continue farming for his uncle.

Luke changes his mind when he returns home to find out that Imperial stormtroopers have raided the moisture farm, killing his aunt and uncle while away.
He and Obi-Wan then travel to Mos Eisley, where they meet smugglers Han Solo and Chewbacca at a cantina.
They team up and travel on the Millennium Falcon to Alderaan, only to find out that it has been destroyed by the Death Star.
The Falcon is brought into the Star's hangar bay via tractor beam, where Luke and Han disguise themselves and infiltrate the station.
When they discover Princess Leia is there, Luke persuades a reluctant Han and Chewbacca to help rescue her.
Obi-Wan deactivates the tractor beam, and he later sacrifices his life in a duel with Vader, so that Luke and his friends can board the Falcon and escape.

During the Battle of Yavin, Luke joins the Rebel Alliance in attacking the Death Star.
In the trench leading to the Death Star's exhaust port, Luke hears Obi-Wan's voice, telling him to "trust his feelings"; he takes Obi-Wan's advice and switches off his X-wing's missile guidance system, instead using the Force to guide the missiles and destroy the Death Star.
In the film's final scene, he joins Han and Chewbacca in receiving a medal of honor for his heroism.

=====
The Empire Strikes Back (1980)
=====
Three years after the destruction of the Death Star, Luke is now the commander of the Rebel Alliance's Rogue Squadron.
While on a mission on the ice planet Hoth, he is captured by a wampa, but manages to escape using his lightsaber.
In the frozen wasteland, he sees Obi-Wan's Force ghost, who tells him to travel to the planet Dagobah and complete his training with the Jedi Master Yoda.
Luke collapses but is later rescued by Han.
When the Empire discovers the Rebel base on Hoth, Luke leads his squadron of Snowspeeders to battle the enemy’s AT-ATs, but he is forced to retreat when his wingmen are overwhelmed.
Escaping in his X-wing, he travels to Dagobah and meets Yoda.
He undergoes rigorous Jedi training, quickly increasing his power in the Force.

During his training, Luke sees a vision of his friends in danger.
Against both Obi-Wan and Yoda's advice to stay and complete his training, he travels to Bespin to save them, unwittingly falling into a trap placed by Darth Vader.
He engages in a lightsaber duel with Vader.
As his mentors warned, Luke proves to be no match for Vader; the Sith Lord easily overpowers Luke and severs his right hand.
Vader then reveals that he is Luke's father, and offers him the chance to turn to the dark side of the Force and rule the galaxy at his side.
Resolving that he would rather die than become an agent of evil, Luke throws himself into a deep reactor chasm.
He survives, but is pulled into a garbage chute to the underside of Cloud City, and left hanging perilously onto a vane rod.
Leia, flying away from Cloud City in the Millennium Falcon, senses Luke's call out to her with the Force, and turns the ship around to save him.
Aboard the ship, he hears Vader telepathically telling him that it is his destiny to join the dark side.
Luke's severed hand is replaced with a bio-mechanical one.

=====
Return of the Jedi (1983) =====
One year after the invasion on Bespin, Luke is now a Jedi Knight, and has constructed his own lightsaber.
He returns to Tatooine with Leia, the droids, and Lando Calrissian to save Han, frozen in carbonate, from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt.
Luke offers to negotiate with Jabba, who rejects his offer and casts him into a pit to battle a rancor.
When Luke kills the rancor, he, Han, and Chewbacca are sentenced to death in the sarlacc pit.
Luke escapes with R2-D2's help, saving his friends and destroying Jabba's sail barge.

Luke returns to Dagobah, and learns from a dying Yoda that Vader is indeed his father.
Luke then learns from Obi-Wan's spirit that he has a twin sister, whom he immediately realizes is princess Leia.
Both Jedi Masters tell Luke that he must face Vader again to finish his training and save the galaxy, but he is disturbed by the idea of killing his own father.

Arriving on Endor as part of a Rebel commando squad, Luke surrenders to Vader in an attempt to bring his father back from the dark side of the Force.
Vader brings Luke to the second Death Star orbiting around Endor, where his master, the Emperor, tries to tempt Luke to the dark side, revealing his plan to destroy the Rebel fleet.
Luke, enraged at the thought of losing his friends, lashes out at the Emperor with his lightsaber, but Vader blocks his strike, and father and son once again duel with each other.
Luke regains control of his emotions until Vader senses that Luke has a sister, and threatens to turn her to the dark side if Luke will not submit.
Luke snaps and overpowers Vader, severing his father's mechanical right hand.
The Emperor orders Luke to kill Vader and then take his place.
Luke looks at his own bionic hand and realizes that he is on the verge of suffering his father's fate.
He casts his lightsaber aside, declaring himself a Jedi.

Furious, the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning.
In agony, Luke calls out to his father for help; unwilling to let his son die, Vader throws the Emperor down a reactor shaft, but is mortally wounded by the Emperor's Force lightning in the process.
As Rebel fighters head toward the second Death Star's main reactor, Luke removes Vader's mask and looks upon his father's real face for the first and last time.
The redeemed Anakin Skywalker reassures Luke that there was good in him after all before dying, and to tell his sister that he was right about him.
On Endor, Luke burns his father's armor and prosthetics on a funeral pyre, giving him a proper Jedi funeral.
During the Rebels' victory celebrations on Endor, Luke sees his father's spirit appear alongside those of Obi-Wan and Yoda.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
=====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) =====
In the prequel film Revenge of the Sith (2005), during the waning days of the  Clone Wars between the Galactic Republic and the Separatists, Senator Padmé Amidala, wife of Anakin Skywalker, becomes pregnant to Luke and his twin sister Leia.
Foreseen fear of Padmé dying from the birth of Luke and Leia becomes a primary catalyst into Anakin's fall to the dark side as Darth Vader by Darth Sidious, who had secretly orchestrated the Clone Wars from both sides in order to transform the democratic Galactic Republic into the autocratic Galactic Empire mere days before Luke's birth.
After being Force-choked by Vader, Padmé is taken to Polis Massa, where she gives birth to Luke and Leia and dies, having lost the will to live.
At the time, Vader was not aware that Padmé had given birth to twins, believing that he killed her out of his anger.
After the twins are separated in order to be protected from the Sith, Luke is taken by Obi-Wan Kenobi to the desert planet Tatooine, where he is adopted by his father's stepbrother, Owen Lars, and his wife, Beru.
The infant Luke is portrayed by Aidan Barton, the son of Roger Barton, an editor of the film.

====
Sequel
trilogy ====
=====
The Force Awakens (2015) =====
In the first installment of the sequel trilogy, The Force Awakens (2015), the opening crawl reveals that Luke Skywalker had mysteriously vanished some time in the thirty years after the destruction of the second Death Star.
Luke went into hiding after his nephew and apprentice, Ben Solo, turned to the dark side and was later dubbed Kylo Ren.
When Ren killed all of his fellow apprentices and ushered in the despotic reign of the First Order, Luke felt responsible, and disappeared.
At the end of the film, the Resistance manage to reconstruct a map, which traces the location of the temple from the Empire's archives to his location, and he is subsequently found on the planet
Ahch-To by the young scavenger, Rey, who presents him with the lightsaber previously wielded by both Luke and his father.

The Art of Star Wars:
The Last Jedi notes that Luke's exile is a reversal from his decision to help his friends in The Empire Strikes Back.

=====
The Last Jedi (2017) =====
In The Last Jedi (2017), Luke throws the lightsaber away after being given it by Rey.
He then seals himself in his home, refusing to talk with Rey.
However, when he sees Chewbacca without Han Solo and that Rey came on the Millennium Falcon, he inquires about what has gone on with his family.
Rey informs Luke about Solo's death at the hands of Kylo Ren and that the First Order has risen to rule the galaxy.
Rey asks Luke to train her in the ways of the Force.
Luke is initially reluctant to train Rey, telling her that it is time for the Jedi Order to end.

After some persuasion from R2-D2, Luke starts training Rey, originally for the purpose of showing her why the Jedi Order needs to end, but grows increasingly afraid of her power.
Luke then tells Rey the history of the Jedi Order, how Darth Sidious rose to power and how the Jedi were partly responsible for Darth Vader's rise.
Luke also initially tells Rey that Kylo was corrupted by Supreme Leader Snoke and that when he confronted his nephew, he retaliated by destroying his Jedi temple.
This is proven false, however, and, after a furious moment with his new apprentice, Luke tells Rey that he had briefly considered killing the sleeping Ben after seeing a vision of the destruction he could cause, but immediately relented; Ben woke to see Luke with his lightsaber drawn and turned to the dark side because he felt betrayed.
Upon learning this, Rey urges Luke to help her redeem Ben, but he refuses to participate in this nor help the Resistance, saying, "This is NOT going to go the way you think.
"
When Rey leaves, an embittered Luke tries to burn the Jedi temple next to his home on Ahch-To, but fails and is visited by the spirit of Yoda, who assures Luke that he still has a purpose.

Luke appears on the planet Crait, as the Resistance are staging a standoff against the First Order, and he apologizes to Leia for allowing Ben to fall to the dark side.
Luke steps in front of the First Order's artillery, and unexpectedly survives an onslaught of blaster fire ordered by Ren.
Ren charges at Luke in hand-to-hand combat, seemingly bisecting him with his lightsaber, but Luke remains unscathed;
still on Ahch-To, Luke has sent a projection of himself to Crait, using the Force.
This distraction allows the Resistance to escape the planet.
Luke tells Kylo that he will not be the last Jedi before his projection disappears.
On Ahch-To, Luke collapses then looks off in the horizon to see the planet's two suns setting before he becomes one with the Force and vanishes.

=====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) =====
Luke appears briefly in The Rise of Skywalker, the ninth and final chapter of the series.
When Rey discovers her lineage as the granddaughter of Darth Sidious, she exiles herself on Ahch-To as Luke did.
Meaning to isolate herself, she throws Luke's lightsaber towards the burning wreckage of Kylo Ren's TIE whisper she had traveled there with.
Luke appears as a Force spirit, and reprimands Rey for treating the lightsaber with disrespect just as he did.
Luke then admits that he was wrong to not participate in the Resistance, and thanks Rey for helping him rediscover himself.
Luke convinces Rey to not view herself as a Palpatine, but as the good person Leia saw her as when training her, and not to give up on her battle against the Sith Lord.
Luke lends Rey his old T-65B X-wing and tells Rey to combine his father's lightsaber with Leia's old lightsaber in her battle on Exegol.

After Rey vanquishes Sidious once and for all, she visits the moisture farm on Tatooine where Luke was raised.
She buries Luke and Leia's lightsabers, revealing that she has constructed her own.
A local asks Rey who she is.
As Leia, who died earlier, and Luke appear as Force spirits, Rey names herself Rey Skywalker.

===
Television series ===
At the end of the Star Wars Rebels episode "Twin Suns", a silhouette of Luke Skywalker is seen from afar by Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Luke appears in the animated Disney micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny (with Mark Hamill once again reprising his role).
The episode "The Path Ahead" details him training with Yoda on Dagobah.
He also appears in the episode "Traps and Tribulations", which takes place shortly after the Battle of Endor and shows him and Leia assisting the Ewoks in stopping a rampaging monster known as a Gorax.
Luke appears in the season 2 finale of The Mandalorian after making contact with Grogu through The Force in "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy".
In "Chapter 16: The Rescue", he arrives on Moff Gideon's cruiser and destroys all Dark Troopers in aid of Grogu, Din Djarin and his companions.
He then takes Grogu with him to train him in his New Jedi Order with Djarin's permission.

===
Video games ===
Luke is a playable character in Star Wars Battlefront II, and in the online multiplayer of Star Wars Battlefront.

===
Literature ===
Luke is the main character of the novel Heir to the Jedi and the junior novel
The Legends of Luke Skywalker (the latter of which was adapted as a manga).
He is also a main character of the 2015 comic Star Wars, which takes place between the films of the original trilogy.

====
Heir to the Jedi ====
Star Wars:
Heir to the Jedi was announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Set between A New Hope and
The Empire Strikes Back
, Heir to the Jedi chronicles the adventures of Luke as he continues to battle the Empire with his Rebel friends and begins to develop his Force abilities.
The novel is written from the first-person perspective of Luke, and is only the second Star Wars novel to attempt this type of narrative voice.

===
Legends ===
In April 2014, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise.
The Legends-branded novels, comic books and video games detail
Luke's exploits following Return of the Jedi.

====
Novels ====
In the novel The Truce at Bakura, set one day after the battle of Endor, Luke and his friend Wedge Antilles recover a message droid from the titular planet, which was being invaded by the Ssi-Ruuk.
Luke commands a task force, turning back the enemy army.
He also meets Dev Sibwarra, a Force-sensitive human who had been captured by the Ssi-Ruuk, who is killed in the battle after turning against his captors.
In the novel The Courtship of Princess Leia, set four years after the Battle of Endor, Luke travels to the planet Dathomir.
There, he discovers a group of Force-sensitive witches called the Witches of Dathomir, banded into two separate groups: a collective of benign, matriarchal clans; the one he is in contact with being the Singing Mountain Clan, and the witches who have turned to the dark side, called the Nightsisters.
Discovering a prophecy in which it was told a Jedi would change the way of life on the land, Luke eventually realizes truly what the Force is for the first time in his life.
While there, he destroys most of the Nightsisters (including their powerful leader, Gethzirion, and the galaxy's most powerful remaining warlord, Warlord Zsinj).
Thanks to the help of the prophecy and witches, Luke recovers old Jedi records left by Yoda about 400 years prior.
He decides to start a new Jedi Academy, something he has been trying to do for six months before the start of the novel by finding old Jedi records and archives.
In The Thrawn Trilogy, Luke meets former Emperor's Hand Mara Jade, who is bound by Palpatine's disembodied voice that repeatedly commands "You will kill Luke Skywalker".
Mara Jade is working with her boss, a fringe-of-the-galaxy smuggler named Talon Karrde, who also plays a crucial role in this era.
Although she was ready to fulfill that order to stop the voice, circumstances force her to keep him alive long enough to have him help escape a mutual danger.
Despite her threats, Luke learns of Mara's curse and vows to free her from it.
Meanwhile, the rest of the New Republic is fighting against Grand Admiral Thrawn, and thanks to Leia's help, he is eventually defeated, although Luke tried several times to get near him and his ally, Joruus C'baoth.
Eventually, the desperate pair fights against Luke's clone, Luuke Skywalker, C'baoth's apprentice.
During the fight, Mara Jade destroys the clone and, with Leia's help, destroys C'baoth.
This entire time, C'baoth has been obsessed with "molding" Luke and Mara to serve him, perhaps due to the fact that the Spaarti cloning cylinders he was made from have a reputation of turning people insane later in life.
Nonetheless, C'baoth is defeated along with Luuke, and Mara's sacrifice silences her curse and completes her reconciliation with the Jedi, whom she later joins.
In the Jedi Academy trilogy, Luke resigns his commission in the New Republic's starfighter corps to pursue his Jedi studies and rebuild the Jedi Order in the Massassi Temple on Yavin 4, a decision some anti-Jedi politicians use against him.
Luke becomes the New Jedi Order's leader.
His students in the ways of the Force include; Gantoris, Kam Solusar, Tionne, Streen, Cilghal, Kirana Ti and others.
He is forced to contend with the spirit of ancient Sith Lord Exar Kun, who lures one of his most powerful students, Kyp Durron, to the dark side.

In the Hand of Thrawn Duology, Luke, now a Jedi Master, works again with Mara Jade, who has learned to better her Force knowledge since her training at Luke's Jedi Academy.
He falls in love with her and they eventually marry.
Later, in Edge of Victory: Rebirth, they have a son whom they name Ben, after Obi-Wan Kenobi's pseudonym.

In the New Jedi Order series, Luke creates a New Jedi Council.
He idealises a new conclave, made up of Jedi, politicians and military officers.
Included in this new Jedi Order are Tresina Lobi, Kenth Hammer, Kyle Katarn, Kyp Durron, Cilghal, Saba Sebatynee and himself.
From the politicians and military came new Chief of State Cal Omas, Admiral Sienn Sovv (Sullustan male) and four others.
In Force Heretic: Remnant, he spearheads the mission into the Unknown Regions during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion to find the mysterious planet of Zonama Sekot, a planet that creates living starships.
After the invasion is defeated with the help of the new Mandalorian Warriors, a Sekotian fleet and a Galactic Alliance-Imperial Remnant fleet, Luke leads the New Jedi Order on Denon, the temporary capital of the Galactic Alliance and the site of the newly rebuilt Jedi Temple on Coruscant.
In The Swarm War, the New Jedi Order moves to Ossus, the site of former famous Jedi temples and libraries that were mostly destroyed 4,000 years prior.
Upon the Killik's invasion of Chiss space and the transformation of most of the Myrkr mission survivors into Killik Joiners, Luke determines that the Killik's collective mind is being unconsciously controlled by a hive called the Dark Nest.
The Dark Nest is controlled by a former Nightsister named Lomi Plo, who became their Unseen Queen with her ability to become invisible by exploiting the doubts of inferiors.
One of the Myrkr mission survivors, Alema Rar, attempted to plant seeds of doubt in Luke's mind by suggesting that his wife, Mara, may be somehow responsible for the death of his mother, Padmé Amidala, which he almost believes because of Mara's previous involvement as the Emperor's Hand.
This allows Lomi to escape from Luke.
Luke discovers recordings of his father Force-choking his mother on Mustafar, his own birth, and his mother's death hidden inside the protective memory archives of R2-D2.
Because of this, he is able to overcome his doubts about Mara and defeat Lomi Plo in the final battle of the Swarm War, cutting her into four pieces.
Luke also withdraws the Jedi from Cal Omas' Advisory Council, as he plans to create a New Jedi Council that will give aid to the Galactic Alliance when needed.
He also becomes the Grand Master of the New Jedi Order to give the Jedi a clear sense of direction.
He has told the Jedi to either follow his leadership or make the order their priority, or leave.
Jedi Danni Quee and Tenel Ka have resigned because of their duties to Zonoma Sekot and Hapes, respectively, while Corran Horn tries to resign, but Luke talks him out of it.
Luke is also forced to exile Tahiri, Lowbacca, and Tesar Sebatayne to Dagobah for divulging secret information to people outside the New Jedi Order.

In the Legacy of the Force series, Luke begins having visions of a figure cloaked in darkness destroying the galaxy and the Jedi Decree.
In his dreams, this figure's presence is much like that of Darth Vader.
Luke has been troubled by the fact that he has been unable to discern the identity of this figure.
Complicating matters even more is the recent schism that has developed between Luke and his nephew, Jacen Solo.
Already a tremendously powerful Jedi Knight, Jacen has begun adopting radical and extreme interpretations of the Force, causing a dramatic change in his personality.
Luke fears that Jacen is pursuing the same path that ultimately led to Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side.
In Bloodlines, the situation worsens when Luke's son, Ben, becomes Jacen's apprentice.
Luke must also battle his wife, who refuses to confront Jacen for fear of alienating Ben.
In Tempest, Luke determines that the dark figure from his dreams is Lumiya, a former Emperor's Hand now known as the "Dark Lady of the Sith".
Luke and Lumiya had fought several times over the years, but when Mara is murdered in Sacrifice, Lumiya deceives Luke into believing that she killed her.
They battle again, and Luke saves a weaponless Lumiya from falling to her death simply so that he can kill her himself.
Luke returns to Coruscant where he is found by Ben, standing guard over Mara's body; upon speaking with his son, he realizes that Lumiya could not have killed her.
Later in his private cabin, Luke breaks down over the death of his wife, knowing that her murderer is still at large.
He does not realize that the killer is his own nephew, Jacen, who has now taken the Sith name Darth Caedus.
In Revelation, Ben proves that Jacen killed Mara, but Luke is now reluctant to kill Jacen out of fear that he or his son will fall to the dark side in the process.
(
The decision is taken out of his hands in Invincible, when Jaina kills Jacen in a final lightsaber duel).

In Fate of the Jedi novels, set about 40 years after the first film, Luke Skywalker, now in his early sixties, is deposed by the government from his position as Grand Master, and exiled from Coruscant.
However, if he finds the reason of why Jacen Solo fell to the dark side, he can be allowed to return.
Ben insists on coming with him.
Together, father and son explore dangerous and little-known portions of the galaxy.
Luke and Ben learn much about each other, about the Force, and about the great dangers threatening the Jedi.
The great love the two surviving Skywalkers have for each other grows even greater as they repeatedly save each other's lives and explore the limits and powers and mysteries of the Force.

=====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor =====
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is a standalone novel that chronicles the Battle of Mindor, a fictional event in the Star Wars expanded universe.
The novel was written by Matthew Stover and released in December 2008.

The novel is set shortly after Return of the Jedi and the novel Prophets of the Dark Side, with Luke Skywalker and the Rebel Alliance attempting to stop Lord Shadowspawn and his "shadow stormtroopers", culminating in the Battle of Mindor.
Matthew Stover has said on his personal weblog, Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor is my attempt to get the EU back to its pre-Zahn roots -- specifically, to evoke memories of my all-time favorite Star Wars books, Brian Daley's Han Solo novels.

====
Comic books ====
Luke Skywalker appears in the Marvel-published Star Wars comics adaptations of the original trilogy, as well as an ongoing series that ran from 1977–86.
When Dark Horse acquired the license two years later, he appeared in numerous projects based on the franchise as well.
In Star Wars: Legacy, set 125 years after the events of the original films, Luke appears as a spirit in the Force to his descendant Cade Skywalker and persuades him to once again become a Jedi in order to defeat the evil Darth Krayt and his burgeoning Sith empire.

====
Video games ====
An older and wiser Luke Skywalker also appears in the Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast and Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy video games at the rank of Jedi Master.
In Jedi Outcast, Luke helps Kyle Katarn in his fight against Desann and Empire Reborn by driving them away from the Valley of the Jedi.
Luke appears in the game
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed in a downloadable alternate storyline where Starkiller duels Luke.
He also appears in the Disney Lucasfilm video game Star Wars Commander.
Luke is also a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0.
==
Characterization ==


===
Psychoanalytic ===
Each of the Star Wars characters instantiates one of the archetypes in Joseph Campbell's Hero's journey, with Luke Skywalker symbolizing the Hero archetype.
As such, he is a formulaic, relatable protagonist who encounters the basic struggle between good and evil in the same way as other heroic figures such as Harry Potter, Bilbo Baggins, and Jesus Christ.
Luke's central dilemma is the ongoing war between good and evil, both externally and internally.

===
Religious ===
Some argue that Luke mirrors fundamental values of Christianity and Abrahamic religion; Luke's journey is often compared to that of Jesus Christ.
Scholars argue that Luke is a Christ-like figure, while Yoda represents a god and Darth Vader represents the temptations of evil.
Luke's struggle between good and evil is contrasted with that of his father, Anakin Skywalker, in a way that represents the story of the Prodigal Son.

==
Concept and creation ==
Luke was variously conceived of as a 60-year-old grizzled war hero, later as a Jedi Master, and as a woman.
In an interview about his early drafts, Lucas said:

The first [version] talked about a princess and an old general.
The second version involved a father, his son, and his daughter; the daughter was the heroine of the film.
Now the daughter has become Luke, Mark Hamill's character.
There was also the story of two brothers where I transformed one of them into a sister.
The older brother was imprisoned, and the young sister had to rescue him and bring him back to their dad.

Though Luke's surname was "Skywalker" in Lucas's 1973 treatment of The Star Wars, it was changed to "Starkiller" in subsequent drafts, at one point featuring in the title (The Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller).
The "Starkiller" surname remained for the first few months of production; Hamill used the name "Luke Starkiller" the sole time he referred to himself during filming (dubbed "Skywalker" in the film).
"
Starkiller" was dropped due to what Lucas called "unpleasant connotations" with Charles Manson.
An alternative ending pitched by George Lucas for Return of the Jedi was Luke assuming his father's role as Darth Vader after the latter's death and intending to rule in his place.
Though Lawrence Kasdan favored the idea, Lucas ultimately declined, since the films were made for children.
Another conclusion to the film featured the character disappearing into the wilderness akin to "Clint Eastwood in the spaghetti westerns.
"According to Mark Hamill
, during the filming of the original Star Wars film, George Lucas asked him if he would reprise the role for a cameo when he was in his 60s to pass the torch to the next generation.
In 1983, Hamill stated that his return to the franchise would be "either be another plane of existence or not the same character".
Hamill learned of the sequel trilogy over the summer of 2012 at a Star Wars Celebration during lunch when Lucas told him one was in development.
Hamill recalled shaving his beard to portray the Trickster in The Flash, then letting it grow back for the filming of Star Wars.
Luke's lack of screen time in The Force Awakens was due to concerns by screenwriter Michael Arndt that his presence would mean the audience would have less interest in protagonist Rey, leading to an agreement that he be removed from the screen and instead become a plot device.
Hamill attended meetings for script readings, and helped conceal Luke's role in the film; instead of dialogue, he read stage directions.
Abrams said it allowed him to remain involved and that his reading helped make a "better experience for everyone".
According to concept designer Christian Alzmann, Luke's appearance in The Last Jedi was partly inspired by that of Colonel Kurtz in Apocalypse Now (1979).

== Reception ==
In 2015, Luke Skywalker was selected by Empire magazine as the 50th-greatest movie character of all time.
Empire also ranked him as the third greatest Star Wars character.
Luke was also on the ballot for the American Film Institute's 100 Years...
100 Heroes and Villains.
On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Luke at number 14.
IGN listed Luke as their 4th top Star Wars character, and he was chosen twice by IGN's readers as one of their favorite Star Wars characters.
IGN's Jesse Schedeen also picked Luke Skywalker as one of the characters they most wanted to appear on the Wii, as well as listing Skywalker as one of their favorite Star Wars heroes.
Schedeen also listed the character as one of the Star Wars characters they wanted to see in Soulcalibur.
IGN also called the fight between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader in Return of the Jedi one of the ultimate movie "boss battles".
In a feature on speeches made by Luke Skywalker, IGN's Todd Gilchrist said that his favorite speech made by Luke was "I am a Jedi, like my father before me".
UGO Networks listed Luke as one of their best heroes of all time, and he was voted as one of the coolest Star Wars characters by UGO's readers.
Inventor Dean Kamen has also code-named his new prosthetic arm system "Luke" in honor of the character.
Mark Hamill was nominated a Saturn Award for Best Actor in for his portrayal of Luke Skywalker in Star Wars, and won the award for his portrayal in The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and The Last Jedi.
In 1976, Mark Hamill had a serious car accident after filming Star Wars, which involved an operation on his face.
It was speculated that the Wampa attack at the beginning of The Empire Strikes Back was written in to explain his facial injuries, but George Lucas specifically disputed this in the DVD commentary of The Empire Strikes Back.
In regards to Luke's portrayal in The Last Jedi, many fans expressed disappointment in how he was depicted "as a grumpy old man whose failures had driven him into hiding" and the actions the character takes in contributing to Kylo Ren's backstory, a stark departure in how Luke was characterized in the original trilogy.
Hamill originally stated that he "pretty much fundamentally [disagreed] with every choice [The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson] made for this character," but that he had the utmost respect for Johnson and was willing to do his part to realize Johnson's vision.
While regarding the possibility of a younger actor playing the role, Hamill expressed support towards Sebastian Stan, whose physical resemblance to a young Hamill went viral.
However he noted that child actor Jacob Tremblay would be his top choice if the story were to be focused on a very young Luke.
In 2016, when asked about the character's sexual orientation and if Luke could be gay, Hamill said Luke's sexual orientation "is meant to be interpreted by the viewer."
He added, "if you think Luke is gay, of course he is.
You should not be ashamed of it.
Judge Luke by his character, not by who he loves.
"
Hamill later said that he considered the possibility that Luke could have found love between Episode VI and Episode VII.

==
Cultural impact ==
Skywalker remains an American icon.
In fact, Luke Skywalker is often still used by child psychotherapists to help children to project their thoughts and state of being in a way that is understandable to both the child and their therapist.
Another way that therapists utilize Star Wars in sessions is to teach their patients that the Force represents the self-understanding that they achieve in therapy.
Children are taught that they are Luke and their therapist
is Obi-Wan as eventually, as Luke no longer needed his mentor, patients will one day no longer need their therapist.
Star Wars has been related back to cultural events of its time, such as the Cold War and Nixon-era politics.
The severing of Luke's hand and Darth Vader's bionic presence supposedly, according to space.com, symbolize the unity of the military and amputees.

==
Relationships ==


===
Family tree ===


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
Further reading ==
Dunk, Steve (December 28, 2017). "
A Hero's Journey - Luke Skywalker".
TheForce.net.
Retrieved October 6, 2019.

==
External links ==
Luke Skywalker in the StarWars.com Databank
Luke Skywalker on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Luke Skywalker on IMDb
Luke Skywalker and the Shadows of Mindor on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is the novelization of the 2015 film of the same name.
The author, Alan Dean Foster, also wrote Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker, the 1976 novelization of the first Star Wars film.

==
Development ==
Asked to write the novelization by Shelly Shapiro of Del Rey Books,
Foster was given access to the screenplay of the film, along with stills from the film of characters and sets.
Foster wanted to develop a romance between Rey and Finn, which he thought was implied in the film.
He later stated, "I expected to see that developed further in Episode VIII."
He also expressed his dissatisfaction with the latter film, saying that it prompted him to write a treatment for Episode IX, "attempting in that storyline to explain a lot of the really silly things that happened in Episode VIII.
"
However, he admitted that he "never expected Disney to do anything with [it].
"

==
Differences between the novel and the film ==
The novelization includes additional scenes and dialogue.
These include:

A prologue featuring an excerpt from the "Journal of the Whills", a fictional journal first mentioned in Foster's first Star Wars novelization.

Early in the novel, a sequence with Leia reveals the origin of main factions in the film: the Resistance, the New Republic and the First Order.

A section revealing how Poe Dameron escapes from the crashed TIE fighter and leaves Jakku.

A sequence where Rey and Chewbacca encounter Unkar Plutt on Takodana.
==
Publication history ==
To avoid spoilers caused by the book being released before the movie, the hardcover release was delayed until January 5, 2016.
The e-book was released on December 18, 2015.
The book was a #1 New York Times best seller.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
The score from The Empire Strikes Back, composed by John Williams, was recorded in eighteen sessions at Anvil Studios over three days in December 1979 and a further six days in January 1980 with Williams conducting the London Symphony Orchestra.
Between Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back, Williams had also worked with the London Symphony Orchestra for the scores to the films
The Fury, Superman and Dracula.
The score earned another Academy Award nomination for Williams.
Again, the score was orchestrated by Herbert W. Spencer, recorded by engineer Eric Tomlinson and edited by Kenneth Wannberg with supervision by Lionel Newman.
John Williams himself took over duties as record producer from Star Wars creator George Lucas.

The soundtrack was first released in the United States as a 75-minute double LP five days before the film's premiere but the first Compact Disc release ran only half the length of the 2-LP set.
Re-recordings of the score even included music that was not on the original CD soundtrack.
A remastered version of the soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records on May 4, 2018.

==
Overview ==
In 1980, the disco label RSO Records released the film's original soundtrack in a double-album, with two long-playing (LP) records.
Combined, the two records featured seventy-five minutes of film music.
This double LP package also included a booklet presentation with pictures of the main characters and action sequences from the film.
Featured at the booklet's end was an interview with John Williams about the music and the new themes, such as "The Imperial March (Darth Vader's Theme)" and "Yoda's Theme".
It also included a brief explanation of each track.
The front cover artwork featured Darth Vader's mask against the backdrop of outer space; and the back cover featured the famous "Gone with the Wind" version of the poster art.
As a side note, this package marked the final time a double LP soundtrack set was ever issued (Episode VI, the final film to have an LP soundtrack released, had only a single disc, also released by RSO Records).
A double-cassette edition was also released.

In the U.K., a single vinyl album and cassette were released in 1980 by RSO Records.
This comprised only ten tracks, which were also re-arranged differently.
For instance, the first track on the U.K. release is "The Imperial March" instead of the "Star Wars Main Theme".
This track listing would be used for the album's first international CD release in 1985.
Also unlike the U.S. version, this release did not have a booklet but the information (and some photographs) were replicated on the inner sleeve.

In 1985, the first Compact Disc (CD) release of the soundtrack was issued by Polydor Records, which had by that time absorbed RSO Records and its entire music catalog.
As with the album's original U.K. vinyl and cassette release, this CD release reduced the music content from the seventy-five minutes featured in the 1980 U.S. double-album down to forty-two minutes.

In 1993, 20th Century Fox Film Scores released a special four-CD box set:
Star Wars Trilogy:
The Original Soundtrack Anthology.
This anthology included the soundtracks to all three of the original Star Wars films in separate discs.
The disc dedicated to The Empire Strikes Back restored almost all of the original seventy-five minutes from the 1980 LP version and included new music cues never released before for a total of nineteen tracks.
On the fourth bonus disc, five additional tracks from Empire were included in a compilation of additional cues from the other two films.
This CD release also marked the first time that the famous "20th Century Fox Fanfare" composed by Alfred Newman in 1954 was added to the track listing, preceding the "Star Wars Main Theme".

In 1997, RCA Victor released a definitive two-disc set coinciding with the Special Edition releases of the original trilogy's films.
This original limited-edition set featured a thirty-two page black booklet that was encased inside a protective outer slipcase.
The covers of the booklet and the slipcase had the Star Wars Trilogy Special Edition poster art.
This booklet was very detailed, providing extensive notes on each music cue and pictures of the main characters and action sequences from the film.
The two discs were placed in sleeves that were on the booklet's inside front and inside back covers.
Each disc had a glittery laser-etched holographic logo of the Empire.
The musical content featured the complete film score for the first time.
It had all of the previously released tracks (restoring the Mynock Cave music which was left off the 1993 release), included extended versions of five of those tracks with previously unreleased material, and six brand new tracks of never before released music for a total of one hundred twenty-four minutes.
All the tracks were digitally remastered for superior clarity of sound.
They were also re-arranged and re-titled from the previous releases to follow the film's story in chronological order.
RCA Victor re-packaged the Special Edition set later in 1997, offering it in slimline jewel case packaging as an unlimited edition, but without the original "black booklet" version's stunning presentation and packaging.

In 2004, Sony Classical acquired the rights to the classic trilogy scores since it already had the rights to release the second trilogy soundtracks (The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones).
And so, in 2004, Sony Classical re-pressed the 1997 RCA Victor release of the Special Edition Star Wars trilogy, including The Empire Strikes Back.
The set was released in a less-than-spectacular package with the new art work mirroring the film's first DVD release.
Despite the Sony digital remastering, which minimally improved the sound heard only on high-end stereos, this 2004 release is essentially the 1997 RCA Victor release.

In 2016, Sony Classical released a remastered version of the original 1980 release as a two-disc LP, copying all aspects of the original RSO release, down to the labeling.

On May 4, 2018, Walt Disney Records released a newly-remastered edition of the original 1980 album program on CD, digital download, and streaming services.
This remaster was newly assembled from the highest-quality tapes available, rather than sourced from the existing 1980 album masters.
This release marks the first release on CD of the complete 1980 soundtrack album.

===
Release history ===


==
Track listing for the first U.S. release on LP ==
First release on LP by RSO.Total Time: 74:34


===
Charts ===


==
Track listing for the original U.K. release and first international release on CD ==
First release on CD by Polydor.
"The
Imperial March
(Darth Vader's Theme)" – 3:00
"Yoda's Theme" – 3:27
"The Asteroid Field" – 4:10
"Han Solo and the Princess" – 3:26
"Finale" – 6:25
"Star Wars (Main Theme)" – 5:48
"
The Training of a Jedi Knight" – 3:05
"Yoda and the Force" – 4:02
"The Duel" –
4:03
"The Battle in the Snow" –
3:48Total
Time: 41:23


==
Star Wars Trilogy:
The Original Soundtrack Anthology ==
In 1993, 20th Century Fox Film Scores released a four-CD box set containing music from the original Star Wars trilogy.
Disc two in the set was devoted to The Empire Strikes Back, with further tracks on disc four.

Note:
Parts of tracks six and seventeen on this particular set have their left & right channels reversed).

The first part of track twenty-one, "Ewok Celebration (Film Version)", is from Return of the Jedi.

==
Track listing for the Special Edition reissue ==
In preparation for the 20th anniversary Special Edition releases of the original trilogy's films, 20th Century Fox spent four months, from April to July 1996, transferring, cleaning and preparing the original soundtracks for special two-disc releases.
The original release, by RCA Victor in 1997, consisted of limited-edition books with laser etched CDs inside the front and back covers with each book.
In the case of The Empire Strikes Back, the discs are etched with the logo for the Empire.
The discs were given an unlimited release in a two-disc jewel case, also by RCA Victor later that year.
They were again re-released in 2004 by Sony Music, with new artwork paralleling the original trilogy's first DVD release.

==
Recording Information ==


===
Cue List ===
1M1
Main Title (2)
1M2
The Imperial Probe (3)
1M2 New Start
1M2
Insert Bar 80
1M2
Insert #2 Bar 109
1M3/2M1 Luke's Escape
2M2 Ben's Instructions
2M3 Luke's Rescue
2M4
The Probe Scanner
3M1 Drawing The Battle Lines
3M2 Leia's Instructions
3M3
The Snow Battle
3M4/4M1
Luke's First Crash
4M2
The Rebels Escape Again
4M3
The Asteroid Field
5M1 Crash Landing
5M2
Yoda Appears
5M3 Yoda's Entrance (4)
5M3
End
Fix
5M4/6M1 Solo
And The Princess
6M2
Yoda's Teaching
6M3
This Is Not A Cave
6M4 Training A Jedi
6M5/7M1
The Magic Tree
7M2 Attack Position
7M3 Yoda Raises The Ship
7M4/8M1 Vader's Command
8M2 City
In The Clouds
8M3 Lando's Palace
9M1 Luke
To The Rescue
9M2 Vadar Shows Up
9M3
Putting ThreePio
Together
9M4
Trouble In Prison
9M6/10M1 Carbon Freeze (5)
9M6/10M1
Insert Bar 57
10M2
Luke Pursues
The Captives
10M3 Chewie Chokes Lando
11M1 Through The Window
12M1
Losing A Hand
12M2 To Hyper-Space
12M3 Finale (6)
12M4 End Credits (7)
12M4
End Credits
Insert


==
See also ==
The Empire Strikes Back
Music of Star Wars
Empire Jazz


==
References ==
Star Wars is an American epic space opera media franchise created by George Lucas, which began with the eponymous 1977 film and quickly became a worldwide pop-culture phenomenon.
The franchise has been expanded into various films and other media, including television series, video games, novels, comic books, theme park attractions, and themed areas, comprising an all-encompassing fictional universe.
In 2020, its total value was estimated at US$70 billion, and it is currently the fifth-highest-grossing media franchise of all time.

The original film (Star Wars), retroactively subtitled Episode IV: A New Hope (1977), was followed by the sequels Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (1983), forming the original Star Wars trilogy.
Lucas later returned to filmmaking to direct a prequel trilogy, consisting of Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999), Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), and Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
In 2012, Lucas sold his production company to Disney, relinquishing his ownership of the franchise.
The subsequently produced sequel trilogy consists of Episode VII:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi (2017), and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker (2019).

All nine films of the 'Skywalker saga' were nominated for Academy Awards with wins going to the first two releases.
Together with the theatrical live action spin-off films Rogue One (2016) and Solo (2018), the combined box office revenue of the films equated to over US$10 billion and is currently the second-highest-grossing film franchise of all time.

==
Premise ==
The Star Wars franchise depicts the adventures of characters "A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away", in which humans and many species of aliens (often humanoid) co-exist with robots, or 'droids', who may assist them in their daily routines; space travel between planets is common due to lightspeed hyperspace technology.
Spacecraft range from small starfighters, to huge capital ships such as the Star Destroyers, to space stations such as the moon-sized Death Stars.
Telecommunication includes two-way audio and audiovisual screens, and holographic projections.

A mystical power known as the Force is described in the original film as "an energy field created by all living things ...
[that] binds the galaxy together".
Through training and meditation, those whom "the Force is strong with" are able to perform various superpowers (such as telekinesis, precognition, telepathy, and manipulation of physical energy).
The Force is wielded by two major knightly orders at conflict with each other: the Jedi, peacekeepers of the Galactic Republic who act on the light side of the Force through non-attachment and arbitration, and the Sith, who use the dark side by manipulating fear and aggression.
While Jedi Knights can be numerous, the Dark Lords of the Sith (or 'Darths') are intended to be limited to two: a master and their apprentice.
Force-wielders are very limited in numbers in comparison to the population.
The Jedi and Sith prefer the use of a weapon called a lightsaber, a blade of energy that can cut through virtually any surface and deflect energy bolts.
The rest of the population, as well as renegades and soldiers, use laser-powered blaster firearms.
In the outer reaches of the galaxy, crime syndicates such as the Hutt cartel are dominant.
Bounty hunters are often employed by both gangsters and governments.
Illicit activities include smuggling and slavery.

==
Film ==
The Star Wars film series centers around three sets of trilogies, which are collectively referred to as the "Skywalker saga".
They were produced non-chronologically, with Episodes IV–VI (the original trilogy) being released between 1977 and 1983, Episodes I–III (the prequel trilogy) being released between 1999 and 2005, and Episodes VII–IX (the sequel trilogy), being released between 2015 and 2019.
Each trilogy focuses on a generation of the Force-sensitive Skywalker family.
The original trilogy depicts the heroic development of Luke Skywalker, the prequels tell the backstory of his father Anakin, while the sequels star Luke's nephew, Kylo Ren.

An anthology series set between the main episodes entered development in parallel to the production of the sequel trilogy, described by Disney chief financial officer Jay Rasulo as origin stories.
The first entry, Rogue One (2016), tells the story of the rebels who steal the Death Star plans just before Episode IV.
Solo (2018) focuses on Han Solo's backstory, also featuring original trilogy co-protagonists Chewbacca and Lando Calrissian and involving prequel trilogy villain Darth Maul.

Lucasfilm has a number of Star Wars films in development, two of which were confirmed during Disney Investor Day 2020.
The first will be a film titled Rogue Squadron, which is being directed by Patty Jenkins, and is scheduled for release on December 25, 2023.
The second is an unspecified film from Taika Waititi, who in May 2020 was announced to be directing a Star Wars film
he was co-writing with Krysty Wilson-Cairns.
Additionally, a trilogy independent from the Skywalker saga is being written by The Last Jedi writer/director Rian Johnson.
In September 2019, it was announced that Kathleen Kennedy and Kevin Feige would collaborate to develop a Star Wars film.
In February 2020, a film was announced to be in development from director J. D. Dillard and writer Matt Owens.

===
The Skywalker saga ===


====
Original trilogy ====
In 1971, George Lucas wanted to film an adaptation of the Flash Gordon serial, but could not obtain the rights, so he began developing his own space opera.
After directing American Graffiti (1973), he wrote a two-page synopsis, which 20th Century Fox decided to invest in.
By 1974, he had expanded the story into the first draft of a screenplay.
The 1977 movie's success led Lucas to make it the basis of an elaborate film serial.
With the backstory he created for the sequel, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy of trilogies.
Most of the main cast would return for the two additional installments of the original trilogy, which were self-financed by Lucasfilm.

Star Wars was released on May 25, 1977, and first subtitled Episode IV:
A New Hope in the 1979 book The Art of Star Wars.
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back was released on May 21, 1980, also achieving wide financial and critical success.
The final film in the trilogy, Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi was released on May 25, 1983.
The story of the original trilogy focuses on Luke Skywalker's quest to become a Jedi, his struggle with the evil Imperial agent Darth Vader, and the struggle of the Rebel Alliance to free the galaxy from the clutches of the Galactic Empire.

====
Prequel
trilogy ====
According to producer Gary Kurtz, loose plans for a prequel trilogy were developed during the outlining of the original two films.
In 1980, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine-film series plotted, but due to the stress of producing the original trilogy, he had decided to cancel further sequels by 1981.
In 1983, Lucas explained that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now ...
As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them ...
I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday.
"Technical
advances in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the ability to create computer-generated imagery (CGI), inspired Lucas to consider that it might be possible to revisit his saga.
In 1989, Lucas stated that the prequels would be "unbelievably expensive."
In 1992, he acknowledged that he had plans to create the prequel trilogy.
A theatrical rerelease of the original trilogy in 1997 "updated" the 20-year-old films with the style of CGI envisioned for the new trilogy.

Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace was released on May 19, 1999, and Episode II:
Attack of the Clones on May 16, 2002.
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, the first PG-13 film in the franchise, was released on May 19, 2005.
The first two movies were met with mixed reviews, with the third being received somewhat more positively.
The trilogy begins 32 years before Episode IV and follows the Jedi training of Anakin Skywalker, Luke's father, and his eventual fall from grace and transformation into the Sith lord Darth Vader, as well as the corruption of the Galactic Republic and rise of the Empire led by Darth Sidious.
Together with the original trilogy, Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader".
====
Sequel
trilogy ====
Prior to releasing the original film, and made possible by its success, Lucas planned "three trilogies of nine films."
He announced this to Time in 1978, and confirmed that he had outlined them in 1981.
At various stages of development, the sequel trilogy was to focus on the rebuilding of the Republic, the return of Luke in a role similar to that of Obi-Wan in the original trilogy, Luke's sister (not yet determined to be Leia), Han, Leia, R2-D2 and C-3PO.
However, after beginning work on the prequel trilogy, Lucas insisted that Star Wars was meant to be a six-part series and that there would be no sequel trilogy.
Lucas decided to leave the franchise in the hands of other filmmakers, announcing in January 2012 that he would make no more Star Wars films.
In October of that year, the Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that Episode VII would be released in 2015.
The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy, became president of the company and served as executive producer of new Star Wars feature films.
Lucas provided Kennedy his story treatments for the sequels during the 2012 sale, but in 2015 it was revealed Lucas's sequel outline had been discarded.
The sequel trilogy also meant the end of the existing Star Wars Expanded Universe, which was discarded from canon to give "maximum creative freedom to the filmmakers and also preserve an element of surprise and discovery for the audience.
"Episode
VII:
The Force Awakens was released on December 16, 2015, Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi on December 13, 2017, and Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker on December 18, 2019, in many countries.
The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi were both critical and box office successes.
Episode IX received a mixed reception from critics and audiences.
The sequel trilogy starts 30 years after Episode VI and focuses on the journey of the Force-sensitive orphan Rey, guided by Luke Skywalker.
Along with ex-stormtrooper Finn and ace X-Wing pilot Poe Dameron, Rey helps the Resistance, led by Leia, fight the First Order, commanded by Han and Leia's son (and Luke's nephew), Kylo Ren.
===
Anthology films ===
Lucasfilm and Kennedy have stated that the standalone films would be referred to as the Star Wars anthology series (though the word anthology has not been used in any of the titles, instead carrying the promotional "A Star Wars Story" subtitle).
Focused on how the Rebels obtained the Death Star plans introduced in the 1977 film, the first anthology film, Rogue One: A Star Wars Story, was released on December 16, 2016, to favorable reviews and box office success.
The second, Solo:
A Star Wars Story, centered on a young Han Solo with Chewbacca and Lando as supporting characters, was released on May 25, 2018, to generally favorable reviews and underperformance at the box office.
Despite this, more anthology films are expected to be released, following a hiatus after 2019's The Rise of Skywalker.

==
Television ==
The Star Wars franchise has been spun off to various television productions, including two animated series released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only the later one remained canon.
Eight live-action Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first, The Mandalorian, premiered on November 12, 2019.
Star Wars won the 2020 Webby Award for Television & Film in the category Social.
Disney+
later released the Ewoks movies and animated series, along the animated first appearance of Boba Fett, and the Clone Wars animated micro-series in a section called Star Wars Vintage, that section will also include the Droids animated series in the future.
Certain aspects of the original Clone Wars micro-series are considered to not contradict the canon, while others do.

=== Series ===


===
Films ===


===
Television special ===


==
Fictional timeline ==
The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies.
The following eras were defined in January 2021:
The High Republic:
The era of the "High Republic", set 200 years before the prequel trilogy.
It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte.

Fall of the Jedi: The era of the prequel trilogy, in which the democratic Galactic Republic is corrupted by its ruler, Palpatine—secretly the Sith lord Darth Sidious.
After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire.
It includes the prequel trilogy films and the animated The Clone Wars.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Republic in August 2019.

Reign of the Empire:
The era after the prequel trilogy, exploring the reign of the Empire.
It includes the animated The Bad Batch and Solo: A Star Wars Story.

The Age of Rebellion:
The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxing with the death of the Emperor and eventually resulting in the fall of the Empire.
It includes the animated Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, and the original trilogy films.

The New Republic:
The era after the original trilogy, set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire.
It includes The Mandalorian and its spin-off series, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic, and Ahsoka.

Rise of the First Order:
The era of the sequel trilogy, in which the remnants of the Empire reform as the First Order.
Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers, the mysterious being known as Snoke and his puppet master, the revived Palpatine.
It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films.
This era was previously defined as The Age of Resistance in August 2019.The
Expanded Universe of spin-off media depicts different levels of continuity, which were deemed non-canonical and rebranded as Legends on April 25, 2014, to make most subsequent works align to the episodic films, The Clone Wars film, and television series.

==
In other media ==
From 1976 to 2014, the term Expanded Universe (EU) was an umbrella term for all officially licensed Star Wars storytelling material set outside the events depicted within the theatrical films, including novels, comics, and video games.
Lucasfilm maintained internal continuity between the films and television content and the EU material until April 25, 2014, when the company announced all of the EU works would cease production.
Existing works would no longer be considered canon to the franchise and subsequent reprints would be rebranded under the Star Wars Legends label, with downloadable content for the massively multiplayer online game
The Old Republic the only Legends material to still be produced.
The Star Wars canon was subsequently restructured to only include the existing six feature films, the animated film The Clone Wars (2008), and its companion animated series.
All future projects and creative developments across all types of media would be overseen and coordinated by the story group, announced as a division of Lucasfilm created to maintain continuity and a cohesive vision on the storytelling of the franchise.
Multiple comics series from Marvel and novels published by Del Rey were produced after the announcement.

===
Print media ===
Star Wars in print predates the release of the first film, with the November 1976 novelization of Star Wars, initially subtitled "From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker".
Credited to Lucas, it was ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster.
The first "Expanded Universe" story appeared in Marvel Comics' Star Wars #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues being an adaptation of the film), followed by Foster's sequel novel Splinter of the Mind's Eye the following month.

====
Novels ====
After penning the novelization of the original film, Foster followed it with the sequel Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
The novelizations of The Empire Strikes Back (1980) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi (1983) by James Kahn followed, as well as The Han Solo Adventures trilogy (1979–1980) by Brian Daley, and The Adventures of Lando Calrissian trilogy (1983) by L. Neil Smith.
Timothy Zahn's bestselling Thrawn trilogy (1991–1993) reignited interest in the franchise and introduced the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn, Mara Jade, Talon Karrde, and Gilad Pellaeon.
The first novel, Heir to the Empire, reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, and the series finds Luke, Leia, and Han facing off against tactical genius Thrawn, who is plotting to retake the galaxy for the Empire.
In The Courtship of Princess Leia (1994) by Dave Wolverton, set immediately before the Thrawn trilogy, Leia considers an advantageous political marriage to Prince Isolder of the planet Hapes,  but she and Han ultimately marry.
Steve Perry's Shadows of the Empire (1996), set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that included a comic book series and video game.
The novel introduced the crime lord Prince Xizor, another popular character who would appear in multiple other works.
Other notable series from Bantam include the Jedi Academy trilogy (1994) by Kevin J. Anderson, the 14-book Young Jedi Knights series (1995–1998) by Anderson and Rebecca Moesta, and the X-wing series (1996–2012) by Michael A. Stackpole and Aaron Allston.
Del Rey took over Star Wars book publishing in 1999, releasing what would become a 19-installment novel series called The New Jedi Order (1999–2003).
Written by multiple authors, the series was set 25 to 30 years after the original films and introduced the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The bestselling multi-author series Legacy of the Force (2006–2008) chronicles the crossover of Han and Leia's son Jacen Solo to the dark side of the Force; among his evil deeds, he kills Luke's wife Mara Jade as a sacrifice to join the Sith.
Although no longer canon, the story is paralleled in The Force Awakens with Han and Leia's son Ben Solo, who has become the dark Kylo Ren.
Three series set in the prequel era were introduced for younger audiences: the 18-book Jedi Apprentice (1999–2002) chronicles the adventures of Obi-Wan Kenobi and his master Qui-Gon Jinn in the years before The Phantom Menace; the 11-book Jedi Quest (2001–2004) follows Obi-Wan and his own apprentice, Anakin Skywalker in between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones; and the 10-book
The Last of the Jedi (2005–2008), set almost immediately after Revenge of the Sith, features Obi-Wan and the last few surviving Jedi.

Although Thrawn had been designated a Legends character in 2014, he was reintroduced into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels, with Zahn returning to write more novels based in the character, and set in the new canon.

====
Comics ====
Marvel Comics published a Star Wars comic book series from 1977 to 1986.
Original Star Wars comics were serialized in the Marvel magazine Pizzazz between 1977 and 1979.
The 1977 installments were the first original Star Wars stories not directly adapted from the films to appear in print form, as they preceded those of the Star Wars comic series.
From 1985 to 1987, the animated children's series Ewoks and Droids inspired comic series from Marvel's Star Comics line.
According to Marvel comics former Editor-In-Chief Jim Shooter, the strong sales of Star Wars comics saved Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
Marvel's Star Wars series was one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
The only downside for Marvel was that the 100,000 copy sales quota was surpassed quickly, allowing Lippincott to renegotiate the royalty arrangements from a position of strength.
In the late 1980s, Marvel dropped a new Star Wars comic it had in development, which was picked up by Dark Horse Comics and published as the popular Dark Empire series (1991–1995).
Dark Horse subsequently launched dozens of series set after the original film trilogy, including Tales of the Jedi (1993–1998), X-wing Rogue Squadron (1995–1998), Star Wars: Republic (1998–2006),
Star Wars Tales (1999–2005),
Star Wars: Empire (2002–2006), and Knights of the Old Republic (2006–2010).After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, it was announced in January 2014 that in 2015 the Star Wars comics license would return to Marvel Comics, whose parent company, Marvel Entertainment, Disney had purchased in 2009.
Launched in 2015, the first three publications were titled Star Wars, Darth Vader, and the limited series Princess Leia.
First announced as Project Luminous at Star Wars Celebration in April 2019, full details of a publishing initiative called Star Wars: The High Republic were revealed in a press conference in February 2020.
Involving the majority of the current officially licensed publishers, a new era set 200 years before the Skywalker Saga will be explored in various books and comics.
These include ongoing titles by Marvel and IDW Publishing, written by Cavan Scott and Daniel José Older respectively, that will both premiere in August 2020.

===
Audio ===
====
Soundtracks and singles ====
John Williams composed the soundtracks for the nine episodic films; he has stated that he will retire from the franchise with The Rise of Skywalker.
He also composed Han Solo's theme for Solo: A Star Wars Story; John Powell adapted and composed the rest of the score.
Michael Giacchino composed the score of Rogue One.
Ludwig Göransson scored and composed the music of The Mandalorian.
Williams also created the main theme for Galaxy's Edge.
====
Audio novels ====
The first Star Wars audio work is The Story of Star Wars, an LP using audio samples from the original film and a new narration to retell the story, released in 1977.
Most later printed novels were adapted into audio novels, usually released on cassette tape and re-released on CD.
As of 2019, audio-only novels have been released not directly based on printed media.

====
Radio ====
Radio adaptations of the films were also produced.
Lucas, a fan of the NPR-affiliated campus radio station of his alma mater the University of Southern California, licensed the Star Wars radio rights to KUSC-FM for US$1.
The production used John Williams's original film score, along with Ben Burtt's sound effects.
The first was written by science-fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden.
It was broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981, adapting the original 1977 film into 13 episodes.
Mark Hamill and Anthony Daniels reprised their film roles.
The overwhelming success, led to a 10-episode adaptation of The Empire Strikes Back debuted in 1983.
Billy Dee Williams joined the other two stars, reprising his role as Lando Calrissian.
In 1983, Buena Vista Records released an original, 30-minute Star Wars audio drama titled Rebel Mission to Ord Mantell, written by Daley.
In the 1990s, Time Warner Audio Publishing adapted several Star Wars series from Dark Horse Comics into audio dramas: the three-part Dark Empire saga, Tales of the Jedi, Dark Lords of the Sith, the Dark Forces trilogy, and Crimson Empire (1998).
Return of the Jedi was adapted into 6-episodes in 1996, featuring Daniels.

===
Video games ===
The Star Wars franchise has spawned over one hundred computer, video, and board games, dating back to some of the earliest home consoles.
Some are based directly on the movie material, while others rely heavily on the non-canonical Expanded Universe (rebranded as Star Wars Legends and removed from the canon in 2014).
Star Wars games have gone through three significant development eras, marked by a change in leadership among the developers: the early licensed games, those developed after the creation of LucasArts, and those created after the closure of the Lucasfilm division by Disney and the transfer of the license to Electronic Arts.

====
Early licensed games (1979–1993) ====
The first officially licensed electronic Star Wars game was Kenner's 1979 table-top Star Wars Electronic Battle Command.
In 1982, Parker Brothers published the first Star Wars video game for the Atari 2600, Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back, followed soon the year later by Star Wars: Jedi Arena, the first video game to depict lightsaber combat.
They were followed in 1983 by Atari's rail shooter arcade game Star Wars, with vector graphics to replicate the Death Star trench run scene from the 1977 film.
The next game, Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984), has more traditional raster graphics, while the following Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back (1985) has vector graphics.
Platform games were made for the Nintendo Entertainment System, including the Japan-exclusive Star Wars (1987), an international Star Wars (1991), and Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992).
Super Star Wars (1992) was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, with two sequels over the next two years.

====
LucasArts and modern self-published games (1993–2014) ====
Lucasfilm founded its own video game company in 1982, becoming best known for adventure games and World War II flight combat games, but as George Lucas took more interest in the increasing success of the video game market, he wanted to have more creative control over the games and founded his own development company, LucasArts.
Improved graphics allowed games to tell complex narratives, which allowed for the retelling of the films, and eventually original narratives set in the same continuity, with voice-overs and CGI cutscenes.
In 1993, LucasArts released Star Wars: X-Wing, the first self-published Star Wars video game and the first space flight simulator based on the franchise.
It was one of the best-selling video games of 1993 and established its own series of games.
The Rogue Squadron series was released between 1998 and 2003, also focusing on space battles set during the films.

Dark Forces (1995), a hybrid adventure game incorporating puzzles and strategy, was the first Star Wars first-person shooter.
It featured gameplay and graphical features not then common in other games, made possible by LucasArts' custom-designed game engine, the Jedi.
The game was well received, and it was followed by four sequels.
The series introduced Kyle Katarn, who would appear in multiple games, novels, and comics.
Katarn is a former stormtrooper who joins the Rebellion and becomes a Jedi, a plot arc similar to that of Finn in the sequel trilogy films.
A massively multiplayer online role-playing game, Star Wars Galaxies, was in operation from 2003 until 2011.
After Disney bought Lucasfilm, LucasArts ceased its role as a developer in 2013, although it still operates as a licensor.

====
EA Star Wars (2014–present) ====
Following its acquisition of the franchise, Disney reassigned video game rights to Electronic Arts.
Games made during this era are considered canonical, and feature more influence from the Star Wars filmmakers.
Disney partnered with Lenovo to create the augmented reality video game Jedi Challenges, released in November 2017.
In August 2018, it was announced that Zynga would publish free-to-play Star Wars mobile games.
The Battlefront games received a canonical reboot in 2017.
Jedi:
Fallen Order was released in November 2019 and Star Wars:
Squadrons was released in October 2020.

===
Theme park attractions ===
In addition to the Disneyland ride Star Tours (1987) and its successor, Star Tours: The Adventures Continue (2011), many live attractions have been held at Disney parks, including the travelling exhibition Where Science Meets Imagination, the Space Mountain spin-off Hyperspace Mountain, a walkthrough Launch Bay, and the night-time A Galactic Spectacular.
An immersive themed area called Galaxy's Edge (2019) opened at Disneyland and opened at Walt Disney World in mid-2019.

A themed hotel, Star Wars:
Galactic Starcruiser, is currently under construction at Walt Disney World.

===
Multimedia projects ===
A multimedia project involves works released across multiple types of media.
Shadows of the Empire (1996) was a multimedia project set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi that included a novel by Steve Perry, a comic book series, a video game, and action figures.
The Force Unleashed (2008–2010) was a similar project set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope that included a novel, a 2008 video game and its 2010 sequel, a graphic novel, a role-playing game supplement, and toys.

===
Merchandising ===
The success of the Star Wars films led the franchise to become one of the most merchandised franchises in the world.
While filming the original 1977 film, George Lucas decided to take a $500,000 pay cut to his salary as director in exchange for full ownership of the franchise's merchandising rights.
By 1987, the first three films have made US$2.6 billion in merchandising revenue.
By 2012, the first six films produced approximately US$20 billion in merchandising revenue.
Kenner made the first Star Wars action figures to coincide with the release of the original film, and today the original figures are highly valuable.
Since the 1990s, Hasbro holds the rights to create action figures based on the saga.
Pez dispensers began to be produced in 1997.
Star Wars was the first intellectual property to be licensed in Lego history.
Lego has produced animated parody short films and mini-series to promote their Star Wars sets.
The Lego Star Wars video games are critically acclaimed bestsellers.
In 1977, the board game Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star was released.
A Star Wars Monopoly and themed versions of Trivial Pursuit and Battleship were released in 1997, with updated versions released in subsequent years.
The board game Risk has been adapted in two editions by Hasbro:
The Clone Wars Edition (2005) and the Original Trilogy Edition (2006).
Three Star Wars tabletop role-playing games have been developed: a version by West End Games in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s, and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.

Star Wars Trading Cards have been published since the first "blue" series, by Topps, in 1977.
Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States.
Each card series are of film stills or original art.
Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare "promos", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II "floating Yoda" P3 card often commanding US$1,000 or more.
While most "base" or "common card" sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase cards" are very rare.
From 1995 until 2001, Decipher, Inc. had the license for, created, and produced the Star Wars Customizable Card Game.

==
Themes ==
Star Wars features elements such as knighthood, chivalry, and Jungian archetypes such as "the shadow".

There are also many references to Christianity, such as in the appearance of Darth Maul, whose design draws heavily from traditional depictions of the devil.
Anakin was conceived of a virgin birth, and is assumed to be the "Chosen One", a messianic individual.
However, unlike Jesus, Anakin falls from grace, remaining evil as Darth Vader until Return of the Jedi.
According to Adam Driver, sequel
trilogy villain Kylo Ren, who idolizes Vader, believes he is "doing what he thinks is right".
George Lucas has said that the theme of the saga is redemption.
The saga draws heavily from the hero's journey, an archetypical template developed by comparative mythologist Joseph Campbell.
Each character—primarily Anakin, Luke, and Rey—follows the steps of the cycle or undergoes its reversal, becoming the villain.
A defining step of the journey is "Atonement with the Father".
Obi-Wan's loss of a father figure could have impacted his relationship with Anakin, whom both Obi-Wan and Palpatine are fatherlike mentors to.
Luke's discovery that Vader is his father has strong repurcussions on the saga and is regarded as one of the most influential plot twists in cinema.
Supreme Leader Snoke encourages Kylo Ren to kill his father, Han Solo.
Kylo uses the fact that Rey is an orphan to tempt her into joining the dark side.
According to Inverse, the final scene in The Last Jedi, which depicts servant children playing with a toy of Luke and one boy using the Force, symbolizes that "the Force can be found in people with humble beginnings."
===
Historical influences ===
Political science has been an important element of Star Wars since the franchise launched in 1977, focusing on a struggle between democracy and dictatorship.
Battles featuring the Ewoks and Gungans against the Empire and Trade Federation, respectively, represent the clash between a primitive society and a more advanced one, similar to the Vietnam-American War.
Darth Vader's design was initially inspired by Samurai armor, and also incorporated a German military helmet.
Originally, Lucas conceived of the Sith as a group that served the Emperor in the same way that the Schutzstaffel served Adolf Hitler; this was condensed into one character in the form of Vader.
Stormtroopers borrow the name of World War I German "shock" troopers.
Imperial officers wear uniforms resembling those of German forces during World War II, and political and security officers resemble the black-clad SS down to the stylized silver death's head on their caps.
World War II terms were used for names in the films; e.g. the planets Kessel (a term that refers to a group of encircled forces) and Hoth (after a German general who served on the snow-laden Eastern Front).
Shots of the commanders looking through AT-AT walker viewscreens in The Empire Strikes Back resemble tank interiors, and space battles in the original film were based on World War I and World War II dogfights.
Palpatine being a chancellor before becoming the Emperor in the prequel
trilogy alludes to Hitler's role before appointing himself Führer.
Lucas has also drawn parallels to historical dictators such as Julius Caesar, Napoleon Bonaparte, and politicians like Richard Nixon.
The Great Jedi Purge mirrors the events of the Night of the Long Knives.
The corruption of the Galactic Republic is modeled after the fall of the democratic Roman Republic and the formation of an empire.
On the inspiration for the First Order formed "from the ashes of the Empire", The Force Awakens
director J. J. Abrams spoke of conversations the writers had about how the Nazis could have escaped to Argentina after WWII and "started working together again."

==
Cultural impact ==
The Star Wars saga has had a significant impact on popular culture, with references to its fictional universe deeply embedded in everyday life.
Phrases like "evil empire" and
"May the Force be with you" have become part of the popular lexicon.
The first Star Wars film in 1977 was a cultural unifier, enjoyed by a wide spectrum of people.
The film can be said to have helped launch the science-fiction boom of the late 1970s and early 1980s, making science-fiction films a mainstream genre.
The widespread impact made it a prime target for parody works and homages, with popular examples including Hardware Wars, Spaceballs, The Family Guy Trilogy and Robot Chicken: Star Wars.

In 1989, the Library of Congress selected the original Star Wars film for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry, as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
The Empire Strikes Back, was selected in 2010.
35mm reels of the 1997 Special Editions were the versions initially presented for preservation because of the difficulty of transferring from the original prints, but it was later revealed that the Library possesses a copyright deposit print of the original theatrical releases.

===
Industry ===
The original Star Wars film was a huge success for 20th Century Fox, and was credited for reinvigorating the company.
Within three weeks of the film's release, the studio's stock price doubled to a record high.
Prior to 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37 million, while in 1977, the company broke that record by posting a profit of $79 million.
The franchise helped Fox to change from an almost bankrupt production company to a thriving media conglomerate.
Star Wars fundamentally changed the aesthetics and narratives of Hollywood films, switching the focus of Hollywood-made films from deep, meaningful stories based on dramatic conflict, themes and irony to sprawling special-effects-laden blockbusters, as well as changing the Hollywood film industry in fundamental ways.
Before Star Wars, special effects in films had not appreciably advanced since the 1950s.
The commercial success of Star Wars created a boom in state-of-the-art special effects in the late 1970s.
Along with Jaws, Star Wars started the tradition of the summer blockbuster film in the entertainment industry, where films open on many screens at the same time and profitable franchises are important.
It created the model for the major film trilogy and showed that merchandising rights on a film could generate more money than the film itself did.
Film critic Roger Ebert wrote in his book The Great Movies, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after.
"
It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures.
The film was one of the first films to link genres together to invent a new, high-concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.
Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws, it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced, big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.
Some critics have blamed Star Wars and Jaws for "ruining" Hollywood by shifting its focus from "sophisticated" films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy, and for the industry shift from stand-alone, one and done films, towards blockbuster franchises with multiple sequels and prequels.
One such critic, Peter Biskind, complained, "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies...
They marched backward through the looking-glass.
"
In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".
The original Star Wars trilogy is widely considered one of the best film trilogies in history.
Numerous filmmakers have been influenced by Star Wars, including Damon Lindelof, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Joss Whedon, John Singleton, Kevin Smith, and later Star Wars directors J. J. Abrams and Gareth Edwards.
Lucas's concept of a "used universe" particularly influenced Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982) and Alien (1979), James Cameron's Aliens (1986) as well as The Terminator (1984), George Miller's Mad Max 2 (1981), and Peter Jackson's The Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001–2003).
Christopher Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the 2010 blockbuster film Inception.

====
Fan works ====
The Star Wars saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the Star Wars galaxy.
In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan fiction to creating fan films.
In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official Star Wars Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre.
Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries.
Fan fiction films set in the Star Wars universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007, Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
Lucasfilm has allowed but not endorsed the creation of fan fiction, as long as it does not attempt to make a profit.

===
Academia ===
As the characters and the storyline of the original trilogy are so well known, educators have used the films in the classroom as a learning resource.

For example, a project in Western Australia honed elementary school students storytelling skills by role-playing action scenes from the movies and later creating props and audio/visual scenery to enhance their performance.

Others have used the films to encourage second-level students to integrate technology in the science classroom by making prototype lightsabers.
Similarly, psychiatrists in New Zealand and the US have advocated their use in the university classroom to explain different types of psychopathology.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Works cited ==


==
Further reading ==
Decker, Kevin S. (2005).
Star Wars and Philosophy.
Open Court.
ISBN 978-0-8126-9583-0.

Campbell, Joseph (1991).
The Power of Myth.
Anchor.
ISBN 978-0-385-41886-7.

Henderson, Mary (1997).
Star Wars: The Magic of Myth.
Bantam.
ISBN 978-0-553-10206-2.

Cavlelos, Jeanne (1999).
The Science of Star Wars.
St. Martin's Press.
ISBN 978-0-312-20958-2.

Nancy R. Reagin, Janice Liedl, ed.
(
2012).
Star Wars and History.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 978-0-470-60200-3.

Star Wars:
Where Science Meets Imagination.
National Geographic & Boston Museum of Science.
October 2005.
ISBN 978-0-7922-6200-8.
==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars Map - 2020 official; HiRez; WebSite
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game developed by Traveller's Tales and published by LucasArts and TT Games Publishing.
It was released on 11 September 2006.
Part of the Lego Star Wars series, it is based on the Star Wars science fiction media franchise and Lego Group's Lego Star Wars eponymous Star Wars-themed toy line.
It follows the events of the Star Wars films, A New Hope,
The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi.
The game allows players to assume the roles of over 50 Lego versions of characters from the film series; customized characters can also be created.
Camera movement was improved from its predecessor Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and the concept of "vehicle levels" was explored more thoroughly.
The game was revealed at American International Toy Fair.
Promotions for the game were set up at chain stores across the United States.

Lego Star Wars II was critically and commercially successful; it has sold over 8.2 million copies worldwide as of May 2009.
Critics praised the game for its comedic and "adorable" portrayal of the film series and due to preference for the original trilogy over the prequel trilogy.
However, the game's low difficulty, and its Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions in general, were received more poorly.
The game received awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and Spike TV, among others.
A mobile phone adaptation, Lego Star Wars II Mobile, was later developed by Universomo, published by THQ, and released on 19 December 2006.
Lego Star Wars II and its predecessor were compiled in Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, released a year later.

==
Gameplay ==
Lego Star Wars II's gameplay is from a third-person perspective, and takes place in a 3D game world that contains objects, environments, and characters designed to resemble Lego pieces.
Its gameplay—a combination of the action-adventure, platform, and sometimes puzzle genres—shares elements with that of Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005).
While Lego Star Wars followed the events of The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002), and Revenge of the Sith (2005), Lego Star Wars II is based on Star Wars (1977)
, The Empire Strikes Back (1980), and Return of the Jedi (1983).
The game comically retells the trilogy's events using cutscenes without dialogue.
The player assumes the roles of the films' characters, each of whom possesses specific weapons and abilities.
At any time, a second player can join the game, by activating a second controller.
During gameplay, players can collect Lego studs – small, disk-shaped objects, which serve as the game's currency.
The player has a health meter, which is displayed on the game's heads-up display.
The player's health is represented by four hearts; when these hearts are depleted, the player dies, and a small amount of their studs bounce away.
However, they instantly respawn and can often re-collect the lost studs.
The game's central location is the Mos Eisley cantina, a spaceport bar on the planet Tatooine.
At the counter, the player may use their Lego studs to purchase characters, vehicles, gameplay hints and extras, or activate cheat codes.
In a small area outside the cantina, players may view collected vehicles.
The game is broken into levels, which are accessed from the cantina; each film is represented by six levels, representing key locations and scenes in that film.
The locations include Hoth, Bespin, Dagobah, Tatooine, the Death Star, and Endor.
The game also features bonus levels.
During levels, the player defeats enemies, builds objects out of Lego bricks, and drives vehicles.
Certain levels are played entirely while piloting vehicles, including a TIE fighter, a Snowspeeder, and the Millennium Falcon.
Levels must first be played in Story Mode.
This unlocks the next level as well as a Free Play mode for the recently completed level.
Gameplay is identical in the two modes.
However, Story Mode restricts playable characters to those followed in the film scenes the levels are based on, while Free Play-offers all those unlocked.
Levels can be replayed in either mode to collect studs and secret items.
Three types of secret items are available: gold bricks, minikits, and power bricks.
Within each level is hidden one power brick.
When a power brick is collected, its corresponding extra, such as invincibility or stud multipliers, becomes available for purchase.
Each level also contains ten hidden minikits, that is, ten pieces of a Star Wars vehicle.
When all ten have been collected, the player is awarded a gold brick.
Collecting a certain number of gold bricks unlocks free rewards, such as a spigot that spews out studs.
Gold bricks are also awarded when levels are completed, and when a predefined number of studs is accumulated in a level; ninety-nine gold bricks are available.
The vehicles represented by the minikits are displayed outside the cantina.
As each vehicle is completed (all ten minikits collected), it becomes available for play in a bonus level.

===
Playable characters ===
68 characters from the films are playable over the course of the game, including variations of Luke Skywalker, Princess Leia, Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, R2-D2, C-3PO, Darth Vader, Wicket the Ewok, and Boba Fett.
Character abilities have a greater role in Lego Star Wars II than in Lego Star Wars.
Certain characters armed with guns can use a grappling hook in predesignated areas.
Characters wielding lightsabers can deflect projectiles, double jump and use the Force.
R2-D2, C-3PO, and other droid characters are needed to open particular doors.
Small characters like the Ewok and Jawa can crawl through hatches to reach otherwise inaccessible areas.
Bounty hunters, such as Boba Fett, may use thermal detonators to destroy otherwise indestructible objects.
Sith, like Darth Vader, can use the Force to manipulate black Lego objects.
Some characters have unique abilities; for example, Chewbacca can rip enemies' arms from their sockets, Darth Vader can choke enemies with the Force, Princess Leia possesses a slap attack, and Lando Calrissian can use a kung-fu-like attack.
Special abilities are often necessary to unlock secrets, and story mode does not always provide characters with needed abilities.
This means that some secrets can be found only in free play mode.
The player can unlock the "Use Old Save" extra, which imports all unlocked characters from Lego Star Wars for use in free play; however, a Lego Star Wars saved game must be present on the same memory card that contains Lego Star Wars II's save data.
Players can create two customized characters in the Mos Eisley cantina.
These characters can be built using both miscellaneous parts and those of unlocked characters; 2,258,163,204 combinations are possible.
Entering two cheat codes, publicized by IGN, makes pieces for a Santa Claus character available.
The game generates names for the characters based on the pieces used (for example, a character made from pieces of Darth Vader and C-3PO might have the name "Darth-3PO"); alternately, the player may create a name.

==
Development ==
Lego Star Wars II was created by the Cheshire game developer Traveller's Tales.
LucasArts – busy with other projects – had deferred publishing of Lego Star Wars to Eidos Interactive, but regained the "necessary resources" to publish its sequel alongside TT Games Publishing.
Lego Star Wars II was created for Microsoft Windows, OS X, Xbox, GameCube, PlayStation 2, Game Boy Advance (GBA), Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable (PSP), and Xbox 360.
Differences exist between platforms: the DS and GBA versions have some different playable characters than the other versions, and the DS and PSP versions support a "Wireless Lobby" for multiplayer gameplay.
Lego Star Wars II uses a modified Lego Star Wars engine.
However, many gameplay improvements were made over its predecessor, most notably camera angles and movement.
Camera movement in co-op was a specific point of concern, as LucasArts received critical feedback from fans over this issue.
Traveller's Tales looked to expand upon the concept of levels completed entirely in vehicles.
These "vehicle levels" were explored more thoroughly in Lego Star Wars II than in its predecessor.
In response to complaints from fans, LucasArts and Traveller's Tales granted the ability to build bricks to all non-droid characters.
Character customization, an entirely new concept, was considered a significant improvement over the original game, and is one of three features highlighted on the game's final back cover.
Tom Stone, director at Traveller's Tales, stated of the various improvements made over the original game:
We were surprised and, of course, delighted that the original game was played and enjoyed by so many people ...
And with all of the new improvements and features along with the Original Trilogy we're implementing into LEGO Star Wars II, we're confident that the new game has what it takes to entertain even more gamers than before.

The designers attempted to recreate the films' characters and events in a "cute" way.
Assistant producer Jeff Gullet said that, in the game's recreation of a Return of the Jedi scene where Luke Skywalker "jumps off the plank ... and somersaults onto the skiff", Skywalker "performs an all-out acrobatic routine with all sorts of jumps from the plank.
It's hilarious".
LucasArts producer David Perkinson said, "unless you've got the heart of the Emperor, you are going to chuckle at many of [the characters]
the first time you see them – you just have to.
They're so darn cute!"
==
Marketing and release history ==
On 2 February 2006, images of the game were leaked to the Internet.
However, they were quickly removed, and LucasArts, if telephoned, did not confirm or deny the game's development.
The game was formally announced on 10 February, at American International Toy Fair 2006.
A preview was later hosted at Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) 2006.
Because the original Lego Star Wars had been well received commercially and critically, selling 3.3 million copies by March 2006 and winning several awards, its sequel was highly anticipated both by fans of the original game and by video game publications such as IGN and GameSpot.
Shortly before the game's release, promotions were set up at chain stores across the United States, including Toys "R" Us, Wal-Mart, Target, Best Buy, GameStop, and Circuit City.
In Europe, Lego Star Wars II was released on 11 September 2006, for PC, Xbox, GameCube, GBA, DS, and Xbox 360; on 15 September for PlayStation 2; and on 10 November for PSP.
The game's North American release fell on 12 September for all platforms, coinciding with the release of the individual two-disc DVD releases of the films on which it was based.
The game's Australian release fell on 15 September for all platforms, but the Xbox 360 version was not released in this region.
The OS X version of the game was released in 2007.
The PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS versions were the only versions that saw release in Japan, which occurred on 2 November 2006.
The game received a rating of E10+ from the Entertainment Software Rating Board (for "cartoon violence" and "crude humor"), 3+ from PEGI, and A from CERO.A mobile phone adaptation of the game was developed by Universomo and published by THQ.
It was released on 19 December 2006.
Several gameplay features – such as two-dimensional graphics, limited character selection, and coverage only of the film Star Wars — distinguish this version of the game from the versions for other platforms.
Lego Star Wars and Lego Star Wars II were later compiled in Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga, developed by Traveller's Tales and published by LucasArts.
The Complete Saga incorporated improvements from the sequel into the original game, and expanded the Mos Eisley cantina to allow access to both games' levels.
It was created for Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, and DS.
It was released on 6 November 2007.

== Reception ==


===
Critical response ===
Upon release, Lego Star Wars II was positively received by critics, who praised its portrayal of the films' characters and events.
Nintendo Power staff writer Chris Shepperd claimed that "[t]he adorable LEGO adaptations also led to some hilarious story moments: the 'I am your father' scene from The Empire Strikes Back is priceless".
Reviewers from GameSpy, 1UP.com, GameSpot, IGN, and PlayStation:
The Official Magazine offered similar opinions.
Shepperd and Variety's Ben Fritz called the game "adorable".
In reviews of the Xbox 360 version, Official Xbox Magazine praised the game's "off-kilter humor", and Electronic Gaming Monthly stated that "[y]ou have to give credit to the brilliant blockhead who forced this awesome yet fundamentally bizarro idea on LucasArts."
Jeff Bell, corporate vice president of global marketing for Microsoft, commended Lego Star Wars II for expanding the range of consumers for the Xbox 360, noting its family-friendly appeal.
The game was praised as a result of reviewers' preference of the original trilogy over the prequel trilogy.
Andrew Reiner of Game Informer said that "comparing [the prequel trilogy] to the films in the original trilogy is similar to comparing Jar Jar Binks to Han Solo".
Shepperd praised the level design of Lego Star Wars II, and called its predecessor's environments "sterile".
These views were echoed by reviewers from 1UP.com, Variety, GameSpot, GameSpy, Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine (for the PlayStation 2), and BusinessWeek.
Critics were divided on the game's level of difficulty.
Fritz claimed that, though Lego Star Wars II provided only a "short journey", it was "loads of fun".
GameSpot's Ryan Davis estimated that it could be completed in six hours, but praised its bonus content.
GameSpy and 1UP.com's reviewers thought similarly.
A review by
USA Today's Brett Molina claimed that "[t]he game's difficulty is balanced well enough
so kids won't feel too frustrated while older gamers will still find a solid challenge" and gave the game an overall score of 8 out of 10.
Official Xbox Magazine's review praised its "weird puzzles".
IGN's Jeremy Dunham and Reiner were more critical of the perceived low difficulty.
Critics disliked the game's Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions.
Davis believed that the Game Boy Advance version could be completed in two hours.
GameSpy staff writer Phil Theobald bemoaned this version's poor controls, easy levels, and vehicle-piloting sections.
He concluded that "for goodness sake, [one should] buy one of the [home] console versions".
Theobald, Davis, and IGN's Craig Harris criticized the high number of glitches in the DS version.

===
Accolades and sales ===
Lego Star Wars II won and was nominated for numerous awards, and ranked on several video game lists.
The official Star Wars website declared Lego Star Wars II to be the best Star Wars-related product of 2006.
The game won iParenting Media Awards' "2006 Greatest Products Call", and was placed on Reader's Digest's September 2006 "5 Things We Don't Want You to Miss" list, Time magazine's list of the top ten video games of 2006, and GameSpy's PC "Game of the Year" list.
It received the 2006 Game of the Year award from Nick Jr. and IGN (for PC games only).
It won Spike TV Video Game Awards 2006's "Best Game
Based on a Movie or TV Show", and
"Best Gameplay" from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts's 3rd British Academy Video Games Awards.
It received BAFTA nominations in three other categories, including "Best Game".
In contrast, the previously poorly received DS version was listed as one of the "tears" on IGN's September 2009 "Cheers & Tears" list of action games for the DS.
The editors of Computer Games Magazine named Lego Star War II the fifth-best computer game of 2006, and called it "
a superb action/adventure, one with [...]
an almost puppy dog-like insistence that you love it.
"Lego
Star Wars II sold over 1.1 million copies worldwide in its opening week.
The PlayStation 2, GameCube, Xbox 360, and Xbox versions were the third, fifth, eighth, and ninth-best selling games of September 2006, respectively.
The GameCube, Xbox, and PlayStation 2 versions were the third, eighth, and ninth-best selling games of 2006, respectively.
All platforms except PC combined, the game was the third-highest selling of 2006 in the United States, behind Madden NFL 07 and Cars.
All platforms combined, the game was the fifth-highest selling of 2006 in the United Kingdom.
The GameCube, GBA, and DS versions were the first, second, and fifth best-selling of January 2007 for their respective platforms.
By 2 May 2009, the game's worldwide sales had surpassed 8.2 million.
It has been certified as part of the budget lines
Platinum Hits for the Xbox 360, Greatest Hits for the PlayStation 2 (each represents a worldwide sales total of at least 400,000 on its respective platform), and Player's Choice for the GameCube (250,000).

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website(Wayback Machine copy)

Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy at MobyGames
David Filoni (born June 7, 1974) is an American film and television director, voice actor, television writer, television producer, and animator.
He has worked on Avatar:
The Last Airbender, The Mandalorian, and on the theatrical film and television series of Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
He was also the creator and an executive producer on Star Wars Rebels for all four seasons, and served as its supervising director for all but the third season, in which Justin Ridge served as supervising director while Filoni accepted a promotion to oversee all of Lucasfilm Animation projects.
Filoni is also credited as one of the writers and executive producers of the web series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, and as the creator of the 2018–2020 animated series Star Wars Resistance and the 2021 animated series Star Wars
The Bad Batch.

==
Early life ==
Dave Filoni grew up in Mt. Lebanon, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Pittsburgh.
He graduated from the Mt. Lebanon High School in 1992 and Edinboro University of Pennsylvania in 1996.
Filoni's father was an opera and a classical music fan, according to composer Kevin Kiner (who did most of the music for The Clone Wars and Rebels); as such, he inherited appreciation for classical music and helped with the collaboration process, with Kiner crediting Filoni for suggesting the organ in Grand Admiral Thrawn's theme from Rebels.
Filoni has also said that his grandfather and uncle were pilots, with the latter specializing in restoring planes.
He cited this as a significant influence with regards to the concept of Star Wars Resistance.

==
Early career ==
Prior to his work with Lucasfilm Animation, Filoni worked as a storyboard artist and/or assistant director for various animated series, including Mike Judge's King of the Hill, Phil Walsh's Teamo Supremo, and Disney's Kim Possible, before moving on to direct many of Nickelodeon's first-season episodes of the animated series Avatar: The Last Airbender.

==
Star Wars ==
An avid Star Wars fan, particularly of character Plo Koon, Filoni dressed up as the Jedi Master for the opening of Revenge of the Sith, and was dismayed at the character's fate in the film.
Filoni left Nickelodeon after George Lucas offered him a job, helping him develop a Star Wars animated series.
While on The Star Wars Show Filoni revealed that he originally believed he was being pranked when given the Star Wars job.
Filoni's office, as seen in the extra features on the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars DVD, is filled with Plo Koon paraphernalia.
He has a bust of Plo Koon's head, a model of Plo Koon's ship, an autographed portrait by the actor who played Plo Koon, a replica of Plo Koon's lightsaber on his desk, and his personal Plo Koon costume on display.
Filoni also has a notebook-sized planner on his desk with Plo Koon's picture taped to the outside, and he has written the words "Plo Kool" on concept art designs for the Clone Wars, indicating that he liked those designs.
Filoni also has a small model of the character Appa on his desk, from Avatar:
The Last Airbender.
Filoni has attended all the Clone Wars premieres and attended the fifth-season premiere in Orlando, Florida during the special event Celebration VI on August 24, 2012.
He is most associated with developing the characters of Ahsoka Tano and Captain Rex.
===
Producing and directing ===
In 2008, he served as director of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated feature film and the supervising director of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series.

Filoni made an appearance at Celebration IV on Sunday, May 28, 2007 with producer Catherine Winder to discuss the beginnings of the new television series and reveal how The Clone Wars is being created.
At the time, he announced he would be writing for the Clone Wars monthly comic.
Filoni voices the bounty hunter Embo during various episodes in different seasons.
In February 2009, Filoni was inducted as an Honorary Member of the 501st Legion international costuming organization in recognition of his contributions to the continuing Star Wars saga.
Filoni was as an executive producer of Star Wars Rebels, which debuted in fall 2014, alongside Greg Weisman and Simon Kinberg.
For the first two seasons he also served as its supervising director.
He appointed Justin Ridge as his successor for the remainder of the show, though he still remained as executive producer.
Filoni departed as supervising director in September 2016 when he was given the job as overseer of all future and current Lucasfilm Animation projects.
Then he returned as supervising director for season 4.

In 2017, Jon Favreau invited Filoni to work with him to create The Mandalorian, a live action Star Wars television series that appeared on Disney+ in November 2019.
Referred to as "a Lucas encyclopedia", he contributes to and consults on many aspects of the series' production.
He is an executive producer of the show, as well as director of episodes 1 and 5 of Season 1 and episode 5 of season 2, making it his live action debut.

===
Voice acting ===
Filoni provided the voice of the bounty hunter Embo and the droid CH-33P ("Cheep") in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
In the Star Wars Rebels season three episodes "The Holocrons of Fate" and "Legacy of Mandalore", Filoni voiced a Rebel Crewman, Stormtroopers, and Mandalorian Warrior, respectively.
He also voiced Chopper for the entirety of the show, a fact not revealed until the series finale.
Dave Filoni also voiced Bo Keevil, a secondary character in Star Wars Resistance.

===
Acting ===
Filoni made his live action acting debut in The Mandalorian Trapper Wolf along with Paul Sun-Hyung Lee, as an X-Wing pilot during the time of the New Republic, who appeared in the episodes Chapter 6:
The Prisoner and Chapter 10: The Passenger.
==
Filmography ==


===
Live-action credits ===


===
Animation credits ===


===
Episodic directing and writing credits ===


==
Books ==


==
Awards and nominations ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Dave Filoni at IMDb
Jake Matthew Lloyd (born March 5, 1989), also known as Jake Broadbent, is an American former actor who portrayed the young Anakin Skywalker in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, the first in the Star Wars prequel trilogy.

==
Early life ==
Jake Matthew Lloyd was born in Fort Collins, Colorado.
He is the son of entertainment agent Lisa Riley and the brother of Madison Broadbent.
Lloyd attended Carmel High School in Carmel, Indiana, where he graduated in 2007.

== Career ==
Lloyd began his acting career in 1996, playing Jimmy Sweet in four episodes of ER.
He was then cast as Jake Warren in Unhook the Stars.
He got his big break playing Jamie Langston in Jingle All the Way.
He also played Mark Armstrong in Apollo 11.
Lloyd gained worldwide fame when he was chosen by George Lucas to play the young Anakin Skywalker in the 1999 film Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, the first film in the Star Wars prequel trilogy.
Lloyd received the Young Artist Award for Best Supporting Actor.
In 2000, Lloyd starred in the dramas Die with Me and Madison, then retired from acting, although Madison was not released in cinemas until 2005.

==
Post-Star Wars work ==
After retiring from acting in 2001, Lloyd continued to make appearances at sci-fi and comic-book festivals.
In 2012, he announced that he was directing a documentary highlighting the Tibetan refugees in India, who escape persecution by the Chinese government.
Lloyd was commissioned in 2012 to create a promo for singer Mallory Low's song.
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones actor Daniel Logan, who played Boba Fett in the film, starred in the song's music video.
Lloyd left Hollywood for Chicago, and dropped out after a semester at Columbia College Chicago, where he studied film and psychology.

==
Personal life ==
In 2012, Lloyd explained that his decision to retire from acting in 2001 was due to bullying at school and harassment by the press, both in response to his role in The Phantom Menace.
In March 2015, police responded to an alleged assault by Lloyd on his mother Lisa Riley.
In a statement to Indianapolis Metro Police Department, Riley alleged Lloyd arrived at her house and began verbally berating her.
He then progressed to physically assaulting her, but she declined to press charges, revealing that Lloyd was diagnosed with schizophrenia and was not taking his medication at the time.
On June 17, 2015, Lloyd was arrested in South Carolina under the name Jake Broadbent for reckless driving, driving without a license, and resisting arrest; he failed to stop for a red light, which initiated a high-speed police chase.
At a hearing on June 22, his bail was set at $10,700.
On June 23, Lloyd's mother stated to TMZ that he has schizophrenia and that "the family plans to try and get him help again [...]
once he's released from jail".
Lloyd was not released on bail.
In April 2016, after being held for 10 months awaiting trial in Colleton County Detention Center, Lloyd was transferred from jail to a psychiatric facility due to his schizophrenia diagnosis.
In January 2020, his family issued a statement saying that he has moved closer to his family, and has officially been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.

==
Filmography ==


===
Film ===


===
Television ===


===
Video games ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Jake Lloyd at IMDb
Jake Lloyd – 10 years After Ep One – with Sci Fi Pi at the Wayback Machine (archived July 24, 2009)
The Force Is Not With Him: Anakin Skywalker
10 Years Later at the Wayback Machine (archived July 28, 2009)
=
=
Humans and humanoid sentient species ==


===
Humans ===
Humans are a species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxywide.
Humans are native to many different worlds and are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities, that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.
By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.

Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

Mandalorians: Mandalorians are a culture of humans using armors from Mandalore.
Whose origins are descended from the Taung, a gray skinned humanoid race native to Coruscant.
The Taung are forced from Coruscant by the rising human population.
The warring race name their new planet "Mandalore", after their leader, Mandalore the First.
After the extinction of the Taung, the Mandalorian culture lives on and comprises various species from around the galaxy.

===
Humanoid sentient species ===
The following is a list of Star Wars humanoid sentient species from the Star Wars franchise.

List of Star Wars species
(A–E)
Dathomirians:
The Zabrak, also known as Iridonians (when referring to the Zabrak who came from Iridonia), were a carnivorous humanoid species native to Iridonia, a planet located in the Mid Rim known for its inhospitable terrain and fierce predatory life.
They were a race known for having a fierce sense of self-determination and an equally dominant need for independence.
Zabrak resembled Humans to some degree, but had a number of significant physical characteristics that set them apart from baseline Humanity.
The most striking of these were a series of vestigial horns that crowned the heads of both males and females.
These horns grew at puberty in varying patterns and signified that the time of their rite of passage was drawing near, both Darth Maul and his brother Savage Opress were Zabraks.

Duros (or "Durosians") are humanoids from planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.

They were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

They are proud of their heritage and many take up the mantle of spacefarer.

Some have made a name for themselves, such as Cad Bane, a notorious Duros bounty hunter.

Others prefer a simpler life, and can be found in Mos Eisley quite often.

Ewok
: The Ewok is a small, sentient furry creature who lives in trees on the forest moon of Endor.

List of Star Wars species
(F–J)
Jawa:
Jawa are creatures that inhabit Tatooine.
They wear hoods over their heads to cover their identities from outsiders.
They roam the land in sandcrawlers and deal in trade among others.

Geonosian: Geonosians are sentient, winged insectoid creatures native to Geonosis.

Gungans: Gungans are sentient amphibious creatures native to the swamps of Naboo.

Gungans first appeared in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Jar Jar Binks, a main character, is a Gungan, and despite his lack of intelligence, he becomes a representative in the galactic senate in place of Padme Amadala.

Ithorians:
Ithorians are a hammer-headed humanoid species.
They have appeared in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope, Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II and Star Wars: Bounty Hunter.

Hutts:
Hutts are portly, grotesque, slug-like creatures native to Nal Hutta.
Many are very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords.

List of Star Wars species
(K–O)
Neimoidian:Neimoidians are large-eyed, amphibian and reptilian-like sapient bipeds native to the planet of Neimoidia.
Many Neimoidians are wealthy businessmen.
Despite their commonly menacing attitudes, however, Neimoidians are generally dishonest and easily frightened, preferring to lie even to their leaders, whether it be for profit or for self-safety.

Noghri:
Noghri are short, bipedal, sapient beings native to Honoghr.

The Galactic Empire usually employed them as assassins.
Later, Leia Organa Solo was able to prove how they were duped into service, and they swore allegiance to her and her family.

They often worked as guards for the New Republic.

List of Star Wars species (P–T)
Togruta: Togruta are species from the planet Shili.[4]
They are a humanoid race distinguished by their three, and rarely 4, lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks, and
more commonly called 'head tails'), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togruta possess a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.
Togruta work well in large groups, and individualism is seen as abnormal within their culture.
Jedi Shaak Ti and Anakin Skywalker's former Padawan Ahsoka Tano are togrutan.

Tusken Raiders: Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People, are vicious humanoid creatures native to Tatooine.
"
Tuskens" are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Their first appearance is in Star Wars (1977) when Luke and C-3PO search for R2-D2 on Tatooine.

Twi'lek: Twi'leks are humanoid creatures native to Ryloth.
Their culture strongly suggests male rule and has been that way since Nola Tarkona founded the Diversity Alliance in the Young Jedi Knights series of books.
These creatures have two "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head.
The muscles in these tails can be used to relate the mood of their owner.
Most of twi'lek economy is based on slave trade.
Female slaves were sold as dancers, assistants, and into other lowly jobs until Nola took over Ryloth.
After her takeover most of the economy was based on Ryll spice, which grows native in the caves of Ryloth.
Known twi'lek include Jedi master Aayla Secura; Mission and Griff Vao from the game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic; and Oola, a slave dancer in Jabba the Hutt's Palace on Tatooine.

List of Star Wars species
(U–Z)
Wookiee:
Wookiees are large, hairy, primate-like creatures, native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern day depictions of Sasquatch.
Despite having great strength and a short temper, they are described as an intelligent and scientific race.

==
Animal non-sentient creatures ==
The following is a list of non-sentient, animal fictional creatures species found in the Star Wars franchise.

==
A ==


===
Acklay ===
An Acklay is a large non-Sentient creature resembling a praying mantis.
It is a crustacean.
It is equipped with three eyes and six legs with four digits each, the fourth of which terminates in an elongated scythe-like claw and has a crest to protect its long neck from aerial attacks.
As a carnivore, it possesses a mouth full of long, sharp teeth that it uses for catching fish.
It originated on Vendaxa, but has since adapted to other environments such as Felucia and Geonosis.

One was killed by Obi-Wan Kenobi during the Battle of Geonosis.

Acklay are night and day hunters.
Acklay could be Force-sensitive due to a rare mutation, learning to use Force lightning with their mouths.

===
Air Shrimp ===
Air shrimps are flying shrimp native to Bespin that float in the upper atmosphere.
Not much is known about them, besides the fact that they are eaten by the birdlike Rawwks.
They are tiny and eat human flesh.
They are the pets of sandpeople.

===
Aiwha ===
Aiwha are 30 foot long aquatic mammals that somewhat resemble very large mynocks and cetaceans.
Most claim that its home world is Naboo but it also lives on Kamino.
They dwell in the oceans and the sky above it.
The Gungans and Kaminoans ride on them.

===
Akk Dog ===
Akk dogs, sometimes called Aak dogs, are lizard like creatures the length of a speeder.
They formed Force bonds with any handler, Force-sensitive or not.
Commonly seen as Jedi pets or companions, their hides are resistant to lightsabers.
They are native to Haruun Kal.
===
Angler ===
Crustaceal multi-ocular mollusks from Yavin 4 that fish for underwater prey, such as the Aquatic Gundark and the pinkish salamander, by dangling their root-like tentacles/claws below the water's surface.
===
Anooba ===
Anoobas are scavengers that will occasionally attack large creatures such as rontos and eopies, but most commonly they attack smaller creatures.
Their strong jaws have a horny exterior beak that is able to crush thick bones.
They have a long tail that acts as a counterbalance during sprints, and helps to regulate their internal temperature.
They range in weights between 25 and 40 kilograms ( though the males are often larger than females ).
Anoobas have unregulated appetites, and they will gorge until they can no longer move.
They are pack animals and hunt in packs of 10 to 12, within the pack there are 2 dominant adults, an alpha male, and an alpha female.
Female anoobas foster between 3 and 4 cubs per season
, they feed them through methods of regurgitation.
There are some anoobas that have been domesticated by the tusken raiders.
There are also some escaped packs roaming the streets of Coruscant.

===
Asyyyriak ===
The Asyyyriak lives in the forests of Kashyyyk.
It spends most of its time high above the forest floor.
It has an elongated head and a pointed snout filled with sharp teeth.
It has six legs, which are positioned along its flexible spine to provide a highly maneuverable frame.
Each foot has four toes, which end in razor sharp talons.
Its body is covered with long brown and green hair, which lies on top of green skin.

Asyyyriaks primarily prey upon avians and other small animals.
A few small Wookiee children are lost each year because of the Asyyyriak.
Asyyyriaks hibernate during cold seasons, and tend to favor a hollow tree trunk as a den.

===
Aquatic Gundark ===
A medium-sized predator from Yavin 4
, It stalks the shallows of streams and lakes for runyips and whisper birds.
It has multiple sets of eyes to allow simultaneous vision above and below the water.

== B (including Birds) ==


===
Bandara ===
Bandaras, which are also known as sandbar dwellers, are beetles from the planet Devaron who live in huge unyielding swarms on sandbars and beaches.
Their unified mating call during the summer can be unbearable to hear.

===
Bantha ===
The bantha is a colossal, shaggy, mammalian mount with circular ram-like horns.
Herds of bantha inhabit the desert wastes of Tatooine in the outer Rim, as well as grasslands and plains of other worlds throughout the Star Wars galaxy.
They are very sociable animals, have long sticky tongues to catch prey, and are notorious for their smell.
Since bantha are found in such a large number of agricultural systems, it is believed that early space settlers transported the species to new worlds.
Although largely domesticated, on some planets wild herds can still be found.
There are several known varieties of banthas in existence, including the common bantha (Bantha majorus), the smaller, shy dwarf bantha, and the rangier, slender dune bantha.
One specific subtype of bantha is the Kashyyyk greyclimber, which differs in that the greyclimber has massive cranial bone plates in place of horns; it has also adapted to climbing through the evolution of articulated toes that can grip wroshyr trees.
Banthas can be seen in video games and the movie Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
They can also be found in The Mandalorian "Chapter 9: The Marshal".
Also Star Wars Episode II, Attack of the Clones.
They were commonly used on Tatooine by the Tusken Raiders.
The Tusken raiders form symbiotic bonds with banthas.
When the Tusken Raiders reach the age of 7, a bantha of the same gender is ceremoniously given to the youngling, as its partner in life.
When Tusken Raiders marry, the couple's banthas mate.
When the Tusken Raiders have offspring, the banthas often produce an offspring of the same gender at the same time.
Upon the death of a bantha or a Tusken raider, the species left behind will often commit suicide.

===
Barri ===
Barri are enigmatic spacefaring creatures that can hitch rides on asteroids and derelict spacecraft for thousands of years in space.
Their acid secretions break down and help the barris digest the asteroid they ride on.

=== Beck-tori ===
Beck-tori are aquatic parasites endemic to the planet Nam Priax.
They are blue and resemble the shape of an eel.
These creatures channel the force to enhance their senses and heal themselves.

===
Beldon ===
Beldons are colossal floating creatures found in the lower atmosphere of Bespin.
They are gas-filled creatures that can metabolize the natural chemicals and biospheric plankton of the slushy gas-liquid-solid interface
(via long, trailing, tentacles) of the lower atmosphere.
Beldons grow between 800m and 10 km.
They travel together in herds.
Their light-sensitive skin cells aid with defense and metabolism.
Eggs and sperm are released into the atmosphere and drift freely until random fertilization.
They have a caudal fin on their back to help with stability.
They excrete Tibannna gas which can be collected and used as a hyperdrive coolant.
They are surrounded by a small electrical field to detect approaching danger.
A herd of Beldons are seen in season 2 of Star Wars Rebels.

===
Bergruutfa ===
Bergruutfa are large 7m tall herbivorous grazers from the planet
Teloc Ol-sen.
They have been known to serve as caravan beasts, warbeasts and farm animals, and have an armored frill around their head.

===
Birds ===


====
Clawbird ====
The clawbird is a black-feathered carrion-eating bird, similar to a vulture.
They live on Tatooine, Geonosis and Wayland.

====
Gartro ====
Gartros are small, avian creatures that live on Coruscant.
They have bat-like wings, spiked tails, and jaws filled with sharp teeth.
Gatros are omnivorous and completely harmless.

====
Geejaw ====
Geejaws are leathery-winged bird creatures that live on Naboo and the forest moon of Endor.

====
Hawk-bat ====
Hawk-bats are purple or red creatures with a curved beak and leathery wings.
They can be found on civilized worlds like Coruscant and Taris.

====
Kkryytch ====
Kkryytch are avian creatures that eat seeds and live on Kashyyyk.

====
Porgs ====
Porgs are a penguin or puffin-like species with facial features of seals.
They are native to the planet Ahch-To, where Jedi Master Luke Skywalker made his exile in the years following the victory over the Galactic Empire.
They are introduced in The Last Jedi and are known for how "insanely cute" they are, serving as comic relief.
The creatures, who dwell on the cliffs of the island where Skywalker lives in exile, could build nests and fly.
Male porgs are known to be slightly bigger in size than females; baby porgs are called porglets.
A flock of porgs is known as a murder.
During The Last Jedi, one porg finds its way aboard the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca; they serve as a foil for the Wookiee.
A porg also appears in The Rise of Skywalker when Rey travels to Ahch-To.

The introduction of the porgs was somewhat controversial, with some critics claiming the creatures were introduced to cater to children and boost merchandise sales.
However, the production team has stated that the porgs were created to account for the puffins in the background of outdoor shots set on Ahch-To.
Puffins are native to the Skellig Islands, which served as the filming location of Ahch-To, and local conservation laws prevented the filmmakers from taking actions that would keep the puffins out of frame; they either had to remove the puffins from the shots with digital editing or disguise them as something else to maintain continuity.
Disguising the puffins proved technically easier and cheaper than removing them, which led to the development of the porgs.
The porgs' voices were created through a mixture of sounds from turkeys, chickens, and doves.

====
Pylat bird ====
Pylat birds are beautiful white and black cockatiels that inhabit Neimoidia and are a symbol of their owner's wealth.

====
Woodoo ====
Woodoos are carnivorous ground dwelling birds native to Tatooine.

===
Blase Tree Goat ===
The Blase Tree Goat, as called by the natives who live on Endor, is known galaxy wide as a Choreamnos.
A lazy animal that looks like a cross between a goat and a sloth.
They hardly move except to get leaves on other branches.

===
Blistmok ===
The Blistmok is a lizard, native to the planet of Mustafar.
They are usually dark red or a dark teal color.

===
Blurrg ===
The blurrg is used for transportation on Ryloth, on Endor's forest moon, and on Arvala-7, where some are found in a feral state.
It is typically used as a beast of burden by the freedom fighters of Cham Syndulla, and mauraders.
It is found in Star Wars: The Clone Wars and in The Mandalorian episode one.
They are tough-skinned reptilian herbivores known for their small brains and simple intelligence.
Their brain is roughly the size of a jubba nut.
Their dense skull is used as a battering ram, they utter frequent low roars, but besides this no other communications.
Males are eaten during mating.
Their eggs are laid in clutches between 5–6, and are left where they drop.
Young stay inside their mothers' protective circles during early years.
On Endor they are preyed upon by boar-wolves, and are objects of derision in Ewok culture and folk-lore.

===
Borcatu ===
Borcatus are a non-canon, quadrupedal, scavenger vermin found amongst garbage and trash on thousands of civilized planets.
Up to 0.5-metre (1.6 ft) in length, they are protected from the environment and predators by strong, armored scales.

===
Bordok ===
The bordok is a herbivorous equine animal, native to the forest moon of Endor.
They have an erect mane, and short knobby forward pointing horns on either side of their head.
It is used by Ewoks as a pack animal and a mount if captured.

===
Bursa ===
Bursas are carnivorous quadrupeds native to Naboo.
They live in mud huts or burrows they build in the ground.
Rumors are, being that they hunted and killed the early Gungan race, they are partially responsible for the Gungans seeking shelter from them
underwater..


==
C ==


===
Can-cell ===
The can-cell is a monstrous dragonfly, about 1.5 m (4.9 ft)
long, which flies the skies of Kashyyyk and Teth.
It is seen in Star Wars:
The Clone Wars and Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
===
Cannok ===
Cannoks inhabit the forest moon of Dxun.
Cannoks are small, annoying creatures that have the ability to consume anything, including mechanical components.

===
Cherfer ===
Cherfers are aggressive, quadrupedal, herd animals from the planet Elom.
Although they are omnivores, these beasts are quick to anger and prefer meat.

===
Chiilak ===
Chiilak are thick-furred, six-limbed bipeds that inhabit the glacial regions of the moon Misnor, and can grow up to 2.2 m
(7.2 ft) tall.
Although they can breathe air, they can hold their breath underwater for up to 20 minutes; similarly, their webbed paws make for easy swimming.

===
Choreamnos ===


===
Coruscani ogre ===
The Coruscani ogre is a large sentient being that wanders the lower levels of Coruscant.
They have hard gray skin, pointed ears and very sharp teeth.
These beasts feed off the flesh of other creatures.

===
Cracian thumper ===
The Cracian Thumper is a widely used bipedal beast of burden used on human-populated worlds throughout the galaxy.
It is named for the sound it doesn't make, as it makes very little sound while running.
It is a central component of the Rebel Alliance's program of live mount scouting, and Cracian Thumper racing is a popular sport.

===
Crab Glider ===
"Crab gliders" are small, carrion eating crablike creatures native to the planet of Bespin.
Patches of skin between their six legs allow them to glide around their home planet, feeding on the corpses of Beldons, giant air jellyfish.
It is presumed that they keep from falling by catching updrafts from below.

===
Croator ===
The croator, a creature native to Wyndigal II, a planet with extreme ultraviolet radiation exposure, is an asexual, flightless avian-like creature with reflective plumage and an unusually long proboscis, used to inhale tiny fish and insects for food.
Travelers on Wyndigal II often use croator plumage as anti-radiation protection.

===
Cthon ===
The cthon is a zombie-like sentient humanoid that is believed to have evolved from another humanoid creature.
Like the ogre, it feeds off the flesh of others.
It has huge ears, enabling it to find its way around the perpetually dark Coruscant underlevels, but no eyes, as it has no use for them.
Cthons live in small groups and attack the unwary, trapping them with electro nets and devouring them.

They appeared in the novel Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter.

=== Cy'een ===
Cy'een are huge long-necked reptilian fish that are native to the oceans of the planet Chad.

===
Colo Claw Fish ===
Colo Claw Fish are Eel-like predators from the waters of the planet Naboo.
One tried to attack a Gungan sub, but didn't lay a claw on it once.
At the end of the tunnel, a Sando Aqua Monster tried to eat the sub but didn't manage it.
The unlucky Colo, however, ran in to the Sando's mouth, killing it.

== D ==


===
Dashta eel ===
Dashta eels are a species native to Ord Cestus with the ability to use the Force.
They were the biological part of the JK-13 droid.

===
Dactillion ===
Dactillions are four-legged lizard-like creatures with wings and a two part beak.
They fly the skies of Utapau.

===
Danchaf ===
Danchafs, also known as "tree goblins" by the native sentient Jenet species on the planet Garban, these arboreal creatures are ferocious pack carnivores that attack unwary travelers in Garban's forests, and can grow up to 2 m (6.5 ft) tall.

===
Derkolo ===
Derkolo are a sentient species native to the planet Sileron.

=== Dewback ===
Dewbacks or Dewback lizards are large reptilian creatures native to Tatooine.
They are commonly used as beasts of burden by moisture farmers.
They have been described to resemble a t-rex pretending to be a camel.

They move slowly at night, but are known to run at a brisk pace for short distances during the day.
Both Imperial stormtroopers and Jawas have been known to utilize these large beasts.
Dewbacks can be seen in video games, the movie Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope and the series The Mandalorian.
===
Dianoga ===
Dianoga, also known as garbage squids, are large, highly adaptable cephalopods capable of growing up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in length.
They have a spherical body, seven tentacles, a mouth of inward-pointing teeth, and one large eye on a stalk.
They originated in the swamps of planet Vodran, but can now be found in many watery trash or sewage disposals on any planet in the galaxy, living off of any present organic matter.
They are primarily scavengers, and only pose a threat to living creatures when starving or frightened.
Dianogae are now considered sentient beings, as seen in the new canon short story The Baptist.

===
Draagax ===
Draagax are pack hunters that hunt in the equatorial grasslands of the planet Relkass.
Apart from hunting small rodents, these animals also consume wild sentinel plants.
When the plants bloom in the dry season, they provide the draagax with a narcotic that sends them on a berserker frenzy, attacking everything in their path.

===
Dragon ===
====
Condor dragon ====
Condor dragons are flying reptiles from the forest moon of Endor.
They have excellent eyesight and massive fangs for tearing through even the thickest hides.
They have a wingspan of approximately 3 m (9.8 ft).
They are known to eat Ewoks.
They make nests in caves and eat the giant cave spiders.
The Ewok pony is not the prey of the Condor dragon.

====
Dragon snake ====
Dragon snakes are long, ferocious creatures, native to the swamps of Dagobah and Nal Hutta.

====
Hssiss ====
Hssiss, or dark side dragons are large, dark gray, reptilian creatures that originated on Stenness.

They were corrupted by the planet's dark side aura, and domesticated by the Sith.

They have the ability to become almost invisible, making them extremely dangerous to the unwary.

====
Kell dragon ====
Kell dragons are the slightly stockier relatives of the krayt dragon.
While not heavily mentioned in the original Star Wars movies, they featured significantly in the first two installments of the Dark Forces series of games.
Huge and powerful, they rival rancors in their ferocity and, as such, are favored by wealthy crime lords such as the Hutts.

====
Krayt dragon ====
Krayt dragons are massive, carnivorous, terrestrial reptiles native to the planet of Tatooine.

Their digestive tract contains multiple chambers, in which mineral deposits may become gems known as 'Krayt Dragon Pearls', sold for high prices.
Smuggler Hu Wanio became known as the "Kraytcutter" on Sullust from his specialty of dealing in Krayt dragon stomachs on the black market.
The Krayt dragon had two known subspecies, the Canyon Krayt dragon, and the Greater Krayt Dragon.

Canyon Krayt Dragons live in the rocky caves and canyons of Tatooine's safari ranges.
10 m (33 ft) tall and 30 m
(98 ft) long, the canyon krayt represents the smallest of the krayt subspecies.
An evolved hunter, the four-legged canyon krayt possesses a yellow-brown camouflage skin pattern, a five-horned crown ridge, a face armored with dermal bone plates, and a spike-studded tail.
They usually feed on womp rats, eopies, and lone banthas.

Greater Krayt Dragons are rare subspecies of the krayt dragon on Tatooine, measuring up to 100 meters in length, have 10 legs and blue scales, and feed on anything
but mostly Banthas, or on a rare occasions a Sarlacc.
C-3PO passes by a juvenile's skeleton in A New Hope.
This prop was reportedly still in place when the crew of Attack of the Clones went there to film.

===
Drexl ===
Drexl are giant creatures that are usually green, and have teeth the size of human arms.
They are native to Onderon.

The adult form can fly, and is used as a means of transport and defense by the planet's Beast-riders.

Drexl larvae are unable to fly, but are strong and extremely fierce.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.

===
Duracrete slug ===
Having been spread throughout the galaxy by freighters and cargo ships, Duracrete slugs dig tunnels into building foundations and feed off of the concrete in there.
Some specimens have been known to reach 10 m (32.8 ft) in length.
They can consume almost any kind of concrete because the parts they cannot digest are excreted into armor nodules on their bodies.

===
Dweebit ===
The dweebit is a small, reddish-brown beetle, native to the Yuuzhan Vong galaxy.
Dweebits have been used as weapons.
When they were put onto Belkadan, they emitted extremely noxious fumes that made the planet uninhabitable.

== E ==
===
Eopie ===
Eopies are 1.75 meter tall herbivores native to the planet Tatooine, appearing in all three prequel movies,
(Star Wars:
Galactic Battlegrounds and Star Wars Galaxies also feature Eopies).
The quadruped mammals are distinguished by their pale skin and long flexible snouts.
An eopies's pale, white skin helps keep the creature cool by reflecting the intense sunlight of the planet's twin suns.
Eopies are used as beasts of burden due to their endurance and ability to carry a lot of cargo.
They are known for being stubborn and querulous creatures and for having incredibly potent flatulence.
Eopies reach maturity around six standard years of age and their average lifespan is 90 standard years.

==
F ==


===
Fabool ===
Fabools are balloon-like creatures.
They are sometimes punctured by thorny Blba trees and eaten by carnivorous snails.
They live in the Dantarian Savannahs on Dantooine.

===
Falleen ===
Falleens are sentient reptilian beings that can emit pheromones that can affect many species.

===
Falumpaset ===
The Falumpaset is a large mammal native to Naboo, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, The Gungan Frontier, Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds, and Star Wars Galaxies: The Ruins of Dantooine.
They roamed the plains and swamps of the planet in large herds, and their distinctive call could be heard for kilometers around.
Easily domesticated, falumpasets were popular mounts all over the galaxy.

===
Fambaa ===
Fambaas are the largest terrestrial herbivores of the Naboo swamp, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace, The Gungan Frontier, Star Wars Galaxies, Star Wars: Battlefront, and Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds.
Fambaas are technically amphibians but have the scaly hide of reptiles.
These creatures can easily knock over trees to get at leaves and berries.
They also forage for underwater plants.

Fambaas in the wild travel in herds of up to 12.
They are born with moist skin and gills and upon maturity their tails grow, the gills disappear and their skin hardens.
The Fambaa has been domesticated by Gungan for millennia as beasts of burden and cavalry/artillery draft beasts.

===
Fathier ===
Fathiers, or space horses, appears in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
These animals are seen in the coastal city Canto Bight on the desert planet Cantonica.
They are a sentient species that could be tamed and used for riding.
They were known to be graceful and majestic, while being prized for their speed by the wealthy of the galaxy.
The inhabitants of Canto Bight exploited them in competitive and highly popular races on the planet's racetracks.

===
Felucian ground beetle ===
Felucian ground beetles, also known as gelagrubs, are large insects that live on planet Felucia.

===
Fenner's Rock ===
Fenner's Rocks are harmless, slow-moving creatures that consume lichen, moss and algae.
Their bodies resemble rocks and can be stationary for a long time.
They have great big jaws that can suddenly open and sometimes shoot a piercing screech, scaring away unwary passers-by.
===
Fern bicker ===
Fern bickers are ape-like creatures that live on Kashyyyk.
They are mostly solitary creatures.

===
Firaxan shark ===
Alien Firaxan sharks live on the ocean planet of Manaan.
They appeared in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic.

===
Fish ===


====
Colo claw fish ===
=
Colo Claw Fish are immense underwater carnivores that dwell in the porous caverns of the Naboo core, appearing in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
Natural phosphorescence give its eel-like skin an eerie glow.
They have flattened flukes for bodies, with a large toothy snout flanked by hooked grasping claws.
It can grow up to 40 meters in length, mostly made up of hypersensitive tail tissue that detects movement.
While hunting, the colo uses chin lures to attract prey, then screams with special organs in its throat to sonically stun prey.
The colo can then dislocate its jaws to swallow oversized food.
Once ingested, weak stomach acids and poison assist in the stupefaction of live prey.

====
Opee Sea Killer ====
"Opee" is a large, carnivorous,  anglerfish-like aquatic animal living in the underwater sections of Naboo.

====
Sando aqua monster ====
Sando aqua monsters are 200 m (656 ft) long aquatic mammals from Naboo.
They are ravenous, deadly predators, eating everything including the opee sea killer and the colo claw fish.

====
Zuxu ====
Zuxu are carnivorous lungfish from the planet Ganlihk.
Its flippers are large, padded and prehensile enough for it to actually "walk" on four legs on land for a limited time, sometimes even chasing its prey on land.

===
Forntarch ===
Forntarchs are carnivorous, predatory rodents on the planet Gorsh, who await their prey in trees, and then leap down and impale them with razor-sharp forelimbs.

===
Frog-dog ===
Frog-dogs are sentient reptiles with characteristics of both frogs and dogs.
Their diet is carnivorous, and they use their long tongues to capture prey.
Jabba the Hutt kept a frog-dog named Buboicullaar as a pet.

===
Fynock ===
Fynocks are avian creatures that can be kept as pets.
They look like exotic birds with snake tails.
Fynocks live on Talus.
They do not have appendages besides their wings and they have large suckers on their face.

===
Fyrnock ===
Fyrnocks are predatory quadrupeds that live on Anaxes.
They are unable to walk in sunlight.

==
G ==


===
Galoomp ===
Galoomps are herbivorous reptile-like creatures, (though actually mammals) native to Tatooine.
They resemble long-legged armadillos with ankylosaur-like tails.

===
Ganjuko ===
Ganjuko are massive, furred predators found predominantly on planets in the Filve sector and Bothan worlds, and can grow more than 3.5 m (11.5 ft) tall and 5 m
(16.4 ft) long.
Despite their 600 kg (1,320 lb) mass, they can outrun most humans in a sprint.
They are protected by thick external skull plates and beaks, reinforced by thick layers of cartilage, and finally covered over all parts of their body except on its head by thick fur.
===
Ghest ===
Ghests are large reptilian predators from the bayous of Rodia, and they are entrenched in the mythology of the planet.
Ghests are often portrayed as demons in modern Rodian fiction.
They slink underwater quietly in wait and then surprise their prey by attacking and devouring them in a single pounce.

===
Gizka ===
Gizka are small, frog-like creatures that adapt to almost any environment very swiftly, and reproduce just as quickly.
Their first appearance was in the Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic video game.

===
Goffbird (Titavian) ===
A large, purple pterodactyl like creature with a wingspan of 100 m, native to Naboo.
There are large feathers on its chest, which the Gungans use.
It is believed to have a large opening beneath its throat, that emits a secretion with a reddish color to attract other Goffbirds.

===
Gornt ===
A squat, ugly, quadrupedal omnivore, native to the planet Hethar, gornts are now bred as domesticated herd animals on many planets for their extremely nutritious meat.

===
Gorg ===
Not to be confused with Gorog.
Gorgs are frog like creatures that are domestically farmed on Tatooine.

===
Gorog ===
A huge, mammoth animal resembling an ape.
The Gorog is a mythical creature used in an underground arena on Cato Neimodia.
The Gorog can be about 700 meters tall.
The creature is native to Cato Neimodia and walks like a gorilla, with numerous bones and horns sprouting from its head.
The creature is massive, and has two hearts, which makes it difficult to kill.
The Gorog appears in Star Wars
The Force Unleashed II
===
Graiveh ===
Graivehs originate from the planet Ealor, and are dangerous bipedal predators that are considered "pre-sentients" by the scientists of the Galactic Empire, as they seem to almost achieve sentience.
They grow up to 2.5 m (8.2 ft) tall and possess great eyesight.

===
Graul
===
Grauls originate from the planet Dantooine and walk like gorillas.
Their colors range from green to reddish orange and are about the size of rancors.
===
Grazer ===
Grazers are fat animals with spikes on their backs and large udders.
They live on Alderaan, Gestron, and Haruun Kal.
===
Great oopik ===
Great oopiks, flightless creatures from the planet Paramatan with vestigial wings, seem to be the evolutionary link between reptiles and avians.
They also use echolocation to seek their food and stun them with powerful ultrasonic waves emitted from their throat sacs.
They also possess a sac below their backs.
This lethal sac emits a toxic odor when stimulated.
===
Greysor ===
Greysors are monkey-like creatures that live on Naboo, Mimban and Cholganna.
Gungans are known to keep them as pets.

===
Grotseth ===
Grotseths are dangerous predatory fish on the ocean planet Baralou.
They hunt in packs, grow up to 4 m (13.1 ft) in length and are covered in many small razor-sharp shells.

===
Gualamas ===
Gualamas are docile and swift quadrupeds native to Naboo.
They are seen usually in herds, are white with long, swinging tails, and horns atop their heads.
They are smaller relatives of gualaras.

===
Gullipuds ===
Gullipuds are self-inflating creatures, used in gullipud ball games on planets like Naboo, Manaan, Selonia and Drall.

===
Gundark ===
Gundarks are large, long-eared primates, native to the jungle planet of Poiu-Trewq.

Surprisingly solitary for primates, they are noted for both their great strength and their fierce tempers.

== H ==
===
Hanadak ===
Hanadaks are like a cross between a bear and a baboon.
They hibernate during the winters on Hok and have a fierce temper.

===
Hoska ===
Hoska are grazers herd beasts living on the plains of the planet Essowyn, and are primary source of food for the Saurton, the local sentient species.

===
Howlers ===
Howlers are carnivorous, reptilian quadrupeds that may be native to Yavin 4.
They attack prey mainly by lunging and clawing, but they do have an ear-splitting howl that they use to stun prey.
They make an appearance on the video game Jedi Academy.

==
I ==


===
Ishi Tib ===
Ishi Tib are an amphibious species native to Tibrin.

===
Ikopi ===
Ikopis are fleet-footed ungulates that live on the plains of Naboo.

===
Iriazes ===
Iriazes are bipedal ungulates with one horn, a long kangaroo-like tail and brown fur.

They live on Muunilinst and Dantooine.

==
J ==
===
Jyykle vulture ===
Jyykle vultures are solitary creatures that live on Mimban and Kashyyyk.
They are extremely temperamental and often attack without warning.

==
K ==


===
Kaadu ===
Kaadu are large, flightless, billed waterfowl that live in the swamps of the planet Naboo.
Gungans use them as mounts.

===
Kalaks ===
Kalaks are large and very stupid reptilian creatures that stand
2.35 m (7.7 ft) tall.
They live on Mobus and have a tough hide, thereby making them difficult to hunt.

===
Kaminoan ===
Kaminoans are tall, long-necked creatures native to the ocean planet of Kamino and are most commonly known for running the famous cloning factories of Kamino, where the Republic's clone army was created.
They are almost humanoid, very tall, long neck, extremely pale.

===
Kath hound ===
Kath hounds are horned,
wolf-like creatures native to Dantooine.
There are two variants: the smaller one is orange and white with two horns; the larger is brown overall with three large horns.
This latter variant is also called a "bull kath hound".

===
Kimogila ===
Kimogila are large,  vicious lizards from Lok.
They resemble the Krayt Dragons of Tatooine with some distinct aesthetic differences including its bulkier build and its lack of floppy ears.
Kimogila (or "kimos") are generally a dark green color with rows of horns running from nose to tail.
They are very aggressive and trophies, though rare, are made of their skulls.

===
K'lor Slugs ===
K'lor slugs are large worm-like creatures native to the Sith Homeworld of Korriban, and inhabit the tombs of the Sith lords, and prey on anything that attempts to plunder the tombs, from archeologists to Sith Acolytes.
They are also found on several other worlds.
For example: A massive K'lor Slug is found on Taris.
They appear in Star Wars:
The Old Republic


===
Koriena ===
Koriena are striped canines that hunt in packs and are similar to wolves.

=== Kouhun ===
Kouhun are centipede-like creatures with stingers and teeth.
They live on Mimban and Indoumodo.
As well, giant kouhuns live in the swamps of Naboo and shoot poison puffs at their prey.

===
Kowakian monkey-lizards ===
Kowakian monkey-lizards are small, hairy creatures with large ears, beaks and tails, and stand approximately two feet (60 cm) tall.
They are small, semi-intelligent creatures from the planet Kowak.

===
Krakanas ===
Krakanas are aquatic creatures that live on Mon Calamari.
They are similar to giant octopi, in that they have many tentacles; however, each tentacle ends in a large razor-sharp pincer.

===
Krykna ===
Krykna are large, pale-white six-legged arachnoid arthropods native to the planet Atollon, large enough to be aggressively dangerous to humans, but repelled by sensor marker technology.
These spiders closely resemble the Knobby White Spider (above) from the planet Dagoba.
They can be found in chapter ten of The Mandalorian.

===
Kybuck ===
Kybucks are fast, grassland-inhabiting ungulates that inhabit Kashyyyk.
These swift mammals use the tall grasses of their native grasslands to hide from would-be predators, although they are capable of outrunning most predators anyway, being able to perform magnificent acrobatic jumps while running up to 90 kilometers per hour.
Male Kybucks have short horns on the top of their heads, and different species can be told apart by horn variations.

===
Kyren ===
The kyren is a small herbivorous insect from Ansion that travels in swarms of up to 150 million individuals.
They have no legs, and spend most of their lives airborne, feeding on the wide grasslands of Ansion.

==
L ==
===
Laa ===
Laas are fish, resembling angler fish.
Laas live in Naboo's swamps.

===
Laigrek ===
Laigreks are large arachnids from the planet Dantooine.
They like dank, dark areas and took up residence in the ruins of the Dantooine Jedi Enclave after it was bombarded by Darth Malak in the Jedi Civil War.

Their bite is painful, but not venomous.

===
Lava flea ===
Lava fleas are a species of hard shelled arthropod.
The Mustafar lava flea has been domesticated by the native Mustafarians who use it in their large industry of mining the various metals dissolved in the plentiful lava on their planet.

===
Lepi ===
The lepi are an omnivorous humanoid species, resembling anthropomorphic rabbits, with large incisors, long ears, lanky frames, and big feet.
Lepi are covered in short fur that varies in color from green to dark blue.
They possess a heightened metabolism such that they are always in motion, giving some an air of fidgetiness.
Lepi developed and pursued stellar travel in response to over crowding on their homeworld Coachelle Prime.
===
Loper ===
Lopers are small, opossum-like rodents from the fourth moon of Yavin.
They are readily identified by their luxurious red fur, sharp teeth and claws, and hairless, bone-plated tail that ends in wicked barbs.
Though nasty when cornered, Lopers will tend to avoid conflict with larger creatures.

===
Lylek ===
The Lylek is the most dangerous predator on the planet of Ryloth.
It is one of the few creatures that is able to survive in the Bright Lands.
Lyleks are tall beasts that are protected by a thick exoskeleton.
They are armed with sharp, spear-footed limbs, powerful jaws, and overpowering tentacles.
Lyleks are fierce and prey on each other when there is no other food available.
In addition to their viciousness and strength, their tail tentacle is also tipped with a poisonous barb.
The poison is not deadly, but it is strong enough to disable most creatures
so they do not escape.
Lyleks are also known for crawling into inhabited caves and threatening city dwellers.

===
Lizards ===


====
Scyk ====
Scyks are reptilian lizards native to Tatooine.
They appear in the video game Star Wars Galaxies.

====
Vesp ====
Vesps are poisonous lizards that live on the planet Lok.

====
Vyp ====
Vyps are poisonous lizards that live on Cholganna.

== M ==


===
Malia ===
Malia are swift creatures living in dens on the surface of Ragoon 6, marked by blue-gray fur, long tapered snouts, and a triple row of yellow teeth.
They are fearsome fighters, especially during the night when they do their hunting and are most active.

===
Maramu ===
Maramu, a cross between a ram and a kangaroo, live in the mountains of Genesia and Cholganna, they are also native to the forest moon of Endor.

===
Massiff ===
Massiffs are creatures that can be found across the galaxy, including Geonosis and Tatooine.
They are used as pets and guards.
They are often found living with tusken raiders.
In The Mandalorian chapter 9, the Mandalorian uses tusken to speak with them.

===
Minstyngar ===
Minstyngars are insects that live in troops on Kashyyyk and Mimban.

===
Mogo ===
Mogos are camel-like creatures with ten legs that inhabit the planet Roon; the mogo's shaggy fur keeps it warm in the mountains.
Mogos can be used for transportation and food, and their fur is used for clothing.

===
Mott ===
Motts are strong, horned mammals that live on Naboo and Mimban.
They look like a cross between a rhinoceros and a hippopotamus with orange-tan, white-striped hides, motts are easily domesticated.

===
Mouf ===
Moufs are medium-sized, solitary creatures that often get together to feed or mate.
They look similar to bears.

===
Mutriok ===
The mutriok is a four-legged creature found on Socorro.
It is often preyed on by the tra'cor.
===
Mygeetoan yaks ===
Mygeetoan yaks are white yak-like creatures that live on Mygeeto.

===
Mynock ===
A mynock is a leathery-looking silicon-based organism that grows up to 1.6 m (5.25 ft) long, with a wingspan of up to 1.25 m (4.1 ft), and that feeds on electrical energy.
They are often found leeching power from spacecraft, as mynocks are one of the few species capable of living in the vacuum of space, feeding on stellar radiation, silicon and other minerals from asteroids and other space debris.
Mynocks' bat-like wings also allow them to fly in the atmosphere.
Found across the galaxy (having spread prolifically from their original system), mynocks tend to flock together, migrating annually in large groups.
The most notable of these events are the migrations of Roon, during which the sky darkens from swarms of these creatures.

First seen in The Empire Strikes Back feeding on the Millennium Falcon.
The vynock was a leathery, winged subspecies of the mynock native to the planet Kalarba.

==
N ==
===
Neebray ===
Neebray are giant manta ray-like creatures that first appeared in the Clone Wars TV series.
They live in the vacuum of space, use nebulas as breeding grounds and they have been found on planets such as the coral moon of Rugosa and the moon of Rishi.

===
Neks ===
Neks are quadrupeds that resembles a hairless muscular dog, with three large claws to every paw and large teeth.
They are classically called "Battle Dogs" and are bred in the Cyborrean system for sale on the Galactic Black Market.
These huge and vicious creatures are sometimes fitted with armour plating and special simulators calls "Attack Simulators" for either sparring for duelling.

===
Nerf ===
Nerfs are fur-covered, smelly, herbivores with dull horns protruding from their head, first seen in Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope.
They raised on planets such as Alderaan for their delicious meat, although they have a bad odor.
They are first mentioned by name as an insult in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980)
, nerf herders on Alderaan are known for their poor hygiene.
===
Nexu ===
Nexus are felines from the planet of Cholganna.
Nexus possess tooth-filled jaws that cover most of their spade-shaped heads.
They are covered in tan-brown fur, which helps them blend into the background of their native prairies.
The stripes also aid in hiding out in the rainforest brush.
The four-legged carnivores have four eyes also, as the second set, situated next to the first, can see in infrared to find hidden prey.
They also feature a split ended tail, covered underneath with two rows of suction cups used to climb and swing from tree to tree in their forest home.
A Nexu was seen as an 'Arena Beast' in Attack of the Clones.
Padme Amidala was also attacked by the nexu in the arena on Geonosis before it was killed by a Reek.
Nexu can be trained to act as guards or pets.
Allana Djo Solo owned a nexu named Anji.

===
Night Beast ===
The Night Beast is a fictional monster from the Star Wars Saga as well as a movie by American film maker Don Dohler.

After the Massassi had departed from the planet Yavin IV, they left behind a creature known only as The Night Beast to guard and protect their homeworld against anybody who might seek to take it over until they eventually returned.

Its skin is leathery and is murky green in colour, and has slightly aquatic facial features such as large fish-like lips that are filled with enormous teeth.
It is a bipedal life form whose feet and hands end with gigantic, devastating claws and it possesses great strength.

===
Nudj ===
Nudj are swamp lizards, similar to chameleons.
They are native to the swamps of Dagobah.

===
Nuna ===
The Nuna are gamebirds from Naboo, who can be seen living around the Lianorm Swamp.
A dwarf species existed, the adult of which was the same size as a chick of the common species.
The Nuna is also found on Tatooine, notably around Mos Espa.
The Naboo Nuna is socially aggressive, if one is attacked then nearby Nuna will attack the aggressor.
The Tatooine Nuna is mostly non-aggressive and as a result is farmed in large numbers by local hunters.

==
O ==
===
Opee Sea Killer ===
Opee sea killers are large aquatic meat-eating crustaceous sea creatures that live in the planet core of Naboo.
They are approximately twenty meters in length and hybrids of both crustacean and fish.
The creatures have two pectoral guidance fins, six crablike legs in the back, two antennas, bouncy eyes, and abnormally large jaws with larger prehensile tongues within them.

===
Orbalisk ===
Orbalisks are barnacle-like creatures, native to the Beast Moon of Dxun.
They are parasites that attach to the skin of their host.
They feed on Dark Side Energy.
They pump chemicals into the blood that increase rage, anger, and fury.
When killed they pump toxins into the host.
They appeared in Darth Bane: The Rule of Two.
===
Orray ===
Orrays are creatures that have been described as having a build like a horse or alligator.
Extremely aggressive.
Have the smell of an arm pit.

===
Oslet ===
Oslets are 3 m (9.8 ft) tall, timid creatures that live in the jungles of the planet Joralla.
They are also used as mounts and nest high up in the sio trees.

==
P ==


===
Peko peko ===
Peko pekos are reptavians with purple feathers, native to the swampy regions of Naboo.
They are capable mimics, and are often kept as pets.

===
Pharple ===
Pharple are a small to medium-sized game bird found on Lok.

===
Pikobi ===
Pikobis are dinosaur-like creatures that live in the swamps of Naboo.

===
Profogg ===
Profoggs are little creatures resembling prairie dogs, that live on Tatooine.

===
Pug jumper ===
Pug jumpers are hard exoskeletal creatures that live on Kashyyyk.

== R ==


===
Rainbow gem ===
Rainbow gems are long-living silicon-based lifeforms that live on Gallinore.
They radiate a beautiful, colorful shine that stems from their inner light, but only after maturing for thousands of years.
They are considered extremely valuable, as just one is worth the price of a Mon Calamari cruiser.

===
Rakghoul ===
The Rakghoul is the end result of a Sith bioweapon, turning beings into mindless mutants.
Rakghoul infection can be transferred by contact with one.
The original outbreak occurred on the planet Taris, where they plagued the inhabitants of the Undercity – criminals or their descendants – but they also live on Coruscant.
First appeared in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic


===
Rancor ===
The rancor is an immense, warm-blooded predator native to Dathomir, Lehon, and Felucia.
It was first seen in Return of the Jedi wherein Luke Skywalker is attacked by one at the behest of Jabba the Hutt.
Luke kills the creature by triggering a heavy steel gate to fall and crush its head.

===
Rat ===


====
Jakrab ====
Jakrabs are hare like rodents native to Tatooine.

====
Womp rat ====
A womp rat is a slow-moving rodential creature, often found scavenging in packs at the bottom of canyons.
They are one of the most vile creatures native to Tatooine.
They are covered in short fur that is usually yellow or tan and look through garbage and waste dumps for meals.
Due to exposure to radioactive waste and chemicals, womp rats can mutate into larger beasts, with larger jaws, long, whip-like tails, and even an infectious disease-causing saliva.
According to Luke Skywalker in Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, they attain approximately two meters in length.

===
Rathtar ===
A rathtar is a large, carnivorous creature resembling a giant octopus, with razor sharp teeth, multiple tentacles, and numerous eyes.
Introduced in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), they are pack hunters.

===
Reek ===
The reek is a large quadrupedal mammal native to the plains of Ylesia in Hutt space, and often bred on ranches on that world's Codian Moon.
Large tusks protrude from their cheeks, which they use for headlocks in contests for dominance among their own kind.
One central horn is used to attack an opponent head-on.
While they are herbivores by nature, they are often fed meat to make them vicious and are then used for exhibition sport as execution animals.
Was seen as an 'Arena Beast' in Attack of the Clones.

===
Rock worrt ==
=
Rock worrts are orange insects found on many planets.
Their bite delivers a combination poison and neurotoxin to their victim, which is then used as an incubator for up to 20 eggs.

===
Ro-roo ===
Ro-roos are lemur-like creatures that live on Kashyyyk and Mimban.

===
Rong boar ===
Rong boars are a porcine species found on Mimban.

===
Ronto ===
Rontos are large, four-legged creatures that are beasts of burden utilized by the Jawas of Tatooine.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (and video game adaptation), Star Wars Empire: Darklighter, Star Wars Galaxies, Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (Special Edition),
A Hunter's Fate: Greedo's Tale, and Shards of Alderaan.

Like the native dewbacks of Tatooine, rontos are easy to train and become quite fond of their masters.
Rontos have superb senses of hearing and smell, contrasting their poor vision, which is why they are startled by sudden movements.

===
Rugger ===
Ruggers are small, furry rodents, found on the forest moon of Endor.

===
Roggwart ===
Roggwarts are large, predatory beasts with long tails, curved horns, and tough thick skin.
This is the creature General Grievous kept as a pet in episode ten "Lair of Grievous", season one of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars, an animated cartoon series from 2008.
General Grievous would then name his pet roggwart "Gor".
Gor would then live in Grievous's castle on the third moon of the planet Vassek.
Gor would devour any unintended guests for the rest of his life, until Gor would be slain by Kit Fisto in episode ten, season one of the Clone Wars series.

==
S ==


===
Sand Creature ===
Sand Creatures are monstrous worm-like creatures that do not seem to have a true name.
They tunnel under the ground quickly, and shoot up above ground mouth first to swallow prey.

===
Sarlacc ===
The sarlacc is an omnivorous, immobile beast, found on several planets, most notably Tatooine.
The largest known member of the species resides on Felucia, and is several kilometers long.
Jabba the Hutt used to toss his enemies into a sarlacc, which would then slowly digest them for a thousand years.
Boba Fett is the only one known to survive the sarlacc.
It consists of a single giant beak and many tentacles emerging from the depths of its pit as well as spike-like teeth that help snag onto prey's clothes "like barbed wire
" long enough for the tentacles to grab it.
Xenobiologists are unsure as to whether the sarlacc is animal or plant, as it possesses characteristics of both kingdoms.
They reproduce by spitting out a small dart like object that attaches to a living creature and devours it.
First appears in Return of the Jedi.
They are mentioned in the Disney TV show The Mandalorian.
In episode 9, a Krayt Dragon appears in an empty Sarlacc pit.

===
Scurrier ===
Scurriers are rat-like creatures from Tatooine.
They travel in packs of around 30 members.
Males can be distinguished from females by the horns which are small and straight compared to the larger, curled horns of the males.

===
Shaak ===
Shaaks are plump, pachydermal herd animals with enormous rears that jut into the air.
They are native to the grasslands of Naboo, where they graze on flowers and grass.
They are raised for meat.
They can be found in the animated Disney TV show Star Wars: The Clone Wars.

===
Shyrack ===
Shyracks are bat-like creatures that inhabit the caves of Korriban.
Shyracks are very dangerous pests, that often attack intruders in flocks.

===
Sketto ===
Skettos are flying reptiles, native to Tatooine.
They are active at twilight and live off of the blood of large mammals, often travelling in large groups to overwhelm and feed on prey.

===
Slivilith ===
A slivilith is a large, green, amorphous creature that thrives off ambient energy and solar radiation in space.
Sliviliths have a semi-discernible head with two glowing red eyes and two antenna stalks.
The rear side of the body tapers off into a mass of tentacles.
Sliviliths have membranous wings that can propel them through space or atmospheric environments.

===
Snarb ===
Snarbs are lizards with grey skin and 2 legs.
They live on Mimban.

===
Sleen ===
Sleens are lizards native to Dagobah.

===
Spider ===
====
Kinrath ====
Kinrath are large, venomous arachnid-like creatures that live on Dantooine and Kashyyyk.
They appear in Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic and Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords.

====
Knobby White Spider ====
Knobby White Spiders are a bizarre organism of the Dagobah System: essentially the larvae stage of the gnarl tree, resembling a gigantic arachnid, which roams the swamps and devours animals, and eventually anchors itself to the ground and becomes a mature tree.

====
Shell Spider ====
Shell Spiders, as depicted in Darth Maul: Shadow Hunter, are known for their incredibly tough and durable silk, which was used to form dense armor plating for personal protection.
When woven into a mat, shell spider silk could deflect a vibroblade as well as low-power beams and lasers.

====
Spice spider ====
Spice spiders, also called Energy Spiders, are arachnids, native to the mines of Kessel.
Their excrement is the basis of the narcotic glitterstim.
They are one of Han Solo's greatest fears, as he was chased by one in the Kessel Mines.
About 9 years before the Clone Wars began, some of these spiders were brought to Ryloth and altered to produce the more potent narcotic "glitteryll".

====
Webweaver ====
Webweavers are arachnid creatures that live on Kashyyyk.
They are the dominant species on the dark lower and ground levels of the forest planet, where they use their violent characteristics to thrive.

===
Staga ===
Staga are used as herd animals on the planet Ambria.
They have tufts of fur on their shoulders, but are otherwise reptilian-looking, with scales, horns and thick tails.

===
Stone Mite ===
Stone mites are scorpion-like creatures that cling to spaceships, consuming their hulls with a combination of strong jaws and acidic saliva.
Three individual stone mites can merge to form an ambiotic triont that features a hard shell, strengthened by electrolytic reactions.
These creatures have been suspected as the work of military genetic engineers.
Stone mites can be found across the galaxy, including on Tatooine, Coruscant, Malastare and Naboo.

===
Storm beast ===
Storm Beasts are monsters that inhabit Malachor V.


===
Stratt ===
The stratt is a large reptilian beast that lives on Coruscant.

===
Suubatar ===
The suubatar is a riding beast, native to the grasslands of Ansion.
Suubatars are 6 m (19.7 ft) tall, and can travel at an impressive speed on their six muscular legs.
They are omnivores, and feed equally well on large fruit and small prey.

===
Swamp slug ===
Swamp slugs are large aquatic mollusks that live on the planet Dagobah.

==
T ==


===
Tach ===
Tach are harmless monkey-like creatures that inhabit the Shadowlands on the planet Kashyyyk.
During the Czerka occupation of Kashyyyk, tach were hunted by poachers for their glands, which were used as an additive in brewing a type of strong ale unique to the planet Taris.

===
Talortai ===
The Talortai are a mysterious, force sensitive race who are immune to aging.
They are avian-humanoid in appearance but also have reptilian features.
The Talortai are fierce warriors who hone their abilities using the force.
Talortai also have the ability to regenerate any wounds.

Urai Fen in the game
Star Wars: Empire at War
: Forces of Corruption is the only Talortain seen in the Star Wars franchise.

===
Talz ===
The Talz were a sentient species native to the planet Orto Plutonia.
They were covered in thick, shaggy white fur and possessed four eyes and a small proboscis.
During the Clone Wars, they lived a primitive lifestyle.
A talz named Muftak can be seen in A New Hope.

===
Taozin ===
The taozin is a huge, completely transparent, insect-like beast, endemic to the moon of Va'art.
It eats anything foolish enough to come near, which it traps by spitting a gluey fluid that becomes silk and entwines it.

===
Tauntaun ===
Tauntauns are 2.5 m (8.2 ft) tall bipedal snow reptiles, indigenous to the ice planet Hoth.
Tauntauns are covered with white fur and have downturned horns, four nostrils, and a foul body odor.
They graze on lichen, moss and fungi found in ice grottoes as a food source, as well as scavenging on frozen flesh or small rodents; their own meat is unfit for human consumption.
They are used as mounts by the Rebel Alliance during their occupation of Echo Base.
The tauntaun's thick layers of fat and fur provide adequate protection from the cold during the daytime, but it cannot survive exposure to the cold of night.
Due to oil excreted from their skin, tauntauns give off a very unpleasant odor.
They are the primary prey of the wampa.
The species' first appearance was in The Empire Strikes
Back (1980, with one appearing in the center of this movie poster for the film)
, although a mounted tauntaun head appears in Return of the Jedi (1983) next to Jabba the Hutt's favorite trophy, the frozen Han Solo.

===
Terecon ===
Predators on the planet
Essowyn, terecons are reptiles, who attack by burrowing into the ground and leaping spectacularly upon their unsuspecting prey.
They can grow up to 1 m
(3.3 ft) tall and 8 m
(26.2 ft) long.
===
Terentatek ===
A creature mentioned in the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, presumably created by the Sith to kill Jedi.
On the Jedi Academy on Dantooine, a Twi'lek Jedi teaches Revan about an event called 'The Great Hunt' where numerous Jedi were sent out to kill the creatures.
In the game Terentateks are encountered in the Kashyyyk Shadow lands (it is referred to as 'the ritual beast'), in Naga Sadow's tomb on Korriban and the Shyrack Cave on Korriban.
Terentateks feed on force adepts, and are found where the dark side thrives.
Slow but powerful, Terentateks use their large claws to strike foes.
Many Jedi have fallen to the dark side on their quest to rid the galaxy of these abominations.

===
Tesfli piercer ===
Tesfli piercers are tiny flying insects, who inhabit the dense swamps of the planet Gorsh and live in swarms.
Although their bites are not lethal, they sometimes carry dangerous "rotting disease" that simulates gangrene.

===
Thernbee ===
Thernbees are fearsome beasts with psychic abilities, that live on Almania.
They are hairy and have giant teeth and large claws, similar to a lion or wolf.
They are generally quite playful creatures and are often kept as pets, though are also used as watchdogs.
They possess numbing saliva.

===
Thevaxan marauder ===
An enormous reptilian predator on the planet Gorsh, the Thevaxan marauder can always be heard approaching its prey, being a loud, dimwitted and clumsy beast.
It can grow up to 20 m (65.6 ft)
long and 8 m (26.2 ft) tall at the shoulder.

===
Thranta ===
Thrantas are a group of flying animals found on Alderaan, Bespin, and Coruscant.
While there are multiple breeds varying in size and functions (some for personal travel, others for massive air ferries), most thrantas serve the purpose of aerial transport.
The predominant physical feature of these creatures are their manta ray-like figure.

===
Torton ===
Tortons are red and green turtle-like creatures with long legs.
They originated on Naboo's moon of Rori.
===
Tolibs ===
Tolibs are large swamp birds that live on the planet Mimban.

===
Tra'cor ===
The "Tra'cor" is an amphibious relative of the rancor.
Like the rancor, it possessed a hostile temper, but is smaller than the rancor and almost completely water bound.
The tra'cor will feed on moss and grasses growing underwater, but will also eat meat whenever it presents itself.
These water creatures wait to ambush creatures that come to the water to have a drink.
It is found on the planet Socorro and will also walk on land.

===
Treppok ===
Treppoks are enormous fish that grow up to 30 m (100 ft)
long on the ocean planet of Baralou.
They are the herd animals of the sentient species Krikthasi.

===
Tunnel snake ===
Tunnel snakes are poisonous snakes found in jungle regions of planets, such as Kashyyyk and Wayland.

===
Tuskcat ===
Tuskcats are tiger-like animals that live on Naboo and possibly other planets, such as Orto Plutonia.
They had very long sabre-tooth fangs, hence their name, and are also called "Nabooan Tusked Panthers" or Nabooan tusk-cat.
==
U ==


===
Ubeba ===
Ubebas are simians, native to the planet Cholganna.

===
Ugja ===
Ugja are solitary creatures, native to the planet Cholganna.

===
Ugnaught ===
Ugnaughts are small, humanoid creatures that are seen commonly on Bespin.
In The Mandalorian chapter 1, there is an Ugnaught who used to work for the empire.
He was a slave and worked hard to buy his freedom.
His name was Kuill and was killed in the last episode of the season.
They can also be found in The Empire Strikes Back.
They work on the machine that freezes Han Solo in carbonite.
In the beginning of Return of the Jedi, Leiha disguises herself as an Ugnuaght bounty hunter.

===
Uller ===
Ullers are horned creatures that live on Kashyyyk.

===
Umgullian blob ===
The Umgullian blob is a pink, blobby creature, found on Shili and Mimban.
They are most well known to be employed in the blob races on Umgul.

===
Unark ===
Unarks are small, acid-spitting worms that live on Coruscant.

===
Urusai ===
Urusais are reptavians (reptile and avian) native to Tatooine.

==
V ==


===
Varactyl ===
Varactyls are lizard-like creatures with green scales and coloured plumage on their necks.
They are native to the planet Utapau.
Their toes allow them to climb almost vertically.
They seem to have the head of a bird and a body of a gecko, and their call is a short warble-type sound.
A female one named Boga is ridden by Obi-Wan Kenobi in Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
===
Veermok ===
Veermoks are guard creatures found on Naboo and Mimban.
They resemble lanky, upright, and formidable gorillas.

They are useful as guards because they are nearly immune to blaster fire.

ter, to counter its ferociousness.

===
Velker ===
Velker are star fighter shaped creatures found on the planet Bespin.

===
Voorpak ===
Voorpaks are small carnivores that look like balls of fur standing on stick-like legs.
They are kept as pets.
They can be found on Naboo.

===
Vornskr ===
The vornskr is a canine-like animal, native to the planet Myrkr.
It possesses the unusual ability to hunt using the Force.
They are wild, aggressive and vicious beasts.
The voxyn race created by the Yuuzhan Vong to hunt and kill Jedi were a hybrid of the vornskr and the Yuuzhan Vong fero


===
Vulptex ===
Vulptices (sometimes referred to as crystal critters) are fox-like animals, native to the mineral planet Crait.
They live in caves under Crait's salt crust in groups called skulks.
They are best known for their coats made of white crystalline bristles.

==
W ==


===
Wamba ===
Wambas are hooved creatures that live on Cholganna.

===
Wampa ===
Wampas are a horned, clawed, white-furred, carnivorous species of snow monsters native to the frozen world of Hoth.
They are a semi-sentient race of predators standing over 2 m (6.6 ft) in height, subsisting in the cold climate by hunting tauntauns—their primary prey.
Wampas are usually solitary creatures, but are known to occasionally hunt in packs.
Their white fur allows wampas to blend-in with Hoth's blinding blizzards, enabling them to catch their prey completely unaware.
Once they have made their kill, wampas drag the carcasses back to their icy lair, where they suspend them from the ceiling until ready to eat them.
Due to the extreme temperatures of Hoth and the cold-blooded nature of the wampa, the creatures are difficult to track on radar.
A similar species is believed to inhabit the planet Gall, in the Outer Rim.

The wampa made its first appearance in The Empire Strikes Back (1980), as a predator that attacks Luke and eats his tauntaun.
Several other wampa sequences were planned for The Empire Strikes Back, but were ultimately cut.
The wampa also made an appearance in the Family Guy special "Something, Something, Something, Dark Side" (2009), being depicted as Cookie Monster from Sesame Street.

====
Tatooine Howler ====
The Tatooine Howler, also commonly referred to as the Desert Wampa, is a native species of Tatooine that resembles the Wampas of the planet Hoth, despite having no genetic relation.
They are intelligent and solitary creatures, hunting for prey on their own.

===
Wandrella ===
Wandrellas are 10–15 m (32.8–49.2 ft)
long worms, found in the muddy plains of the jungle-covered planet Mimban.
The wandrella's thoughts are primitive, and it often charges at its prey, using its armored belly to quickly move forward.
This large beast has phosphorescent skin, streaked with brown, and has a cluster of several eyes on one end.

===
Woolamander ===
A woolamander is an ape-like animal native to Yavin IV.

It has a blue furred body, a long, multi-colored tail, a prominent belly, and a multi-colored face.
Its chief enemy is the syntaril.

===
Wolf ===


====
Garral ====
Garrals are wolf-like creatures that live in the forests of Wayland and Cholganna.

====
Loth-wolf ====
The Loth-wolf is a near-legendary, Force-sensitive large canid native to Lothal, known since prehistoric times on that world by its inhabitants.
A white-furred one occasionally assisted Ezra Bridger on Lothal in the Star Wars Rebels TV series.

===
Worm ===


====
Blenjeel Sand Worm ====
Gigantic carnivorous caterpillar-like creatures with round mouths filled with sharp teeth, inhabit the planet Blenjeel.

The worms are blind, but can detect motion.
They appear in Jedi Knight and Jedi Academy games.

====
Conduit worm ====
The conduit worm is a long worm that lives in the electrical wiring channels of underground Coruscant and thrives on the electrical currents sent through them.
They may also be attracted to the electric activity in brains, if they do not find a stronger electrical power source to feed on.
As such, many a person has awoken on Coruscant to find one of the worm's feelers creeping into their ears.
The worms can end up on starships, causing power outages, and are treated as vermin.

====
Glim worm ====
Glim worms are tunneling 1 m (3.3 ft) long predators, found on many planets.
They are covered by sharp, flexible scales that move to propel the worms through sand or soil at speeds
up to 40 km/h (25 mph).
They are also hunted for their skin for use as clothing, and their slime for use as adhesive.

====
Space slug ====
Space slugs, also called exogorths or giant asteroid worms, are silicon-based gastropods capable of surviving in near-vacuum conditions.
Space slugs generally make their habitats in asteroids, where they spend the majority of their lives.
Many space slugs have been found in Hoth's asteroid field, some reaching thousands of meters (feet) in length, up to a recorded maximum around 1,000 metres (3,300 ft), although most are much smaller at around 10 metres (33 ft).
They feed by absorbing an asteroid's minerals through their roots.
Smaller space slugs also devour mynocks (in large space slugs, consumed mynocks are not digested and instead become parasites within the space slug).
Large space slugs may also consume starships and have been known to eat sections of Imperial Star Destroyers that flew too close.
The burrow of a space slug is called a "caysh".
They first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back (1980).

===
Worrt ===
Worrts are frog-like creatures native to Tatooine.
They feed on mostly insects and rodents and catch prey by sitting stationary in the sand and using their long tongues to catch and wrap around passing animals.
Jabba the Hutt kept a number of worrts for pest control.
One is briefly seen in Return of the Jedi outside Jabba's palace.
It catches an animal with its tongue, swallows it, and burps.
Many consider this to be the first major introduction of George Lucas's childish humor into Star Wars movies, and a prelude to Jar Jar Binks.
They are sometimes confused with frog-dogs.

===
Wraid ===
Wraids are large, lizard-like creatures that live and are hunted for their armored head plates on the desert planet of Tatooine.
There is also a subspecies on Korriban.

===
Wyrwulves ===
Wyrwulves are six-legged, canine animals that were in fact the children of the Codru-Ji race.
When a wyrwulf reaches puberty, it encases itself in a cocoon, from which a Codru-Ji adult emerges several weeks later.
They can be found on Munto Codru.

==
Y ==


===
Yeltz ===
Yeltz is an amphibious species that resides in the artificial outpost planets of the Lupania ring.
No one
but Yaddle has seen the creature, and thus it is still regarded as a legend.
They are thought to possess the ability to turn transparent under water.
When submerged, they are fearsome predators, but when on-land, they are shy and tamable.

===
Yeomet ===
Yeomets are trash-eating quadrupeds that live on artificial habitats, like space stations or large capital ships.
They are able to eat almost any form of matter, thanks to a special digestive enzyme triggered by strong electromagnetic radiation.
They carry disease.

===
Yorik coral ===
Yorik coral was the primary shipbuilding material of the Yuuzhan Vong.
It was grown on-planet in the shape of a ship.
Later, symbiotic creatures were implanted or grown within it to form the ship's functions.
The completed yorik ship had a nervous system that controlled and coordinated the various functions, and a circulatory system that sustained them.

===
Ysalamiri ===
Ysalamiri are furry salamander-like beings that live on Myrkr.
They have the unique property of repelling the Force, rendering all Force powers within their sphere of influence void; for this reason, they are prominently used by Grand Admiral Thrawn in his campaigns against the New Republic.
The supposed reason for the Force bubble is that it acts as a way to hide from the other unique carnivores of Myrkr that use the Force to hunt down prey, such as the vornskr.
The term "bubble" is particularly apt because, like water bubbles underwater, multiple ysalamiri's bubbles reinforce each other instead of overlapping.
Because of this, large sections of Myrkr are completely removed from the Force.

==
Z ==
===
Zakkeg ===
Zakkegs are large beasts that reside on Dxun.
They are relatively solitary creatures, with thick hides, and covered in spikes and horns.
Along with their tough hide for defense, they are also immune to most Force powers.
Zakkeg are tough, and are a good challenge for Mandalorians.

===
Zillo Beast ===
The Zillo Beast is a lengthy creature sporting the unique feature of five limbs, the fifth protruding from behind its shoulder blades.
It first appeared in the second season of the popular Cartoon Network series The Clone Wars, toward the end of the season.
It was the dominant predator on Malastare before the Dugs wiped them out using various methods, including drilling for fuel that poisons them.
Though they were rendered extinct, rumors spread of a surviving Zillo that would bring about their apocalypse.
While the Republic engaged in a battle against droids on the planet, they tested a new weapon (a type of E.M.P) over the hollow ground concealing the last Zillo Beast in its cave.
Destroying the droids and accidentally opening up the ground leading below, the Dugs immediately wanted to kill the five-story high creature, the last of its kind.
Seeing its armour was resistant to most projectiles, including lightsabres, the Republic tricked the Dugs into thinking that the beast perished and instead transported it to Coruscant for study.
Before study was over, Palpatine ordered the beast to be killed anyway, but the Zillo Beast broke from its prison to hunt Palpatine down in the nearby Senate building.
Because of this and the danger it posed to the citizens of Coruscant, the beast was, shortly after escaping, killed using a toxin gas converted from Malastare fuel.
At the end of the episode, Palpatine informs doctor Sionver Boll he wants the beast cloned.

==
References ==


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
The Essential Guide to Alien Species on Wookieepedia
This is a list of Star Wars cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the film series.
The list is sorted by film and character, as some of the characters were portrayed by multiple actors.

As the franchise is composed of multiple films (including spin-offs and anthologies) there are multiple lead actors.
In the primary series, dubbed the "Skywalker saga", Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher starred as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia respectively in the original films Star Wars (1977)
, The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983) and reprised the roles in the sequel trilogy films
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2015),
Star Wars:
The Last Jedi (2017) and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
James Earl Jones, David Prowse and Sebastian Shaw collectively portrayed Anakin Skywalker / Darth Vader, and Alec Guinness portrayed Obi-Wan Kenobi in the original films.
Jake Lloyd and Hayden Christensen portray a younger version of Anakin in the first and next two installments of the prequels and Ewan McGregor stars in all three, Star Wars:
Episode I - The Phantom Menace (1999),
Star Wars:
Episode II - Attack of the Clones (2002) and Star Wars:
Episode III - Revenge of the Sith (2005) as a younger Obi-Wan Kenobi, being top billed in the later two films.
Daisy Ridley plays Rey and
Adam Driver plays Kylo Ren in the sequel films (2015—19).

Also starring in the franchise include, Felicity Jones who plays Jyn Erso in Rogue One (2016) and Alden Ehrenheich as Han Solo in Solo:
A Star Wars Story (2018).
Solo served as a lead and supporting character in the original (1977—83) and sequel (
2015—19) films respectively, played by Harrison Ford.

Also recurring throughout the franchise include, Frank Oz, Samuel L. Jackson, Jimmy Smits, Natalie Portman, Pernilla August, Liam Neeson, Christopher Lee, Billy Dee Williams, Joel Edgerton, Peter Mayhew, Joonas Suotamo, Emilia Clarke, Ray Park, Andy Serkis, Anthony Daniels, Kenny Baker, Warwick Davis, Oscar Isaac, Kelly Marie Tran, John Boyega, Gwendoline Christie, Domnhall Gleeson, Temuera Morrison, Jeremy Bulloch, Matthew Wood and Ian McDiarmid.

With the release of Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker in 2019, Daniels is credited with the most acting appearances as the same character, having played C-3PO in all nine films of the Skywalker Saga, as well as the anthology film Rogue One, The Clone Wars film and TV series in 2008 and 2003, and a guest appearance in the first season of Rebels.
He also appeared in Solo, but as a different character named "Tak", as well as a character named "Dannl Faytonni" in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith, the latter being alongside C-3PO.

Indicators only apply for characters portrayed within multiple categories.
All characters without indicators were introduced within the category they are listed on.
The cast is divided in six categories: main saga (M), anthology series (A), animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film (S), books (B), comic books (C), and the non-canonical Legends series (L).

List indicators:
^M  denotes the character was introduced within the main saga.

^A
denotes the character was introduced within the anthology series.

^S
denotes the character was introduced within an animated series or The Clone Wars film.

^LS
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends animated series of film before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^B
denotes the character was introduced within a novel.

^LB
denotes the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^C
denotes the character was introduced within a comic book or graphic novel.

^LC
denotes
the character originated within a non-canonical Star Wars Legends comic book or graphic novel before being introduced into the Star Wars canon.

^+
denotes the character introduced within the current category, but also has an extended plot-line within another category.
(
Example: ^+A  would denote the character was introduced within the current category but has an extended plot-line in the anthology series, alternatively ^+S  would denote an extended plot-line in the animated series, and ^+AS  would denote extended plot-lines on both categories.)
==
The Skywalker saga ==


==
Anthology series ==
A series of stand-alone films was announced in 2013:
Rogue One was released in 2016, Solo was released in 2018, and another film is planned with an unknown title or release.
The films do contain some characters and cast from the main series, along with new characters.

==
Animated series and Star Wars: The Clone Wars film ==
In 2008, the animated film Star Wars: The Clone Wars was released.
It was followed by a television series of the same name within the same year.
Four other series entitled Star Wars Rebels, Star Wars Forces of Destiny, Star Wars Resistance, and Star Wars:
The Bad Batch premiered soon after.

==
Legends films and television series ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, the Star Wars Holiday Special and Ewok prequel films: Caravan of Courage and The Battle for Endor, as well as most comics and books produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars, were re-branded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.
Despite the decanonization, the television films do retain many major cast members from the original trilogy reprising their roles; the Holiday Special featured most of the cast from the original film, while the Ewok prequel films featured Warwick Davis reprising his role as Wicket, who originated in Return of the Jedi.

== Notes ==
a The Clone Wars was Saw Gerrera's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first film appearance in Rogue One, he is portrayed by Forest Whitaker.

b
The Holiday Special was Boba Fett's first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in TESB, he is portrayed by Jeremy Bulloch.

c Kevin Pollack, Ken Grantham, Mark Dodson and Rick Cimino are credited as providing Ewok voices for The Battle for Endor, although which Ewok they voice is not stated.

d Clone Wars was General Grievous' first appearance in Star Wars, although in his first canon appearance in ROTS, he is voiced by Matthew Wood.

e Carrie Fisher appears in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker from footage originally shot for Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, but cut from the film.
The previously unseen footage was repurposed to fit the narrative for the franchise's ninth installment.
Additional material for Fisher's character is provided by Billie Lourd via motion capture.

f
Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your first steps" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring during a flashback caused by Rey's touching of Anakin Skywalker's lightsaber.

g Ewan McGregor's voice can be heard saying the newly recorded dialogue "These are your final steps, Rey, rise and take them" while archive recordings of Alec Guinness saying "afraid" were cut to say "Rey", both occurring when Rey says "Be with me", and voices of past Jedi are heard.

h
In the original release of the film, Yoda is portrayed via puppeteery.
In the 2011 Blu-ray re-release, he is played via computer-generated imagery.

==
References ==
The Star Wars Actors Database
Over 1000 Star Wars actors listed with biographies, photos, in-depth credit listings and more.
==
External links ==
Star Wars Episode
I: The Phantom Menace
Star Wars Episode II:
Attack of the Clones
Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope
Star Wars
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi
Star Wars Episode VII:
The Force Awakens
Star Wars Episode VIII:
The Last Jedi
Star Wars Episode IX:
The Rise of Skywalker
Rey, also known as Rey Skywalker, is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise and the main protagonist of the sequel film trilogy.
She was created by Lawrence Kasdan, J. J. Abrams, and Michael Arndt for The Force Awakens (2015), the first installment of the trilogy, and is portrayed by Daisy Ridley.
She also appears in the film's sequels, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019), and related Star Wars media.

Rey is introduced as a scavenger who was left behind on the planet Jakku when she was a child.
She later becomes involved with the Resistance's conflict with the First Order.
Powerful with the Force, Rey trains to be a Jedi under Luke Skywalker and General Leia, and faces adversaries such as Supreme Leader Snoke, Kylo Ren, and the resurrected Emperor Palpatine—who is revealed to be her grandfather in The Rise of Skywalker.
Rey later adopts the name "Skywalker" to honor her mentors and the family legacy.
Reception to the character and Ridley's performance has been highly positive.
Ridley has garnered multiple accolades for her performances as Rey, including two Saturn Award nominations.

==
Development ==


===
Creation and casting ===
Screenwriter Michael Arndt said that he found Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy's offer to write Episode VII daunting in mid-2012, but he became interested when it was explained to him that the tale was about the origin story of a female Jedi and he met with George Lucas.
The character was known as Kira in the early stages of production, and Arndt described her as a "loner, hothead, gear-head, badass".
Arndt said that he struggled with introducing the young woman as the main character in his story while keeping her from being overshadowed after her early meeting with Luke Skywalker, whose role in the film was eventually minimized.
Ridley recalled that director and writer J. J. Abrams originally intended to name the character "Keera"  [sic], but during filming in Abu Dhabi, Abrams revealed to Ridley that he was thinking of going with "Rey".
On creating a female lead for the new trilogy, Abrams stated that from his initial discussions with writer Lawrence Kasdan, he was excited at the concept of having a woman at the center of the story.
He said that "We always wanted to write Rey as the central character" and that other female representation in the story was also important.
Kennedy stated that, "Rey is the new generation's Luke Skywalker.
"
Rey's background as a scavenger was part of the developers attempting to portray her as "the ultimate outsider and the ultimate disenfranchised person", due to their belief that a person of that nature would likely experience a prolonged journey compared to other types of people.
Daisy Ridley was largely unknown before being cast for the role of Rey.
Ridley said that she auditioned many times for the role over the course of seven months and had to keep her casting a secret for three months.
She was announced as part of the cast at the end of April 2014.
She only had experience with small parts in TV shows.
Her inexperience and lack of exposure were a crucial part of what convinced Abrams to give Ridley the role, as the previous installments had featured relatively unknown talent that would not experience heightened degrees of scrutiny.
Abrams stated that Ridley "was so funny and had a great spark", as well as having her act out an emotional scene, proclaiming that "she nailed it on the first take."
Abrams went on to praise Ridley, saying, "She was born with this gift to be in a moment and make it her own.
She simultaneously works from the inside out and the outside in."
Kennedy proclaimed, "Daisy had a physicality and a self-confidence that was so important to the character we were looking for.
She epitomizes that optimism where anything is possible."
Director Dusan Lazarevic, who was present at the casting of Ridley for a role in British drama series Silent Witness, in addition to praising her acting range, stated, "She showed a combination of vulnerability and strength which gave her a complexity, and there was an intelligence in her eyes that was an indicator she could play quite a complicated part."
Cailey Fleming was additionally cast to portray a young Rey.
Although Ridley said she was "riddled with doubts and insecurities", she said that Rey's hopefulness is what she related to most
: it "was something driving me through the auditions—even though it felt so insanely out of anything that I could've imagined.
"
Ridley recalled her shooting experience as starting off bumpy, with Abrams telling her that her first few takes were "wooden".
But Ridley and Abrams had an "incredibly collaborative" process creating Rey; Ridley recalled that the character "changed from when we first began, she became softer.
And I think that's probably me, because Americans tend not to understand me, so it helped, slowing down the speech and everything just made it softer than I am."
Ridley has said that Rey will have "some impact in a girl power-y way", adding that the character "doesn't have to be one thing to embody a woman in a film.
It just so happens she's a woman
but she transcends gender.
She's going to speak to men and women.
"
In an interview with Elle, Ridley said, "She's so strong.
She's cool and smart and she can look after herself," adding, "Young girls can look at her and know that they can wear trousers if they want to.
That they don't have to show off their bodies.
"Composer
John Williams said he immediately loved Ridley in the film and found composing her theme an interesting challenge.
He said that her theme does not suggest a love theme, but rather a strong female adventurer character infused with the Force for a mature, thoughtful theme.
He added that the "musical grammar" of Rey's theme is not heroic, but conveys "an adventurous tone that needs to illustrate empathy."
===
Characterization ===
Rey is introduced as a 19-year-old woman in The Force Awakens.
She is stubborn, headstrong, brave, optimistic, and maintains fierce loyalty to her friends.
Matthew Yglesias of Vox wrote, "Rey is considerably less callow than Luke".
Ridley says of the character, "It's not because Rey is strong that she's amazing.
It's all the complexities of a human.
It's because she is a well-drawn person who is struggling with things
and you're with her.
"Rey is highly Force-sensitive, which is revealed when she is presented with the lightsaber first owned by Anakin Skywalker, then his son Luke.
Without training, she is able to use the Force and defeat the powerful (albeit injured)
Kylo Ren in a duel.
On the mirror-invoking vision Rey experiences in The Last Jedi, writer and director Rian Johnson said that it represents the character learning that she has to connect with herself.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
Rey is first introduced as an orphan living alone on the desert planet Jakku, scraping a living through scavenging parts from ships.
She rescues the astromech droid BB-8 and encounters Finn (John Boyega), a former stormtrooper.
Attacked by First Order troops, Rey steals and pilots the Millennium Falcon to evade them and escape Jakku.
Smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and Wookiee Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) take back the Falcon in their freighter ship.
She saves Finn and they escape the freighter in the Falcon.
Impressed with Rey's bravery and piloting skill, Han offers her a job on the Falcon; however, Rey declines his offer, feeling that she has to return to Jakku.

After they convene at Maz Kanata's (Lupita Nyong'o) castle on the planet
Takodana to return BB-8 to the Resistance, the First Order is alerted to their presence.
Rey visits the castle's basement vault in which Maz has stored a lightsaber that once belonged to Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill) and his father before him.
Upon touching it, she experiences a terrifying vision: she sees a battle led by First Order enforcer Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), a flashback of her younger self being left behind on Jakku, and a vision of Luke, the last Jedi Master in the galaxy, who has been missing for several years.
Maz debates that whoever abandoned her will never return to Jakku, and her only option is to seek out strength in the Force.
Feeling overwhelmed, Rey rejects the lightsaber and flees into the forest.

The First Order attacks Maz's castle, and Ren captures Rey when the Resistance arrives.
Ren takes her to Starkiller Base, where he probes her mind for the map piece that BB-8 showed her.
Ren uses the Force to read Rey's mind, revealing Rey feels that Han is like the father she never had.
Rey then resists him and reads Ren's emotions, exposing his fear that he will never be as powerful as his grandfather, Darth Vader.
Ren reports to his master, Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis), who commands that Rey should be brought before him.
Left alone with a stormtrooper guarding her, Rey uses a Jedi mind trick to get him to help free her.
After sneaking around inside the base looking for a way to escape, she is elated to find Finn, Han, and Chewbacca have come for her.
They watch in horror as Ren kills his own father, Han.

As they try to escape the base through the woods, Ren challenges Rey and Finn, using his lightsaber.
After Ren seriously injures Finn and disarms him of Luke's lightsaber, Rey uses the Force to retrieve the weapon and battles Ren herself.
Initially overpowered, Rey rejects Ren's offer to train her and uses the Force with the lightsaber, disfiguring his face.
After escaping the destroyed base in the Millennium Falcon with Chewbacca and the wounded Finn, she returns to the Resistance base.
While the Resistance celebrates the victory, Rey mourns Han's death with Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) and visits Finn, who is still unconscious.
She decides to seek out Luke's location, using information provided by BB-8 and the re-activated R2-D2 (Kenny Baker).
Rey, Chewbacca, and R2 travel in the Falcon to the oceanic planet of Ahch-To; upon finding Luke, Rey presents him with his longtime lightsaber.

=====
Related works and merchandising =====
Rey is featured in Star Wars: Before the Awakening (2015) by Greg Rucka, an anthology book for young readers that focuses on the lives of Poe, Rey and Finn before the events of The Force Awakens.
Rey's Survival Guide (2015) by Jason Fry is a first-person account from Rey's perspective about herself and her home planet of Jakku.
Rey is also a point of view character in the 2015 novelization of The Force Awakens by Alan Dean Foster.
Fans noticed a lack of tie-in toys featuring Rey.
Hasbro released a version of Monopoly based on The Force Awakens that excluded the Rey character.
After receiving criticism, Hasbro stated that they did not include Rey to avoid revealing spoilers, and would be including Rey in future toy releases.
Paul Southern, the head of Lucasfilm Licensing, said that they wanted to protect the secrets that "the Force awakens in Rey" and that her character carries a lightsaber.
He said that demand for Rey products was underestimated.
Abrams said, "I will say that it seems preposterous and wrong that the main character of the movie is not well represented in what is clearly a huge piece of the Star Wars world in terms of merchandising."
Regarding Rey's relative absence in Star Wars merchandising, CBBC presenter and voice actor Christopher Johnson stated: "It still baffles me to this day that some toy manufacturers don't think that girls want to play with 'superhero' toys and that boys aren't interested in female characters."
====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Rey is one of the key characters of The Last Jedi.
Picking up directly where the previous installment left off, Rey presents Luke with his lightsaber, but Luke dismissively throws it aside.
Luke eventually agrees to teach Rey the ways of the Force.
Rey demonstrates immense raw strength and a clear temptation toward the dark side of the Force that reminds Luke of Kylo Ren, who was once his nephew and student, Ben Solo.
All the while, Rey feels a sudden connection through the Force with Ren, who tells her that Luke tried to kill him while he was the Jedi master’s student (Luke later tells her that he was tempted to kill Ben after seeing a vision of the pain and suffering he would cause, but relented).
In one of their conversations, Rey and Ren touch hands, and through this Rey swears that she is able to feel conflict within Ren, and becomes determined to turn him back to the light side.
Rey asks Luke once more to come with her and rejoin the Resistance, but he declines.
So, Rey, Chewbacca, and R2-D2 leave without him, and Rey goes to meet Ren in the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy.

Ren takes Rey prisoner and brings her before Snoke.
Snoke tells her that he created the Force connection between her and Ren as a trap to reach Luke.
Snoke tortures and taunts Rey, showing her the attack on the Resistance transports, and eventually orders Ren to kill her.
Ren instead kills Snoke, and he and Rey fight Snoke's guards side by side.
After the duo win, Ren asks Rey to join him and create a new order separate from the legacies of Snoke and Luke, but Rey refuses.
In an attempt to get her to turn, Ren gets Rey to admit that her parents abandoned her.
Despite the revelation, Rey refuses to join him and uses the Force to summon Luke's lightsaber, but Ren does so, too, resulting in a standoff that ultimately breaks the lightsaber.
Shortly afterwards, Resistance leader Vice Admiral Holdo (Laura Dern) rams the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus into Snoke's flagship, separating Rey from Ren.
Rey subsequently uses Snoke's escape craft to flee the Mega-Destroyer as later stated by General Hux.

Rey is later revealed to have made her way back to the Millennium Falcon, aiding the Resistance in fighting the First Order’s troops during the Battle of Crait.
Despite their valiant efforts, the Resistance loses the battle, and Rey focuses her efforts on finding the surviving Resistance fighters to help evacuate them.
Eventually, she finds the Resistance fighters behind a dead-end, and uses the Force to move the rocky barrier aside, clearing the path for them to board the Falcon.
Rey reunites with Finn and Leia and meets Poe Dameron (Oscar Isaac) for the first time aboard the Falcon.
Rey feels Luke’s death through the Force, and reassures Leia that he met his end with "peace and purpose".
As she holds the leftovers of Luke's lightsaber, Rey asks Leia how they can rebuild the Resistance from what remains, and
Leia, gesturing towards Rey, says that they now have all they need.
Unbeknownst to Leia, that includes the fact that Rey stole the sacred Jedi texts from Luke before Yoda's (Frank Oz)
Force spirit burned the tree cave they were in.
====
The Rise of Skywalker (2019) ====
Rey is the main protagonist of the trilogy's final film, The Rise of Skywalker, which is set one year after the events of The Last Jedi.
Rey is continuing her Jedi training at the Resistance base under the tutelage of Leia.
The Resistance announces that the resurrected Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid) has been manipulating events from the Sith world Exegol and has built the Sith Eternal's massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers—the Final Order.
Rey discovers from Luke's old notes that a Sith wayfinder can lead them to Exegol.
Rey, Finn, Poe, Chewbacca, C-3PO, and BB-8 leave for Pasaana, where a clue to the wayfinder's location is hidden.
Rey locates the clue—a dagger with Sith inscriptions—with the help of Lando Calrissian (Billy Dee Williams).
Meanwhile, Rey continues communicating with Ren; through this correspondence, Ren learns where Rey is and comes for her.
Rey confronts Ren, inadvertently allowing Chewbacca to be taken aboard a First Order transport.
Attempting to save Chewbacca, Rey accidentally destroys the transport with Force lightning, seemingly killing him.
Rey is stricken with guilt and reveals to Finn that she has been having visions of herself and Ren sitting on the Sith throne.

Rey and the others travel to Kijimi, where programmer Babu Frik extracts the location of the wayfinder—the moon Kef Bir—from C-3PO's memory files.
Ren and the First Order follow Rey to Kijimi.
Rey senses Chewbacca is alive and the group mounts a rescue mission.
Rey retrieves the dagger aboard Ren's Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Steadfast and has visions of her parents being killed with it; Ren informs her that she is Palpatine's granddaughter.
Palpatine had fathered a son who renounced him; he and his wife hid Rey on Jakku, assuming lives as "nobodies" to protect her.
Palpatine eventually found Rey's parents and had them killed, but never found Rey.
Ren also reveals that as the grandchildren of Sith Lords, their connection is actually a dyad in the Force.
Ren urges her to join him so they can overthrow Palpatine and take the throne of the Sith together, but Rey refuses and escapes aboard the Millennium Falcon with her friends.

Together, they travel to Kef Bir where Rey retrieves the wayfinder on the remains of the second Death Star; upon touching the artifact, she has a vision of herself as a Sith.
Having tracked them, Ren destroys the wayfinder and duels Rey.
Leia, dying, calls to Ren through the Force; Rey impales him as he is distracted.
Also sensing Leia's death, Rey realizes what she did to Ren and regrets impaling him.
She uses the Force to heal him and confesses that she did want to join him as Ben Solo before escaping aboard his TIE whisper.
Disturbed by her Sith lineage, Rey exiles herself on Ahch-To.
Luke's Force spirit encourages her to face Palpatine and gives her Leia's lightsaber and his old T-65B X-wing.
Rey departs for Exegol with the wayfinder from Ren's ship.
Meanwhile, Ren resumes his true identity as Ben Solo.

Rey transmits her coordinates to the Resistance, allowing them to launch an offensive against the Sith Eternal forces, including the Sith fleet.
Rey confronts Palpatine, who demands she kill him in anger for his spirit to pass into her, making her "Empress Palpatine".
However, Ben arrives and joins Rey.
Palpatine absorbs their life energy to restore his full power and incapacitates Ben.
He then attacks the Resistance fleet with Force lightning.
Weakened, Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who restore her strength.
Palpatine attacks her with lightning, but Rey deflects it using Luke and Leia's lightsabers, killing him and herself.
Ben uses the Force to revive Rey at the cost of his own life; Rey kisses Ben before he vanishes into the Force.
Rey then returns to the Resistance base and reunites with her friends, celebrating their victory against Palpatine and the Sith Eternal.

Sometime later, Rey visits Luke's abandoned childhood home on Tatooine and buries the Skywalker lightsabers, having built her own in a golden color.
A passerby asks Rey her name; after seeing the Force spirits of Luke and Leia, she responds, "Rey Skywalker".
====
Related works ====
The novelization of The Rise of Skywalker reveals that Rey's father was a nonidentical clone of Palpatine.
An upcoming issue of the comic book series Star Wars Adventures will feature a story set after the events of the film featuring Rey, Finn, and Poe continuing to fight the First Order.
===
Television ===


====
Star Wars Rebels (2014) ====
Rey makes a brief cameo as a disembodied voice in the television series Star Wars Rebels, in the episode "A World Between Worlds".
In the episode, set 16 years before her birth and 35 years before The Force Awakens,
the young Padawan Ezra Bridger briefly hears some of her lines from the film (specifically her speaking to the unconscious Finn at the end) in the World Between Worlds, a dimension that exists outside of time and space.

====
Forces of Destiny (2017) ====
Rey stars in the micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny, voiced by Daisy Ridley.
===
Video games ===
The character of Rey appears in the video games Disney Infinity 3.0, Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens, and Star Wars Battlefront II (2017),
all voiced by Ridley, as well as in the strategy video game
Star Wars: Force Arena.
The character was also introduced as a player "skin" in the game Fortnite.

==
Reception ==


===
General ===
The character and Ridley's portrayal have received critical acclaim.
Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal proclaimed that Rey is "a woman warrior with the stylish ferocity of a kung-fu star," praising "the verve [Ridley] must have been born with plus the skill she must have acquired as a young actress coming up in England," and stating, "It's hard to imagine what the movie—and the sequels to come—might have been if they'd cast the wrong person, but here Daisy Ridley is in all her unassuming glory, and all's right with the galaxy."
Adam Howard of MSNBC stated that "one of the most pleasant surprises of the film has been the strength of its lead female character," adding that some have likened Rey to a "new feminist icon".
Relatedly, Emily Rome of HitFix argued that Rey is "everything we wanted in a Star Wars female character," praising her for being a character that is "independent, skilled, scrappy, tough, and doesn't need saving."
In a personal essay, Nicole Sperling of Entertainment Weekly wrote about her daughters feeling empowered after viewing the film, stating, "They never commented on how pretty Rey is.
They never had to flinch because Rey was a sexual object to some man in power.
They just felt strong.
Equal.
"Megan
Garber of The Atlantic wrote that Rey "proves herself to be, in extremely short order, extremely adept as a fighter".
Some fans opined that Rey is too skilled despite her inexperience during The Force Awakens, making her a Mary Sue.
Rome wrote that "the speed with which Rey mastered Jedi mind tricks and lightsaber fighting with zero training is the stuff of fan fiction.
Rey is geek feminist wish-fulfillment."
Tasha Robinson of The Verge said that Rey "keeps falling into standard-issue damsel-in-distress situations, then capably rescuing herself."
Robinson wrote "Rey is kind of a Mary Sue character" and that "She's a fantasy wish-fulfillment character with outsized skills, an inhuman reaction time, and a clever answer to every question—but so are the other major Star Wars heroes."
Other outlets, including Ridley herself, have argued that the term Mary Sue carries an inherent gender bias, and that the male characters from the original trilogy did not face comparable criticism.
J. J. Abrams stated that "the people who are getting freaked out are the people who are accustomed to [male] privilege, and this is not oppression, this is about fairness."
He elaborated, "You can probably look at the first [Star Wars] movie that George [Lucas] did and say that Leia was too outspoken, or she was too tough.
Anyone who wants to find a problem with anything can find the problem.
The internet seems to be made for that."
Adrienne Tyler of Screen Rant argued Rey's abilities are explained in The Rise of Skywalker as resulting from the pair forming a dyad in the Force, sharing the same fighting capabilities.
Rey's unique hairstyle attracted attention before and after The Force Awakens was released, being compared to Leia's hairdo from the original film, with debate over whether it would become as popular.
Rey has also been compared to the titular character from the Hayao Miyazaki anime film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind (1984).Richard Roeper described Ridley's portrayal of Rey as "a breakout performance", continuing by calling the character "tough and resourceful and smart and brave".
Ridley was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Actress for her portrayal.
The first Reel Women in Technology Award for a fictional character was awarded to the character Rey.
Some fans criticized Rey's trilogy-wide character arc as insufficient.

Fan fiction author Ricca said that tension that was built in the first two films never gets resolved in the last film.

She wanted a moment at the end of The Rise of Skywalker in which Rey reacts to and reflects on everything that has happened to her.
Some critics and fans have noted a visual resemblance between Rey's character design to that of Bastila Shan from the video game
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic, and that her character arc shares thematic similarities with that of Bastila's.
===
Parentage ===
The question of Rey's parentage was a significant point of discussion for the series, and spawned numerous fan theories.
The most popular theories were that she is the daughter of Luke Skywalker or Han Solo, or is Obi-Wan Kenobi's granddaughter (because of a scene where Rey hears Kenobi's echoed voice following a vision in The Force Awakens).
The view that she is Luke's daughter was especially prominent, with fans and critics highlighting their story arc similarities, Star Wars being a Skywalker saga, Rey having a strong attachment to Luke's lightsaber, and being exceptionally strong with the Force without any training.
Some fan theories about Rey's parentage pointed to "Rey's Theme" featured in John Williams' score of The Force Awakens, as the theme shared similarities with the themes for Darth Vader and Luke.
Abrams stated that he intentionally withheld Rey's last name and background in The Force Awakens.
He said that he felt that the origin of Kylo Ren was the only thing that could be revealed in his film and that he knew "quite a bit" about Rey's origin but would give courtesy to The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson by not saying any more.
Former Star Wars:
Episode IX director Colin Trevorrow stated that the answer of Rey's origin would be "deeply and profoundly satisfying" and that Rey is "important in this universe, not just in the context of The Force Awakens, but in the entire galaxy.
She deserves it."
Ridley said that she knew who Rey's parents were.
In The Last Jedi, Rey is coaxed by Kylo Ren into admitting that her parents were "nobodies".
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox equated this scene with Luke finding out that Darth Vader is his father, which was his greatest nightmare.

To VanDerWerff, "Rey's greatest nightmare is being no one."
She added that while Kylo Ren "has every reason to be lying" about this, to her mind it is a good thing that "Rey is the child of nobody of particular importance to the story so far."

Josh Spiegel of The Hollywood Reporter stated that although some fans might be disappointed by Ren's revelation, it "fits in perfectly" with the film's through line that one can be "both exceptionally gifted in the Force and also not a Skywalker" because "the spirit of the Jedi extends ... to anyone with a gift and the power to believe.
"

Conversely, Casey Cipriani of Bustle opined that while Ren might be right about Rey's parents, he is unreliable and "we have to take what he says with a grain of salt and look elsewhere [within the story] for hints of Rey's lineage.
"Before
the release of The Rise of Skywalker, Abrams said that "there's more to the story than you've seen," though, according to Ridley, the facts presented in The Last Jedi would not change.
Rey being revealed as a Palpatine in The Rise of Skywalker received a mixed reception.
Joanna Robinson of Vanity Fair interprets the twist as a rebuttal to the themes presented in Episode VIII, calling it "a blow to those fans who eagerly devoured [Rian] Johnson’s message that anyone from anywhere can be a Force-wielding hero."
Contrarily, Ryan Britt of Fatherly writes that the revelation may be resonant for those with a "Dark Side-inclined family," because Rey decides not to play Palpatine's "stupid game", and "when Palpatine’s face melts off and the dark side disappears into the ether, a lot of emotional family bullshit goes with it.
"
Inverse similarly argues that the end of the film sees Rey reject "any power her grandfather held over her" and "bury the past", in a completion of the hero's journey.
Following the film's release, Daisy Ridley revealed that the identity of Rey's parents had been in constant flux over the course of the production of the Sequel Trilogy.
According to Ridley, during the early production of the Sequel Trilogy, Lucasfilm had been "toying with an Obi-Wan connection" before settling on the idea of her character being no one.
J.J. Abrams then pitched the idea of Emperor Palpatine being Rey's grandfather to Ridley at the start of production on Episode IX, although this aspect of her character "kept changing" over the course of filming.
James Hunt of Screen Rant argues that the idea of an Obi-Wan connection "would've been an equally bad decision," because it would still mean the character "is powerful because of her lineage, rather than Rey simply being powerful because the Force chose her.
It continues the focus on nostalgia and trying to connect everything, rather than letting Rey be wholly new."
==
Relationships ==


===
Mentorship tree ===


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations
Sources


==
Further reading ==
Hawkes, Rebecca (December 23, 2015).
"
Who is Rey?
Everything we know about Daisy Ridley's mysterious new Star Wars heroine".
The Daily Telegraph.
Retrieved December 29, 2015.

Oswald, Anjelica (October 22, 2015).
"
Meet Daisy Ridley, the 23-year-old who snagged a lead role in 'Star Wars:
The Force Awakens' –
her Hollywood career is about to blow up".
Business Insider.
Retrieved December 19, 2015.

==
External links ==
Rey in the StarWars.com Databank
Rey on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Coruscant () is an ecumenopolis planet in the fictional Star Wars universe.
It first appeared onscreen in the 1997 Special Edition of Return of the Jedi, but was first depicted and mentioned by name in Timothy Zahn's 1991 novel Heir to the Empire.
Coruscant is a prominent location in both canon and Legends media that has been produced.
Within the narrative of the films, Coruscant-based locations such as the Jedi Temple and Jedi Archives act as the home for the Jedi and in plot terms are frequently used for exposition or to drive other elements of the plot.

Coruscant was historically referred to as Notron or Queen of the Core; was renamed Imperial Center during the reign of the Galactic Empire (as depicted in the original films) and Yuuzhan'tar during the Yuuzhan Vong invasion (as depicted in the New Jedi Order novel series).
The planet's capital city was initially Galactic City (built at least in 100,000 BBY, partially destroyed in 27 and 44 ABY); under the Galactic Empire this was Imperial City, and was Republic City or the City Of Spires under the Galactic Republic.
The planet was code-named Triple Zero during the Clone Wars.
The demonym and adjective form of the planet name is Coruscanti.

Coruscant lies within the Coruscant Subsector of the Corusca Sector, located in the Core Worlds galactic quadrant region.
Coruscant is the sixth planet out of 11 planets in the Coruscant System:
Revisse (Venus type), Platoril (Mercury type),
Vandor-1 (Mercury type), Vandor-2
(Mercury type), Vandor-3 (
Earth type), Coruscant (Trantor type), Muscave (Jupiter type), Stentat (Jupiter type), Improcco (Pluto type), Nabatu (Eris type) and Ulabos (Pluto type).
Coruscant has four moons; Centax-1, Centax-2, Centax-3, and Hesperidium.
Beyond the system's planets was the OboRin Comet Cluster (Oort Cloud type), and in between Improcco and Nabatu was an asteroid belt (The Covey).
The sun was called Coruscant Prime, which the Star Wars galaxy places as XYZ coordinates 0-0-0 (i.e. the "pole"; instead of the Galactic Center) and the Standard Galactic Grid coordinates were L-9 for all in-universe hyperspace navigation, mapping systems, and astronomical observations.

Coruscant serves as the nexus of socio-economic, cultural, intellectual, political, military, and foreign policies activity within the Star Wars galaxy; at various times, it is the central administrative capital of these governing bodies: the Republic, the Galactic Empire, the New Republic, the Yuuzhan Vong Empire, the Galactic Federation of Free Alliances (Galactic Alliance), the Fel Empire, Darth Krayt's Galactic Empire, and the Galactic Federation Triumvate.
The planet's strategic position relative to the galactic center, a population of approximately 2 trillion sentients, and control over the galaxy's main trade routes and hyperspace lanes — Perlemian Trade Route, Hydian Way, Corellian Run and Corellian Trade Spine — that must converge and pass through Coruscant space, cemented its status as the richest and most influential habitable world in the Star Wars galaxy.
==
Etymology and naming ==
Within the story, the planet derived its name from a rare and valuable gemstone, the corusca gem.

The lights of the planet-wide city, seen from space, were said to resemble the glittering of the gems.

In the real world, the word originates in the late 15th century from the Latin coruscant, "vibrating, glittering", from the verb coruscare.
It is described in the Concise Oxford Dictionary as a poetic and literary adjective meaning 'glittering; sparkling'.
The word "coruscant" is also a French adjective which means glittering, sparkling and, as a literary adjective, can be used to describe a decadent and overly complicated language, decorum or community.

==
Early concepts ==
The concept of a city planet in the Star Wars universe originated with the initial drafts of Star Wars, when author George Lucas included a planet called Alderaan which was a city-planet and the capital planet of the galaxy.
In Lucas's 1975 draft, Adventures of the Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I:
The Star Wars, the capital planet of Alderaan is described as a floating city in the clouds, "suspended in a sea of cirrus methane".
This concept was illustrated in early sketches commissioned by Lucas from conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie, and the design very closely resembles Cloud City, the floating city that featured in The Empire Strikes Back.
In Lucas's third draft, the Imperial City of Alderaan has become the home world of the Sith Lords, and Darth Vader holds Princess Leia captive here.
Lucas continued to hone his script, aided by screenwriters Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz; names of planets and characters were revised and the narrative was improved, and by the fourth draft, scenes on the Imperial capital planet had been moved to a space station called the Death Star and the name of Alderaan was now given to a peaceful world destroyed by the Empire.
The Empire's homeworld, Had Abaddon, came up in early drafts of Star Wars:
Episode VI - Return of the Jedi.
The entire planet was to be a sprawling city.
However, concluding that the realization of such a city was impossible at the time, the creators abandoned the idea.
Later, in the graphic novel Legacy 29: Vector, Part 10 the name Had Abbadon was given to a lost mythic planet in the Had Abbadon System of the Deep Core, which was covered by dry fields, was linked to the birth of the Jedi, was the location of a planned assassination attempt by Cade Skywalker on Darth Krayt, and was home to an Imperial.

The Empire's homeworld first appeared in the expanded universe and was called Coruscant for the first time in Timothy Zahn's Heir to the Empire.
Coruscant was first seen on screen in the 1997 Special Edition release of Return of the Jedi, and the X-Wing series of computer games.
Coruscant was then seen (major appearance) in Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace.
There is a speeder chase through the skies of Coruscant in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones that eventually leads to a nightclub in the bowels of Coruscant's Uscru Entertainment District.
Coruscant is seen in Episode III: Revenge of the Sith as part of the opening battle scene.
The planet's cityscape is then prominently featured throughout much of the movie, with Chancellor Palpatine's office as well as the Senate building being the primary two settings on Coruscant.
Coruscant also appeared in Star Tours
- The Adventures Continue in various Disney parks.

In various novels, characters aligned with the Empire refer to Coruscant as "Imperial Center".
Within the stories, this is explained as an administrative renaming undertaken to emphasize the differences between the Old Republic and the Empire.

Coruscant was in some early sources called "Jhantor" in homage to Isaac Asimov's Trantor.

==
Design ==
Production artwork produced by Ralph McQuarrie for Return of the Jedi had included some unrealised designs for the imperial capital, Had Abaddon.
During production of The Phantom Menace, it was decided that scenes would be set on the capital planet, now called Coruscant, and artist Doug Chiang was tasked with designing the imperial city, and he turned to McQuarrie's original concept art.
The appearance of the cityscape has been described as a "retro-futuristic metropolis", and the streams of floating vehicles travelling between soaring skyscrapers is thought to have been partly inspired by Fritz Lang's 1927 film, Metropolis.
In Attack of the Clones, the depiction of Coruscant was expanded greatly.
Chiang created a more urban, apocalyptic environment for the street level, taking inspiration from Ridley Scott's 1982 film Blade Runner.
==
History within the Star Wars universe ==
Labyrinth of
EvilJames Luceno's novel Labyrinth of Evil introduces a deserted manufacturing area known as 'The Works' as the meeting place for Sith Lords Darth Sidious and Darth Tyranus.

Episode II:
Attack of the ClonesAnother area of Coruscant shown is Coco Town (short for "collective commerce").
Coco Town is the site of Dex's Diner in Attack of the Clones.
Another notable area of Coruscant is 500 Republica, an area where the crème de la crème, such as politicians and diplomats, gather.

Episode III: Revenge of the SithIn the beginning of the film, Separatist cyborg general Grievous has kidnapped Chancellor Palpatine and uses the Separatist fleet to help assault the capital and cover his escape.
Together with the Republic's defense and interception, this is known as the Battle of Coruscant.
A theatre in 500 Republica is where Palpatine holds a meeting with Anakin Skywalker, while watching an opera, and entices him into allying with the Dark Side by telling him of the supposed Sith ability of resuscitation.

After a failed attempt by the Jedi to arrest Palpatine when he divulges to Skywalker his true identity as Darth Sidious, it is in the Republic Senate Building on Coruscant that Palpatine appoints himself Emperor of the first Galactic Empire.

Episode VI:
Return of the JediCoruscant is also the location of an additional sequence added to later versions of Return of the Jedi.
In a montage scene,  upon hearing of the death of Emperor Palpatine, citizens are seen celebrating with fireworks and by pulling down his statues.
This version of Coruscant was not reused for the prequel trilogy.

Dark EmpireIn the Dark Empire graphic novel's prologue, set after the original film trilogy
, Coruscant is ravaged by battles between warring Imperial factions.

The New Jedi Order:
Star By StarIn
The New Jedi Order series, Coruscant is the capital world of the New Republic until, in The New Jedi Order: Star by Star, the extragalactic Yuuzhan Vong overwhelm the New Republic defenses in three attack waves, led by Warmaster Tsavong Lah, and take over the planet, destroying the New Republic and creating the theocratic Yuuzhan Vong Empire.

After surrendering, the Yuuzhan Vong agreed to help the Alliance rebuild Coruscant.
The new Coruscant is a combination of technology and organic life, to represent the peace between the Galactic Federation Of Free Alliances (Galactic Alliance) and the Yuuzhan Vong.

== Legends ==
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.

==
Notable metropolitan areas ==
Senate DistrictThe Senate District was on the equator, and was home to the Ambassidorial Sector, (home to 500 Republica, the Senate Apartment Complex, Loijin Plaza, Nicandra Plaza and Nicandra Counterrevolutionary Signalmen's Memorial Building), Embassy Mall, Skysitter Restaurant, Bonadan Embassy, Colocaur Heights, Champalan Embassy, the Collunm Commons District, the Coruscant Opera House, the Galactic Museum, the Heorem Complex (Home to the Heorem Skytunnel), Judicial Plaza (home to the Glitanni Esplanade and the Judicial Arcology), the Legislative Borough, Senate Plaza, the Avenue Of The Core Founders, the Republic Executive Building, the Galactic Senate Building, Hospital Plaza, the Galactic Senate MedCenter, Novaplex, the Palace District (home to the Imperial Palace and Senate Hill),
Quadrant A-89 (home to the CSF HQ, the Fellowship Plaza , the Galactic Justice Center and the Temple Precinct (home to the Jedi Temple)), Sector H-52, Sector I-33, the Uscru Boulevard, Westport and Xizor's Palace.
It was the de facto capital of Coruscant, the Old Republic, the Galactic Empire, the New Republic, the Galactic Federation Of Free Alliances and the One Sith.
It was constructed in 3996 BBY, bordered by the Financial District and the Sah'c District, was close to The Works, and went by the names Legislative District, Government District and Government Center.

Alien Protection ZoneThe walled Alien Protection Zone does not have a note to explain where on the planet it was, but it was likely to be on the equator.
It was a segregated spot on the planet where all the aliens resided.
Neighbourhoods there represented different species, and each resembled a different culture, making them feel homely, even if they were not.
It was built in 19 BBY by the young Galactic Empire and opened by the New Republic in 6 ABY.

Sah'c
TownSah'c Town, also known as Sah'c District or Quadrant H-46, was an area on the Equator, named after and controlled by the wealthy Sah'c family.
It was home of an emergency bunker where the chancellor of the Galactic Republic or New Republic ruled in case of an emergency (e.g., earthquake, volcano).
Sah'c Canyon was also there, which was the exit point of the Senate District's Heorem Skytunnel.

== See also ==
Ecumenopolis
List of Star Wars planets and moons
Star Wars: 1313
Trantor


=
= References ==
Footnotes
Citations


===
Sources ===
Rinzler, J. W. (2008).
The Making of Star Wars: The Definitive Story Behind the Original Film.
Ebury Press.
ISBN 9780091924997.
Retrieved 20 April 2017.

Hearn, Marcus (2005).
The Cinema of George Lucas.
New York:
Harry N. Abrams.
ISBN 9780810949683.
Retrieved 21 April 2017.

Bouzereau, Laurent (1998).
Star Wars: the Annotated Screenplays (1st UK ed.).
London: Titan Books.
ISBN 9781852869236.
Retrieved 21 April 2017.

==
Further reading ==
The Essential guide to Planets and Moons
(Star Wars),
1st edition, by Daniel Wallace, Scott Kolins.
1998.
ISBN 0-345-42068-3
Star Wars, X-Wing:
Wedge's Gamble, (Book 2 of the X-Wing series)
1st paperback printing, 1996.
Michael A. Stackpole, ISBN 0-553-56802-7
Star Wars, X-Wing:
The Krytos Trap, (Book 3 of the X-Wing series) 1st paperback printing, 1996.
Michael A. Stackpole, ISBN 0-553-56803-5
Star Wars:
Before the Storm, (Book 1 of The Black Fleet Crisis), first paperback printing, 1996.
Michael P. Kube-McDowell, ISBN 0-553-57273-3
Star Wars: Shield of Lies, (Book 2 of The Black Fleet Crisis), first paperback printing, 1996.
Michael P. Kube-McDowell, ISBN 0-553-57277-6
Star Wars, Darksaber, 1st paperback printing, 1995.
Kevin J. Anderson, ISBN 0-553-57611-9
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire, 1996.

Steve Perry, ISBN 0-553-57413-2
Heir to the Empire, (Book 1 of The Thrawn Crisis), 1st edition, 1991.
Timothy Zahn.
ISBN 0-553-07327-3
Dark Force Rising, (
Book 2 of The Thrawn Crisis), 1st edition, 1992.
Timothy Zahn.
ISBN 0-553-08574-3
The Last Command, (Book 3 of The Thrawn Crisis), 1st edition, 1993.
Timothy Zahn.
ISBN 0
-553-09186-7
Edge of Victory:
Rebirth (Book 8 of the New Jedi Order) 2001.
Greg Keyes, ISBN 0-09-941044-3
Star By Star
, (Book 9 of the New Jedi Order) 2002.
Troy Denning, ISBN 0-09-941038-9
The Shadow Academy, Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta.
Berkley, 1995.
(
ISBN 1-57297-025-1)
The Lost Ones, Kevin J. Anderson and Rebecca Moesta.
Berkley, 1995.
(
ISBN 1-57297-052-9)
Alain Musset, From New York to Coruscant.
Essay on Geofiction
(in French only : De New York à Coruscant.
Essai de géofiction, PUF, 2005.
This author uses science fiction as a way to explore the present (assuming that writers base their fiction as an extension of today) [1] / [2] (p. 109)


==
External links ==
Coruscant in the StarWars.com Databank
Coruscant on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
For a description of the word coruscant in French with examples, look at the blog "Le Garde Mot" [3]
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game developed by TT Fusion, based on the 2015 film Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
It is the fifth entry in TT Games' Lego Star Wars series of video games.
Under license from Lucasfilm, the game was released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for iOS, Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, and Wii U, on 28 June 2016, and for Android on 27 July 2016.
The game was ported and released by Feral Interactive for OS X on 30 June 2016.

In addition to adapting the film, the game includes content which covers the period between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens.

==
Gameplay ==
The gameplay of Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is similar to previous Lego video games.
New systems were introduced including Multi-Builds which grant players access to various building options.
These options can be destroyed and rebuilt in certain brick-building sections of the game, allowing for new path to be opened within the game's world.
Players can also hide behind cover and engage in "Blaster Battles" with enemies throughout the game.
The game features over 200 playable characters, including Rey, Finn, Captain Phasma, Poe Dameron, Han Solo, Kylo Ren and droids, such as C-3PO and BB-8, as well as ships, both regular-sized (which can only be used in certain misisons), and miniaturized.
Players may freely explore Jakku, Takodana, D'Qar, and Starkiller Base, which all act as mini-open worlds.
In addition to adapting the film, the game also bridged the gap between Return of the Jedi and The Force Awakens, with Lucasfilm allowing for creative freedom in the additional content that will explore the characters' backstories.

==
Plot ==
The plot closely follows that of Star Wars:
Episode VII -The Force Awakens, though with numerous humorous deviations or minor changes to adapt to the two player co-op gameplay.
There is also a prologue that depicts the Battle of Endor, the defeat of Emperor Palpatine, and the destruction of the Death Star II at the end of Return of the Jedi.

==
Development ==
In early February 2016, publisher Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment teased that the company is working on a new title that involved "two of the world's most popular entertainment brands".
The game was later leaked by several retailers, before its official announcement on 2 February 2016.
Players who purchase the game's Deluxe Edition will receive a season pass to the game and a Lego minifigure of Finn, while players of the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 versions received additional downloadable content, including a character pack and a bonus level, titled the "Droid Character Pack" and the "Phantom Limb Level Pack" respectively.
The game was released for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Nintendo 3DS and Wii U on 28 June 2016.

===
Audio ===
The game featured the voice acting of Daisy Ridley, Oscar Isaac, John Boyega, Adam Driver, Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, Anthony Daniels, Domhnall Gleeson, Gwendoline Christie and Max von Sydow reprising their roles from The Force Awakens, as well as Bill Kipsang Rotich as Nien Nunb, Christian Simpson as C'Ai Threnalli and Tom Kane reprising his role as Admiral Ackbar from various Star Wars video games.
Archival recordings from the film also serve as the game's dialogue.

===
Downloadable content ===
A total of 12 downloadable content (DLC) packs were released from the game.
The first one, entitled "The Phantom Limb,", which is exclusive to Sony systems, includes a level that explains how C-3PO obtained his red arm, in addition to eight characters and a miniature vehicle based on the level.
There were three more level packs, namely "Escape from Starkiller Base" (which follows a pair of Resistance pilots as they make their escape from the besieged Starkiller Base), "First Order Siege of Takodana" (which depicts the Battle of Takodana from the First Order's perspective), and "Jakku:
Poe's Quest for Survival" (which depicts Poe Dameron's escape from Jakku upon being separated from Finn and presumed dead in the main storyline).
The other eight packs were character packs, each adding eight characters and a miniature ship: the "Droid Character Pack", "The Clone Wars Character Pack", "Rebels Character Pack", "
The Empire Strikes Back Character Pack", "Jabba's Palace Character Pack", "The Freemaker Adventures Character Pack", "Prequel Trilogy Character Pack", and "Jedi Character Pack".
==
Reception ==
The game received mostly positive reviews.
GameSpot awarded of 7.0 out of 10, saying "Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens doesn't really take you to a new galaxy far, far away, but it's still a pleasant journey."
Game Informer awarded it 8.5 out of 10, saying "A blast for Star Wars and Lego fans alike.
"
IGN awarded it 9.0 out of 10, saying "Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens is the most gaming fun I’ve had with either series in years.
"The
game was the best-selling retail video game in the UK in its week of release and the fourth biggest launch for a Star Wars game in the UK, and became the fourth fastest-selling game based on the Star Wars universe, and the fourth fastest-selling Lego game.
It stayed in the top position for five consecutive weeks, and was the second Lego game to do so, following Lego Batman 2: DC Super Heroes.

===
Awards ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars  is a 1993 arcade game developed by Sega and based on the original Star Wars trilogy.
Combining elements of A New Hope and Return of the Jedi, in the game players pilot a Rebel starship and battle against the forces of the Empire.
Sega developed Star Wars for their Model 1 system, the same arcade hardware that powered Virtua Fighter and Virtua Racing.
Like those two titles, the graphics in Star Wars are rendered entirely using polygons.
The game was later released under the name Star Wars Arcade, as an exclusive for the Sega 32X's launch in 1994.

The first in a series of Sega Star Wars arcade games, Sega followed up the release of Star Wars Arcade with several other arcade games - Star Wars Trilogy Arcade and Star Wars: Racer Arcade, as well as a Star Wars pinball game.

==
Gameplay ==
The gameplay is similar to that of Atari's 1983 Star Wars arcade game.
Players pilot an X-wing or a Y-wing in first- or third-person perspective and battle Imperial forces.

The game has three levels which include intercepting TIE fighters in an asteroid field, destroying a Super Star Destroyer, and making an assault run on a Death Star.
The arcade cabinet allows two people to play, with one serving as pilot and the other as gunner.

== Reception ==
In Japan, Game Machine listed Star Wars Arcade in its June 15, 1994 issue as the sixth most-successful upright arcade unit of the year.
Electronic Gaming Monthly scored the 32X version at 6.25/10, describing it as a decent but disappointing launch game for the console.
They praised the excellent graphics but complained about repetitive gameplay and limited movement.
GamePro similarly assessed that the game is a decent demonstration of the 32X's graphical capabilities but suffers from repetitive gameplay.
They also criticized that the controls are convoluted when using a standard three-button gamepad and that in cooperative mode the second player's cursor is difficult to see against certain backgrounds.
Next Generation rated the 32X version of the game at three stars out of five, calling it "An excellent translation of a good game, and a good hint of what to expect from 32X."


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Star Wars Arcade at the Killer List of Videogames
Star Wars Arcade at MobyGames
The Star Wars franchise has spawned multiple films and television series.
Two animated series were released in the mid-1980s.
Further animated series began to be released in the 2000s, the first two of which focused on the prequel trilogy-era Clone Wars.
After Disney's acquisition of Lucasfilm, only The Clone Wars was kept in the canon of continuity of the episodic Star Wars films.
Two additional half-hour animated series were created: Rebels, which ties into the original trilogy, and Resistance, which ties into the sequel trilogy.
An additional series spun off from The Clone Wars, titled The Bad Batch, debuted on Disney+
in 2021.

At least seven original Star Wars series will be released on Disney+.
The first live-action series in the franchise, The Mandalorian, premiered in November 2019, and spawned three spin-offs, The Book of Boba Fett, Rangers of the New Republic and Ahsoka.
Additional live-action series include Andor, Obi-Wan Kenobi, The Acolyte, and Lando.

==
Animated series ==


===
Droids and Ewoks (1985–1987) ===
Nelvana, the animation studio that produced the animated segment of the Holiday Special, was hired to create two animated series which aired together on ABC: Droids (1985–1986) follows the adventures of C-3PO and R2-D2, and its sister series Ewoks (1985–1987) features Wicket and other members of the titular species from Return of the Jedi, both set before the events of the original trilogy.
One reviewer calls Droids "rudimentary" and Ewoks "unremarkable", but writes that both "marked the first major effort to expand the Star Wars 'brand' beyond its original live-action film existence."
===
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) ===
George Lucas created his own animation company, Lucasfilm Animation, and used it to produce his first in-house Star Wars CGI-animated series, using Cartoon Network's 2003 Clone Wars micro-series as a "pilot".
The Clone Wars (2008–2020) was introduced through a 2008 animated film of the same name.
The series is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith of the prequel trilogy.
It focuses mainly on the Jedi characters of Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi, as well as Anakin's Padawan apprentice, Ahsoka Tano (an original character created by Filoni for the series), with other characters from the live-action films in supporting roles.
The series marked the beginning of Dave Filoni's involvement in Star Wars animation projects.

After Disney's acquisition of the Star Wars franchise, The Clone Wars was cancelled in 2014 before its intended final episodes were completed.
The remaining unaired episodes were released on Netflix as "The Lost Missions".
The chronological storyline order was released after the series had initially finished airing.
The film and series were included in the canon established in 2014.
The show was later revived for an additional final season that premiered on February 21, 2020, on the streaming service Disney+.
===
Rebels (2014–2018) ===
In 2014, Disney XD began airing Star Wars Rebels, the first CGI-animated series produced following the Disney acquisition.
It follows a band of rebels as they fight the Galactic Empire in the years leading up to A New Hope.
It closed some of the arcs introduced in The Clone Wars.
Due to the film Rogue One being produced at the same time, the film and the series acknowledged each other.
The series also included an in-canon version of Grand Admiral Thrawn from the Legends  Thrawn trilogy.

===
Resistance (2018–2020) ===
The animated series Star Wars Resistance debuted in late 2018, shifting the animation style towards anime-inspired cel-shading visuals, and focuses on a young Resistance pilot Kazuda Xiono before and during The Force Awakens and The Last Jedi, leading up to The Rise of Skywalker.
Sequel trilogy characters such as Captain Phasma, General Hux, and Kylo Ren appear.
The second and final season premiered on October 6, 2019.
===
The Bad Batch (2021) ===
Set after the events of The Clone Wars, The Bad Batch follows the titular squadron making their way through the galaxy as mercenaries in the early days of the Empire.
The series was announced in July 2020, and premiered on Disney+
on May 4, 2021.
Dave Filoni, Athena Portillo, Brad Rau, and Jennifer Corbett serve as executive producers, with Carrie Beck as co-executive producer and Josh Rimes as producer.
Rau also serves as supervising director with Corbett the head writer.

===
Visions ===
Announced on December 10, 2020, Star Wars: Visions is an anime anthology series of ten short films by different creators set in the Star Wars universe.
It is scheduled for release on Disney+
in 2021.

== Micro-series ==


=== Clone Wars (2003–2005) ===

After the release of Attack of the Clones, developed and drawn by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Cartoon Network produced and aired the micro-series Clone Wars from 2003 to weeks before the 2005 release of Revenge of the Sith, as the series featured events set between those films.
The plot in the series was intended as prequel to then upcoming feature movie Episode III: Revenge of The Sith and directly leads to the starting point in the movie.

It won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program in 2004 and 2005.
===
Blips (2017) ===
Star Wars Blips is an animated micro-series created to promote The Last Jedi.
It features droids such as
BB-8 and R2-D2, in addition to porgs.

===
Forces of Destiny (2017–2018) ===
The animated micro-series Star Wars Forces of Destiny debuted in 2017; it focuses on the female characters of the franchise and is set in various eras.

===
Galaxy of Adventures (2018–2020) ===
Star Wars Galaxy of Adventures debuted on the "Star Wars Kids" YouTube channel and website in late 2018.
Using stylized animation, the series of shorts reimagine key scenes from the saga, initially leading up the release of Episode IX.
The shorts feature audio from the original films (with narration by Dante Basco) and are animated by Titmouse,
Inc.


==
=
Roll Out (2019–2020) ===
Star Wars Roll Out debuted on the Star Wars Kids YouTube channel and website in August 2019.
The shorts depict the main characters from the franchise as ball-shaped, similar to BB-8, and utilize a kid-friendly cutout animation style.
io9 calls the design of the series "adorable".

== Live-action series ==


===
The Mandalorian (2019–present) ===
In March 2018, Jon Favreau was hired to write and produce a live-action Star Wars series for Disney+.
The series follows "a lone gunfighter in the outer reaches of the galaxy far from the authority of the New Republic" a few years after the events of Return of the Jedi.
In August 2018, it was reported that the series would cost about "$100 million for 10 episodes".
Pedro Pascal stars as the titular character, and is joined by supporting actors Gina Carano, Nick Nolte, Giancarlo Esposito, Emily Swallow, Carl Weathers, Omid Abtahi, and Werner Herzog.
The series premiered on November 12, 2019, with the launch of Disney+.
The second season premiered on October 30, 2020.
===
The Book of Boba Fett ===
In November 2020, Deadline Hollywood reported that a miniseries focused on Boba Fett could begin filming before the end of the year, before a third season of The Mandalorian went into production.
The series, known as The Book of Boba Fett, was revealed the following month, and confirmed to be in production ahead of The Mandalorian season three.
Favreau and Filoni executive produce along with Robert Rodriguez, with Temuera Morrison and Ming-Na Wen reprising their roles as Boba Fett and Fennec Shand, respectively.
It will be released in December 2021.
===
Andor ===
The series will follow Rebel spy Cassian Andor, five years before the events of Rogue One, during the formative years of the Rebellion.
In November 2018, a prequel series to the 2016 film Rogue One centered on Cassian Andor was confirmed to be in development, and described as a "rousing spy thriller".
Diego Luna will reprise his role for the series.
Stephen Schiff was hired to serve as showrunner and executive producer of the series, which was developed by Jared Bush, who wrote a series bible and a draft of the pilot episode.
In April 2019, Alan Tudyk was confirmed to be reprising his role of K-2SO.
In April 2020, Tony Gilroy, who worked on the reshoots of Rogue One, replaced Schiff as showrunner.
Gilroy was going to write and direct the pilot, and direct other episodes as well.
It was also revealed in April 2020 that Stellan Skarsgård, Kyle Soller,
Denise Gough had joined the cast in undisclosed roles, along with Genevieve O'Reilly reprising her role of Mon Mothma.
In September 2020, it was announced that Gilroy would step down from his directing duties in light of the COVID-19 pandemic and would be replaced by Toby Haynes, who is set to direct the first three episodes.
Filming began in late November 2020 in London.
Andor will be released in 2022, and consist of 12 episodes.

===
Obi-Wan Kenobi ===
In August 2019, it was reported that a streaming series focused on Obi-Wan Kenobi was in development, with Ewan McGregor in talks to reprise his role from the prequel trilogy.
The series was initially thought to have been developing as a standalone film, which was ultimately scrapped due to the performance of Solo at the box office.
During the 2019 D23 Expo, Lucasfilm officially announced that the series was in development, with McGregor confirmed to reprise his role as the titular character.
It will take place eight years after Revenge of the Sith and prior to the events of A New Hope, thus exploring the time during Kenobi's exile on Tatooine.
In September 2019, Deborah Chow and Hossein Amini were announced as the series' director and writer, respectively, who will also serve as executive producers alongside McGregor.
In October 2019, McGregor said the series would comprise six episodes.
According to Amini, filming for the series was set to begin around July 2020, but after he departed from the series, it was reported in January 2020, that production had been pushed to January 2021.
In April 2020, it was announced that Joby Harold would officially be taking over writing duties from Amini.
In August 2020, Kennedy told TheWrap that it would be a limited series.
In September 2020, McGregor said that the series is now scheduled to begin filming in early 2021.On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that Hayden Christensen would reprise his role as Darth Vader, and that the series would be titled Obi-Wan Kenobi.
Obi-Wan Kenobi is scheduled to be released in 2022, and will consist of 6 episodes.

===
The Acolyte ===
In April 2020, Variety reported that a female-centric live-action Star Wars series is in development for Disney+
with Russian Doll co-creator Leslye Headland serving as a writer and showrunner.
In early November, Headland expounded that the series would be set "in a pocket of the universe and a pocket of the timeline that we don't know much about," elaborating that she was more engaged creatively with the geography of the Star Wars universe than its existing visuals.
On November 5, Deadline reported that the series was expected to be an "action thriller with martial arts elements".
On Disney Investor Day 2020, it was revealed that it would take place during the late High Republic era.

===
Ahsoka ===
In December 2020, Ahsoka was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Rangers of the New Republic through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".
Rosario Dawson headlines the series, reprising her role as Ahsoka Tano.
It will be a limited series set sometime after Rebels.

===
Lando ===
In December 2020, Lando was announced as a Disney+ limited series, focusing on the titular character, with a story by Justin Simien.

===
Rangers of the New Republic ===
In December 2020, Rangers of the New Republic was announced.
Developed by Favreau and Filoni, it exists alongside The Mandalorian, The Book of Boba Fett and Ahsoka through interconnected stories culminating in a "climactic story event".

==
Game show ==


===
Jedi Temple Challenge (2020) ===
Star Wars:
Jedi Temple Challenge is a web-based children's game show developed by Lucasfilm.
First announced in December 2019, the series debuted on the Star Wars Kids website and YouTube channel on June 10, 2020.
The series features young contestants competing as Jedi Padawans in a series of obstacle courses and knowledge tests in the attempt to gain the rank of Jedi Knight.
The show is hosted by Ahmed Best, who plays the character of Kelleran Beq, the Jedi Master mentor of the contestants who is joined by his droid companions, AD-3
(voiced by Mary Holland and performed by Gordon Tarpley) and LX-R5.
Sam Witwer provides the voice of an unknown character of the Dark Side of the Force during the final challenge of each episode.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===


===
Critical response ===


===
Emmy Awards ===


==
Abandoned projects ==


===
Underworld ===
In 2005, plans for a live-action television series set between the prequel and original trilogies were announced at Star Wars Celebration.
In 2007, Lucas described the project as "one show that will split into four shows, focusing on different characters.
"
It entered development in early 2009.
The series was described as "gritty and dark" and was expected to feature characters such as Han Solo, Chewbacca, Lando Calrissian, Boba Fett, C-3PO, and Emperor Palpatine.
Lucas described the series as "more talky.
It's more of what I would call a soap opera with a bunch of personal dramas in it.
It's not really based on action-adventure films from the '30s—
it's actually more based on film noir movies from the '40s!"
Producer Rick McCallum revealed the working title, Star Wars: Underworld, in 2012, and that it would focus on criminal and political power struggles in the "period when the Empire is trying to take things over.
"Over one hundred 42-minute episodes were planned, with 50 scripts written.
These were mostly second drafts, but due to their complex content, were too expensive to produce.
Ronald D. Moore was one of the writers, and extensive artwork including character, costume, and set designs were developed at Skywalker Ranch under the close supervision of Lucas and McCallum.
The project was still being considered after Lucasfilm was sold to Disney, including by ABC, with stories being reviewed as of December 2015.
According to Kathleen Kennedy,
That's an area we've spent a lot of time, reading through the material that he developed is something we very much would like to explore. ...
So our attitude is, we don't want to throw any of that stuff away.
It's gold.
And it's something we're spending a lot of time looking at, pouring [sic] through, discussing, and we may very well develop those things further.
We definitely want to.

The plot of the anthology film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story was originally pitched as an episode of the series.
The story of Han winning the Millennium Falcon from Lando was planned to be featured and later developed as Solo:
A Star Wars Story.
In early 2020, Stargate Studios shared test footage made to promote the series to networks, as well as a Google Doc listing production details for the series.

===
Detours ===
Star Wars Detours is an unaired animated parody series from the creators of Robot Chicken, which was postponed in 2013 and ultimately unaired.
Production began in 2012 prior to the Disney acquisition, with 39 episodes completed and 62 additional scripts finished.

===
Cara Dune-centered series ===
A Mandalorian spin-off series centered on the character Cara Dune was reportedly considered for Disney+ by November 2020, which Lucasfilm had intended to announce at Disney's Investor Day event the next month.
However, after Gina Carano, who portrayed Dune in The Mandalorian, posted a series of controversial social media posts in both November 2020 and February 2021, any such project was cancelled and Disney severed its ties with the actress.

== See also ==
Lego Star Wars § Films and videos
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars films


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Yoda Fountain is a fountain with a bronze statue of Yoda, installed in San Francisco, California, United States.

==
References ==
Grogu (also known as "Baby Yoda" among fans and the media) is a character from the Star Wars Disney+
original television series The Mandalorian.
He is a toddler member of the same unnamed alien species as the Star Wars characters Yoda and Yaddle, with whom he shares a strong ability in the Force.
In the series, the protagonist known as "the Mandalorian" is hired to track down and capture Grogu for a remnant of the fallen Galactic Empire, but instead, he becomes his adoptive father and protects him from the Imperials.
The character's real name was not revealed until "Chapter 13:
The Jedi" (released on November 27, 2020), which also explained that Grogu was raised at the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during the Clone Wars.
Prior to this, the character's official name, as used in subtitles and captions, was "The Child".

Grogu has appeared in every episode of the first two seasons, with the exception of "Chapter 15: The Believer".
He was created by The Mandalorian creator and showrunner Jon Favreau based upon his desire to explore the mystery around Yoda and his species.
The character was further developed in early conversations between Favreau and executive producer Dave Filoni, and the character's imagery was defined by concept artist Christian Alzmann.
Grogu is mostly a work of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated imagery.

The puppet was designed by Legacy Effects.

Actor Adam Pally has stated that showrunner Jon Favreau told him it cost about $5 million to make.
It is controlled by two technicians, one who operates the eyes and mouth and another who controls other facial expressions.
The character's voice and sounds were created using a combination of adult and infant vocals, as well as recordings of a bat-eared fox and kinkajou.

The dynamic between the Mandalorian and Grogu embodies a theme of parenting and fatherhood prevalent in The Mandalorian, with the character also raising questions about good and evil and nature versus nurture in the series.

Grogu has received a positive reception from fans and reviewers, is widely considered the show's breakout character, and quickly became a popular Internet meme.
The Guardian called him "2019's biggest new character", and The Hollywood Reporter has said the character "represents the future of Hollywood".
Many writers have described Grogu as a key part in the success of Disney+.
Grogu was kept secret and was deliberately withheld from The Mandalorian's pre-release marketing and merchandise plans to avoid leaks before the show aired.
As a result, merchandise of Grogu was not immediately available after the first season debuted in November 2019, which some analysts say cost Disney $2.7 million in revenue, but Bob Iger, Disney's CEO at the time of The Mandalorian's premiere, has defended the strategy.

==
Appearances ==


===
Backstory ===
Grogu is a member of the same alien species as the Star Wars character Yoda.
He is 50 years old during the events of The Mandalorian, but still appears to be an infant because of the pace at which that species matures.
The species has never been given a proper name because Star Wars creator George Lucas wanted Yoda to maintain a sense of mystery.
Until Chapter 13 (i.e. episode 5 of season 2) of The Mandalorian, Grogu was not identified by a proper name, being referred to by sympathetic characters as "the child", "the kid", or "the baby", and by the antagonists as "the asset", "the bounty", "the target", or "the donor".
===
Season one ===
Grogu first appears in the series debut, "Chapter 1:
The Mandalorian", when the Mandalorian accepts a valuable commission from a mysterious man known only as "The Client" (Werner Herzog), who works for a remnant of the now-fallen Galactic Empire.
The assignment is to track down and capture an unidentified fifty-year-old target.
The Mandalorian and a fellow bounty hunter droid, IG-11 (Taika Waititi), infiltrate a remote and heavily defended encampment on the planet Arvala-7 and find Grogu.
When IG-11 attempts to kill Grogu, the Mandalorian protects him and instead shoots and destroys IG-11.
In "Chapter 2: The Child", Grogu is present when the Mandalorian is attacked by a giant rhinoceros-like creature called a Mudhorn.
As the beast rushes toward the Mandalorian for the kill, Grogu uses the Force to levitate the mudhorn, allowing a surprised Mandalorian to kill it.
The Mandalorian delivers Grogu to the Client on the planet Nevarro and collects his bounty in "Chapter 3: The Sin", after which the Client orders his colleague, Dr. Pershing (Omid Abtahi), to "extract the necessary material" from Grogu.
The Mandalorian later has second thoughts and returns to the Imperial compound to rescue Grogu, killing multiple stormtroopers.
This violates the code of the Bounty Hunters' Guild, and a group of bounty hunters led by guild leader Greef Karga (Carl Weathers) ambush the Mandalorian and attempt to take Grogu back from him.
The Mandalorian and Grogu are saved when fellow warriors from the Mandalorian's tribe come out of hiding to defend them, allowing them to escape Nevarro.
In "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", the Mandalorian seeks refuge in the sparsely populated planet Sorgan.
He plans to leave Grogu in a village there under the care of a widow named Omera (Julia Jones), but after another bounty hunter tracks them down, he realizes the planet is not safe.
The Mandalorian and Grogu visit the planet Tatooine in "Chapter 5
: The Gunslinger", during which the Mandalorian leaves Grogu in the care of a mechanic named Peli Motto (Amy Sedaris).
Grogu and Peli are briefly abducted by a bounty hunter named Toro Calican (Jake Cannavale), whom the Mandalorian kills.
In "Chapter 6: The Prisoner", the Mandalorian participates in a rescue job as part of a team of mercenaries organized by Ranzar Malk (Mark Boone Junior).
The Mandalorian keeps Grogu hidden on his ship during the mission, but the other mercenaries eventually find him.
One of them, a droid named Q9-0 (Richard Ayoade), learns of the bounty on Grogu and tries to kill him, but is himself destroyed by the Mandalorian.
At the start of the first season's penultimate episode, "Chapter 7: The Reckoning", the Mandalorian is contacted by Greef Karga, who says the Client has tightened his control over Nevarro as a result of the Mandalorian's actions there.
Greef proposes that the Mandalorian help him kill the Client and eliminate the Imperial presence from the planet, and in exchange he and Grogu will be safe from any further reprisals from the Guild.
The proposal is a trap, and Greef plans to ambush and kill the Mandalorian and return Grogu to the Client.
Nevertheless, the Mandalorian accepts the offer and returns to the planet along with Grogu and his allies Cara Dune (Gina Carano), Kuiil (Nick Nolte), and the recently-rebuilt IG-11, whom Kuiil has reprogrammed to be a nurse droid and protector for Grogu.
During their voyage, the party is attacked by pterodactyl-like creatures and Greef receives what would have been a fatal injury, but Grogu uses the Force to heal him.
Greef is so moved that he has a change of heart and informs the others about the trap.
They devise a new plan in which Kuiil will bring Grogu back to the Mandalorian's ship, while the others will kill the Client and his troops.
The plan goes wrong and Kuiil is killed by Imperial Scout Troopers, who briefly abduct Grogu before he is rescued by IG-11 at the start of the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption".
IG-11 brings Grogu back to the Mandalorian, Cara, and Greef and helps defend them against an ambush by the Imperial leader Moff Gideon (Giancarlo Esposito), who is revealed to have been seeking Grogu all along.
He does not reveal why he wants Grogu, but says he "means more to me than you will ever know".
After surviving an attack by Gideon's stormtroopers, during which Grogu uses the Force to deflect the fire of an attacking stormtrooper's flamethrower back against him, the group escapes with Grogu through a sewer grate.
They seek help from the hidden Mandalorian tribe, but it is revealed the Imperials wiped out the tribe after they revealed themselves in "Chapter 3: The Sin".
The tribe's leader, "The Armorer" (Emily Swallow), instructs the Mandalorian to watch over and protect Grogu, who she formally adopts into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling", like the Mandalorian once was himself.
She instructs the Mandalorian to seek out and deliver Grogu to the others of his kind, and that until this occurs, the Mandalorian and Grogu are a "clan of two", and that the Mandalorian will be like a father to him.
She declares their "signet" to be a likeness of a Mudhorn, the creature the Mandalorian and Grogu worked together to kill in "Chapter 2:
The Child".
The group departs, and IG-11 sacrifices himself to destroy an entire squad of stormtroopers to protect Grogu.
After fending off a final attack from Moff Gideon, the Mandalorian once again departs from Nevarro with Grogu.

===
Season two ===
Grogu accompanies the Mandalorian during his search for other Mandalorians who could help him find the child's people: the Jedi.
In "Chapter 9: The Marshal", the pair return to Tatooine and meet Cobb Vanth (Timothy Olyphant), the Marshal of Mos Pelgo, who is not a true Mandalorian but wears Mandalorian armor.
The Mandalorian helps Vanth slay a krayt dragon which had been attacking Mos Pelgo in exchange for his armor, along the way arranging an uneasy alliance between the townspeople and a Tusken Raider tribe, and developing deep respect for Vanth, to the point he entrusts him to look after Grogu, should he perish during his attempt to kill the dragon.
In "Chapter 10:
The Passenger", the Mandalorian and Grogu leave for Trask, where they must take a contact, "Frog Lady" (Misty Rosas, voiced by Dee Bradley Baker), and her eggs in exchange for a lead on other Mandalorians.
During their journey, Grogu takes a liking to the eggs and eats a few of them despite being explicitly forbidden from doing so by the Mandalorian.
Grogu's appetite also gets the group into trouble while stranded on Maldo Kreis, where he eats a spider-like creature egg just as the rest of the swarm hatches, though they are ultimately saved by two X-wing pilots (Dave Filoni and Paul Sun-Hyung Lee) from the New Republic.
In "Chapter 11: The Heiress", the group arrives on Trask and, after bringing Frog Lady and her remaining eggs to her husband, the Mandalorian and Grogu encounter Bo-Katan Kryze (Katee Sackhoff) and two other Mandalorian warriors, who save them from a crew of Quarrens who tried to kill the two and steal the Mandalorian's armor.
While the Mandalorian accompanies Bo-Katan's team on a mission in exchange for a lead on Jedi, Grogu is left with the Frog Man and Frog Lady, during which time the eggs hatch and Grogu bonds with the newborn tadpoles.

In "Chapter 12: The Siege", the Mandalorian and Grogu return to Nevarro for repairs to the Razor Crest, and reunite with Greef Karga and Cara Dune, who have since turned the planet around.
While the Mandalorian goes with Greef, Cara and their Mythrol companion (Horatio Sanz) to destroy the last Imperial base on Nevarro in exchange for said repairs, Grogu is left at a local school, where he uses the Force to steal some cookies from a boy.
This episode also provides a clue as to what the Empire's plans with Grogu are; while exploring the Imperial base, the Mandalorian and the others stumble upon cloning experiments performed by Imperial scientists, involving Grogu's blood, some of which has already been transfused to the clones to supposedly give them Force-sensitivity.

In "Chapter 13:
The Jedi", the Mandalorian takes Grogu to former Jedi Ahsoka Tano (Rosario Dawson) on Corvus, who communicates with him through the Force, learning his name and that he is a former Jedi youngling who was rescued from the Jedi Temple on Coruscant during the Great Jedi Purge and hidden for his own safety, which is why he suppresses his Force powers.
While Ahsoka is reluctant to train Grogu because of his strong attachment to the Mandalorian, she tells the latter to take him to the Jedi Temple on Tython, where Grogu might reach out to another Jedi through the Force and choose his own destiny.

In "Chapter 14:
The Tragedy", the Mandalorian brings Grogu to said temple, where he begins meditating, creating a protective Force field around him.
Moff Gideon's Imperial remnant, having tracked down the Mandalorian, soon attacks in an attempt to capture Grogu, who continues his meditation while being protected by the Mandalorian and the recently arrived Boba Fett (Temuera Morrison) and Fennec Shand (Ming-Na Wen), who made a deal with the former to protect Grogu in exchange for Fett's armor (which the Mandalorian obtained from Cobb Vanth).
Despite their best efforts, Grogu is captured by Gideon's Dark Troopers and taken to his cruiser, where he is imprisoned inside a holding cell.
Later, Gideon witnesses Grogu using his Force powers on two stormtroopers that he throws around the cell, before stunning him and preparing to take him to Dr. Pershing to complete the blood transfusion.

In "Chapter 16:
The Rescue", the Mandalorian boards Gideon's ship to rescue Grogu, assisted by Cara, Fett, Fennec, Bo-Katan, and Koska Reeves (Mercedes Varnado).
While Fett provides cover from Slave I and the others take control of the ship's bridge, the Mandalorian confronts and defeats Gideon.
With Gideon captured and Grogu in their custody, the Mandalorian and his allies have their escape route cut off by a platoon of Dark Trooper droids until Luke Skywalker arrives with R2-D2 and destroys the Dark troopers.
When Luke offers to raise and train Grogu, the Mandalorian, realizing that the child's destiny is to become a Jedi, reluctantly allows him to go with Luke.
During an emotional farewell, the Mandalorian removes his helmet to let Grogu see his face for the first time, and promises to meet him again.

== Characterization ==
Physically, Grogu closely resembles Yoda, sharing his signature green skin and long, pointed ears.
Grogu is small in size, with wide eyes, short hairs, and wrinkled skin.
Grogu is capable of sitting up, crawling, walking and eating.
He appears capable of understanding some language spoken around him, but cannot speak except in baby-like babble noises.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair stated: "There is an emotional transference happening here.
The audience cares more about the unnamed, faceless Mandalorian because he cares so much about Baby Yoda."
Rebecca Keegan of The Hollywood Reporter believes Grogu displays a form of wisdom despite his young age, describing him as "a Dalai Lama in toddler form".
Jeanne Cavelos, former NASA astrophysicist and author of The Science of Star Wars, also believes Grogu demonstrates intelligence beyond his years, noting his awareness and empathy toward beings even when their faces or bodies are covered completely, as well as his ability to recognize injury in others and attempt to repair it.
Despite his youth, Grogu demonstrates a considerable ability to use and manipulate the Force, such as when he lifts the large Mudhorn creature into the air in "Chapter 2: The Child", and when he deflects the fire of an attacking stormtrooper's flamethrower back against him in "Chapter 8: Redemption".
Kevin Melrose of Comic Book Resources noted that in the original Star Wars trilogy film The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Luke Skywalker struggled to lift an X-wing fighter due to its large size, so the fact that Grogu can lift heavy objects despite his diminutive size and young age demonstrates the vastness of his Force powers.
Grogu also repeatedly shows a desire to use the Force to help those around him, such as when he attempts to heal the Mandalorian's wounds in "Chapter 2: The Child", and when he heals Greef Karga's near-fatal wounds in "Chapter 7: The Reckoning".
However, after using the Force in this manner, Grogu is often exhausted and slips into unconsciousness, indicating that he is still developing his power and does not yet have the skills to fully control it.
Despite his raw natural ability with the Force, Grogu is untrained and still depends heavily on the Mandalorian and other allies for protection.
Grogu has a sweet temperament, and comes across as innocent and kindhearted to most of the people he encounters, but is also occasionally capable of violence, such as during a scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" when he uses the Force to choke Cara Dune while she is engaging the Mandalorian in a friendly arm wrestling match.
==
Concept and creation ==


===
Conception ===
Grogu was conceived by Jon Favreau, the creator and showrunner of The Mandalorian.
Upon learning that Lucasfilm had been sold to the Walt Disney Company in 2012, Favreau began imagining working on a Star Wars project, and was particularly interested in exploring the events after the original Star Wars trilogy.
He conceived Grogu based upon a desire to explore the mystery around Yoda and his species, and an interest in presenting a character from Yoda's species at the beginning of his journey, in contrast to Yoda ending his own journey in Return of the Jedi (1983).
Favreau believed part of the appeal of Yoda was that George Lucas deliberately kept his origins and details about the species mysterious, and Favreau believed that sense of mystery would extend to Grogu: "I think that's why people are so curious about this little one of the same species."

In mid-2017, shortly after Favreau pitched The Mandalorian to Lucasfilm President Kathleen Kennedy, she suggested he meet with Dave Filoni, who had co-created several Star Wars animated series.
Filoni said of his meeting with Favreau:When he brought up in the very beginning of doing this child and having it be of Yoda's species, I was like, ‘Oh, that's very tricky, because there's never been this before outside of Yoda, and then Yaddle in the prequels on the Jedi Council.
It's kind of a sacred thing ...
We just have to be responsible when we're telling a story with what we're deciding to do.
The fans want to know things are a calculated, careful decision.
Then if you tell a good story, most of the time they go with it.
The character of Grogu was further developed in early conversations between Favreau and Filoni, the latter of whom drew a rough sketch of the character on cocktail napkins during the talks.
Multiple artists worked to refine the image of Grogu created by Filoni, but the definitive imagery came from a concept drawing by artist Christian Alzmann, which depicted the character's makeshift garment.
Favreau said of this rendering: "It looked cute, but it also looked a little weird.
That's part of Yoda.
It can't just be cute.
It can't just be a straight-up Disney baby, it has to be a little bit tweaked.
"
The team sought to establish mannerisms and expressions for Grogu that would remind viewers of a pet with whom they might share a connection.
These characteristics include Grogu's ears, posture, and the way he cocks his head.
Disney CEO Bob Iger said of Grogu: "The moment I laid eyes on the character, I had a strong feeling that it was going to connect with audiences.
So cute, so interesting, so compelling.
So familiar and yet so new.
"
Favreau has clarified that Grogu is not a younger version of Yoda himself, but has declined to comment upon whether he is related to Yoda or otherwise connected to him.

===
Development ===
Grogu is mostly a work of animatronics and puppetry, although accentuated with computer-generated imagery (CGI).
Legacy Effects, the special effects studio started by protégés of special make-up effects creator Stan Winston, designed the Grogu puppet and supplied the puppeteers to animate it during filming.
The puppet cost about $5 million to make, and is relatively heavy due to the amount of wires and animatronic technology inside it.
It is controlled by two technicians, one who operates the eyes and mouth and another who controls other facial expressions.
There are several stand-in versions for Grogu used in filming in addition to the primary puppet.
The crew of The Mandalorian wanted to use animatronics for Grogu as often as possible.
However, they also shot versions of the character's scenes both with and without the puppet, so they had the option of replacing it with a CGI effect in post-production if the puppet did not look satisfactory.
When CGI is used, Favreau said they try to make the character obey the same physical laws that he would if he were a puppet, adding: "I think a lot of times CG makes itself too obvious where you don't create parameters creatively
that allow the character to keep the same identity and charm.
"

The voice and sounds of Grogu were created by David Acord and Matthew Wood, sound editors with Skywalker Sound, who had previously worked on various Star Wars projects.
Acord recorded animals' noises at a wildlife rescue near San Diego, and used recordings of a bat-eared fox and kinkajou to make the initial version of Grogu's voice.
However, Favreau suggested the voice needed to sound more human-like and relatable to audiences, so instead the animal sounds were scaled back and used only for small grunts and cooing noises.
Actual infant vocals were used to create the new version of Grogu's voice, and Acord used a highly-pitched version of his own voice for some of the more articulated vocalizations.
Acord also previously voiced Rotta the Hutt, the young Huttlet son of Jabba the Hutt, in the animated film Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008).
===
Filming ===
The character was referred to as "The Child" in screenplays for The Mandalorian, though Bryce Dallas Howard, who directed "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", said she always referred to him on set simply as "Baby", and other cast members called it "The Being".
During filming, the director of each episode would communicate with Grogu's puppeteers to discuss what was happening in the scene, what emotions Grogu should express, and what actions the character should take.
Director Deborah Chow said in this way, it was similar to providing direction to a living actor.
Favreau encouraged the directors to test and push the boundaries of the Grogu puppet during filming, urging them to experiment and attempt to get the most realistic movements and mannerisms possible from the character.
Brendan Wayne, a body double for the Mandalorian character, said the puppet looked so realistic that performing against it felt like working with an actual child actor.
Rick Famuyiwa, the director of "Chapter 2: The Child", said he was shocked when he learned that the premiere episode of The Mandalorian ended with the introduction of Grogu, because it meant he would be directing the next episode that further expanded upon the character.
The Grogu puppet was popular on set with the show's cast and crew.
Chow said: "With the baby, every time it came on set, the whole crew would respond to it.
Even the grip department, every production assistant is coming to the monitors, trying to see it."
Howard screamed in excitement when she first saw it, and Gina Carano said of Grogu: "That was our precious.
Our precious is this being that we all end up taking care of in some way."
Emily Swallow said she "fell in love with it like everybody else", adding: "I was thrilled when they brought him in that little bag for the scene that I got to have with it.
I just wanted to snuggle it."
Amy Sedaris said the animatronic Grogu puppet made everyone on the set happy: "The minute you looked into Baby Yoda's eyes you just got lost."
Likewise, Giancarlo Esposito said he enjoyed interacting with the Grogu puppet during filming: "It melts my heart, because the reality is, this little baby does things that you could never imagine and when you look at those eyes and that little body, how can you not help but fall in love?"
Carl Weathers has said of him: "He is very interesting and very knowledgeable and very cute.
I never use that word, but he is a cute little guy."

Werner Herzog particularly enjoyed filming scenes with the animatronic Grogu puppet, which he called "heartbreakingly beautiful".
Chow said directing the scene between Herzog and Grogu in "Chapter 3:
The Sin" was "one of the weirdest" moments of her career, because he had so much affection for the puppet and was interacting with it like it was a living being.
She said: "I literally think that he had forgotten that it's not a real-live creature
and he had fallen in love with it."
Herzog strongly urged the Mandalorian filmmakers to use the puppet for the character and not CGI.
While filming one scene, Dave Filoni began to remove the puppet to shoot an alternate take, in case they decided to use a CGI version of Grogu in its place.
Herzog passionately urged him not to do so and to remain committed to the animatronics and puppetry, saying: "You are cowards.
Leave it.
Leave it.
"
Esposito has also said having an actual Grogu puppet to perform against has been beneficial for the cast, because "that space allows all of us to be so wowed by its presence".
Misty Rosas, who delivered the motion capture performance for Kuiil, often held the Grogu puppet during her scenes in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning".
This occasionally proved challenging for Rosas, who also had to manage the weight of the animatronics in her own costume and face mask, as well as the weight of Grogu prop.
One full day of filming the episode focused upon Kuiil riding the blurrg creature, a process Rosas described as "intense" due to the amount of time she spent on the fake creature and the speeds at which it was made to run.
The process was made further challenging because she was carrying the heavy animatronic Grogu puppet throughout the scenes, and she occasionally needed breaks between takes.
Rosas said: "My legs are not exactly long, so I was squeezing for dear life and holding the baby."
Nevertheless, Rosas said she enjoyed working with Grogu character, saying: "He just melts my heart, he's so cute.
"During
the opening scene of "Chapter 8: Redemption", an Imperial Scout Trooper portrayed by comedian Adam Pally punched Grogu.
During the first take of filming the scene, Pally punched the animatronic Grogu puppet hard, prompting Favreau to inform the actor that the puppet cost about $5 million to make.
This made Pally so nervous that he missed Grogu altogether when he tried to punch him in the three subsequent takes.
Pally joked about working with Grogu: "I gotta tell you, the truth is that Baby Yoda is a bit of a diva.
He's constantly vaping."
At some point during filming of The Mandalorian, George Lucas visited the set and held the Grogu puppet.
Favreau posted a picture of Lucas holding Grogu on Instagram on January 16, 2020, which drew considerable Internet attention.

===
Prerelease ===
Grogu was kept secret and was deliberately withheld from The Mandalorian's prerelease marketing and merchandise plans due to the risk that details about the character could leak before the show aired.
Favreau said of this plan: "I think that part of what people really value is to be surprised and delighted, and I think that's becoming all too rare."
Favreau has credited Donald Glover as the source of that strategy.
While developing The Mandalorian, Favreau was simultaneously directing Glover in the photorealistic remake of The Lion King (2019).
While discussing music and pop culture, Glover told Favreau that people enjoy being surprised, because true surprises had become much less common in the Internet era.
As an example, Glover cited the excitement generated by the sudden releases of surprise albums by singer and songwriter Beyoncé.
Favreau felt keeping Grogu a secret until he was revealed would allow fans to connect with the character and "discover the story as it was unfolding".
The leadership and marketing team at the Walt Disney Company was supportive of this strategy.
Screeners of the pilot episode were not distributed to reviewers to avoid leaks about Grogu, and the official Lucasfilm and Star Wars social media accounts did not start posting messages about Grogu until about a week after the series debuted, to avoid spoiling the character's debut as much as possible.

==
Themes ==


===
Parenting and fatherhood ===
One of the primary themes of The Mandalorian is parenting and fatherhood, particularly through the father-son relationship dynamic between the Mandalorian and Grogu.
Ryan Britt of Fatherly wrote: "For years the Star Wars franchise avoided depicting a parent-child dynamic.
With Mando and Baby Yoda, that’s finally changing."
Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk argued that parenting has been the subject of past Star Wars stories, but almost always during later stages of parenthood, rather than an infant in early developmental stages such as Grogu.
As examples, she cited Obi-Wan Kenobi serving as a mentor to the adolescent Anakin Skywalker, Princess Leia lamenting over her grown son Kylo Ren, or the absence of Rey's parents.
Several reviewers have compared the dynamic between Grogu and the Mandalorian to Lone Wolf and Cub, a manga about a samurai warrior and his young son.
Grogu makes the Mandalorian a softer and more relatable character; he changes in a positive way because of raising Grogu, becoming less selfish and self-absorbed.
Several examples of the Mandalorian parenting Grogu appear throughout the series, such as when he stops Grogu from pressing random buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, ultimately by holding him in his lap.
In another example, the Mandalorian sets up a car seat for Grogu in the cockpit of his ship, so he can be seated safely and comfortably during their travels.
The relationship between the Mandalorian and Grogu is an example of unexpected fatherhood.
The Mandalorian feels a connection and parental bond with Grogu because of his own childhood, when he was orphaned upon the death of his parents and was adopted by the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling".
Nevertheless, fatherhood was not a role the Mandalorian was initially seeking, and he makes repeated initial attempts to avoid this responsibility.
He first does so in "Chapter 3:
The Sin", when he leaves Grogu with the Client, and then again in "Chapter 4: Sanctuary", when he plans to leave Grogu with Omera, a protective mother on the planet Sorgan who is willing to take Grogu into her own family.
The Mandalorian does not fully commit to the role of fatherhood until the first-season finale, "Chapter 8: Redemption", when Grogu himself is also adopted into the Mandalorian culture as a "foundling" and the Mandalorian is formally declared to be his father figure.
Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair has noted that none of the day-to-day difficulties of parenthood are portrayed in the series: "There is no shrill squawking from Baby Yoda, no tantrum, no spit-up, no uncontrollable shrieking that burrows into a parent’s psyche like a dentist’s drill shredding a soft, pink nerve."
Likewise, Vulture writer Kathryn VanArendonk said the show ignores or does not address many parenting details that make fatherhood difficult, such as what Grogu eats, when he goes to sleep, and whether he wears diapers.
She wrote: "The Mandalorian is uninterested in diapers, and so Mando gets to be a very particular image of fatherhood: the guy who doesn't have to sweat the small stuff."
VanAnderonk described this as a wish fulfillment fantasy for parents or prospective parents: "a vision of parenting stripped so thoroughly of all detail and specificity that all that’s left are archetypes: the parent, the child".
Grogu encounters a handful of other protector figures throughout the first season, including Omera, IG-11, and Peli Motto.
Some observers have criticized the series for the fact that the Mandalorian repeatedly leaves Grogu alone or in the hands of relative strangers, as well as for making decisions that place Grogu in danger.
One example is in "Chapter 6:
The Prisoner", when he allows a team of dangerous mercenaries to use his ship while Grogu is on board, nearly resulting in Grogu's death.
An interaction the Mandalorian has with Peli Motto in "Chapter 5:
The Gunslinger" is one of the most overt discussions about the challenges of caring for Grogu.
When the Mandalorian accidentally wakes Grogu, who had been sleeping in Peli's arms, she chides him: "Do you have any idea
how long it took me to get it to sleep?
"
She also condemns the Mandalorian for leaving Grogu alone on the ship, saying: "you have an awful lot to learn about raising a young one".
ScreenCrush writer Matt Singer argued the Mandalorian's parenting errors make the show that much more appealing and relatable because making mistakes is a large part of being a parent.

===
Good and evil; nature versus nurture ===
One scene in "Chapter 7:
The Reckoning" led many fans to reevaluate Grogu and question whether he may demonstrate evil tendencies.
During a scene on the Mandalorian's spaceship, Grogu observes as the Mandalorian and Cara Dune engage in a friendly arm wrestling match.
During the contest, Grogu uses the Force to choke Cara, nearly strangling her to death before the Mandalorian intervenes.
Throughout the Star Wars franchise, that ability has been most commonly associated with the dark side of the Force, and particularly with the antagonist character Darth Vader.
Sarah Bea Milner of Screen Rant wrote: "The moment is genuinely shocking — and more than a little disturbing."
Some reviewers noted, however, that Grogu likely mistakenly believed the Mandalorian was in danger and intervened to help.
Additionally, in the same episode, Grogu uses the Force to heal and save Greef Karga, a power typically associated with the Light Side.
Peter Foy of Comic Book Resources wrote: "It doesn't exactly seem realistic that Disney would blow its merchandising potential with the little cutie by going all Damien (The Omen) in his storyline.
"Nevertheless
, some writers have suggested viewers had been underestimating Grogu's capacity for evil because he is cute.
Fans speculated Grogu could be presenting a false personality or using the Force to manipulate people into caring about him to help ensure his survival.
Esquire writer Matt Miller noted that Yoda lied about his identity during his initial appearance in The Empire Strikes Back, posing as a simple-minded observer to Luke Skywalker before revealing himself to be a Jedi Master.
Miller suggested Grogu could be putting on a similar performance.
One fan theory suggests Grogu could be related to a prophecy in a past Star Wars work that predicted an evil that could consume the galaxy.
The prophecy, described in the novel Star Wars: Master and Apprentice (2019), says: "The danger of the past is not past, but sleeps in an egg.
When the egg cracks, it will threaten the galaxy entire.
"
Fans theorized this could refer to Grogu, who sleeps in an egg-like bassinet in The Mandalorian.
Others have theorized the reason the Imperial remnant wants Grogu is to turn him over to the dark side of the Force, or for use as a weapon.
Moff Gideon in the season finale says, "You may think you have some idea what you’re in possession of, but you do not."
Peter Foy of Comic Book Resources suggested this could allude to Grogu's potential to cause mass destruction.
Caitlin Gallagher of Bustle suggested rather than building toward Grogu becoming evil, the show could be suggesting the Mandalorian needs to find a way to raise Grogu in a less violent environment.
All season long, Grogu has witnessed those around him committing violent acts.
For example, Vulture writer Keith Phipps noticed that when IG-11 kills multiple stormtroopers in front of him, Grogu has a "look of wonder" in his eyes, which Phipps said "is hilarious, but also a little chilling".
Some writers applied a nature versus nurture argument to this, contending Grogu is becoming violent because of what he is learning based on the actions around him.
This suggests Grogu is not inherently good or evil, but that instead, like all children, he is impressionable and does not fully understand the events occurring around him.
He is learning about life and needs guidance as he develops his abilities.
This is why he uses Force powers generally associated with both the light and dark sides of the Force.
It will largely fall to the Mandalorian to provide this guidance, as when the Mandalorian stops him from strangling Cara.

==
Cultural impact ==


===
Critical reception ===
Grogu has received a positive reception from fans and reviewers, and is widely considered the show's breakout character.
Fans immediately adopted the nickname "Baby Yoda" to describe the character, a moniker Favreau has embraced as "the easiest, shortest, most hashtagable way to identify that character".
However, the nickname is not used internally by the crew of The Mandalorian, and Disney CEO Bob Iger said he "got [his] wrist slapped" by Favreau for calling the character Baby Yoda in e-mail messages.
Iger later said the scale of the positive reaction to Grogu was "beyond my expectations by a wide margin".
Several writers described Grogu as a pop culture phenomenon, particularly noting the adoration it had received from fans on social media.
The Guardian called Baby Yoda "2019's biggest new character", and Bryan Alexander of USA Today wrote: "There's nothing hotter in the universe than Baby Yoda."
Some critics noted that fandom for Grogu transcended age and experience, and that few fictional characters unite entire fan bases in the way Grogu had; Anthony Breznican of Vanity Fair wrote: "In an era of bitter division on nearly all matters, there is seemingly unanimous adoration for this tiny alien creature.
"Vox
writer Allegra Frank said Grogu made The Mandalorian "instantly more memorable and evocative", and alleviated the solitude and tension that might otherwise have surrounded the show's protagonist.
Carolyn Giardina of The Hollywood Reporter said Grogu helped The Mandalorian not only achieve critical and commercial success, but also impact the cultural zeitgeist.
Beyond the show, other writers have described the character as a key component in the success of Disney's rollout of the Disney+ streaming service.
Julia Alexander of The Verge wrote: "There's no question that Baby Yoda is driving interest in Disney+".
Some critics called Grogu one of the best and most lauded new Star Wars characters in recent memory, while others said the character had made the Star Wars franchise relevant to an even wider range of audiences.
Vulture writer Madison Malone Kircher described Grogu as an example of a character so popular that his fame nearly eclipsed that of his own franchise, comparing him to Baby Groot from the Guardians of the Galaxy films.
The Guardian writer Zach Vasquez noted past Star Wars works had featured young characters that have not resonated as strongly as Grogu, so he credited his success with the character's designers and special effects.
Likewise, Robyn Bahr of The Hollywood Reporter said the positive response to Grogu, along with that of the show
The Dark Crystal:
Age of Resistance, demonstrate that audiences still desire puppetry, animatronics, and practical effects rather than only CGI.
Bahr wrote: "If Baby Yoda were entirely 3D animation, he wouldn't have become an icon the minute we laid our eyes on him.
"Grogu was featured on the cover of the December 2019 issue of The Hollywood Reporter, along with the headline: "Baby Yoda represents the future of Hollywood".
In an article in the magazine, writer Rebecca Keegan argued Grogu is the culmination of several shifts and trends in the entertainment industry over the decade prior to the release of The Mandalorian.
These include the decline of the traditional movie star, the growth of streaming media services, the rise of Internet culture, and technological advances in CGI.
Variety writer Caroline Framke said she fell in love with the character even despite acknowledging that he is an "inherently manipulative product of the most powerful media
conglomerate".
Not all reviews of Grogu were positive.
An online report conducting an analysis of which U.S. states responded most positively to Grogu, finding that interest in him was highest in Utah, and lowest in Mississippi.
Rolling Stone writer Alan Sepinwall said the reveal of Grogu was a rehash of the appearance of Rotta the Hutt in Star Wars: The Clone Wars.
Emily VanDerWerff of Vox described the character as "yet another merchandising opportunity" and did not feel the character was worth Disney attempting to keep secret before his reveal.
BBC writer Caryn James said he did not believe anyone without an emotional attachment to Star Wars would care about Grogu.
Jeremy Gordon of The Outline called Grogu the "product of a merciless capitalist machine" intended primarily to generate merchandising revenue for Disney.
Gordon wrote: "It's not really Baby Yoda
I hate, of course.
He's really cute.
It's the feeling that I'm being pandered to, that all of this is a foregone conclusion."
Emma Gray Ellis wrote that there was some backlash to Grogu on social media in response to the character's massive Internet popularity.
She wrote: "There's something grindingly, performatively grouchy in leaping forward to damn something that 'everyone' likes, in no small part because everyone likes it."

Grogu ranked first on several Screen Rant lists about the series, including the most interesting characters from the first season of The Mandalorian, the best characters from the show, and the best costumes from the first season.

===
Internet memes ===
Grogu quickly became a popular Internet meme.
In the week following the debut of The Mandalorian, Grogu was driving almost twice as many social media interactions on news stories about it as any of the 2020 Democratic presidential candidates.
The Baby Yoda search term saw continuous growth on Google Trends in the weeks following the release of The Mandalorian.
There were 2.28 million social media interactions about the characters on news stories in the first two weeks after the release of The Mandalorian, and 2 million tweets featuring the words "Baby Yoda" were sent on Twitter between November 12 and December 5, 2019.
When Favreau tweeted a concept art image of the character by artist Christian Alzmann on November 19, it received more than 34,000 retweets and 217,000 likes within one week.
Various celebrities have tweeted about the character, including Ariana Grande, Elon Musk, Dwayne Johnson, Russell Wilson, Alex Rodriguez, and Donald Trump Jr. Zach Vasquez of The Guardian wrote: "It's now practically impossible to scroll through any social media platform without being inundated with pics, videos, memes and gifs of the bug-eyed, big-eared tot."
The Los Angeles Times included Grogu in its list of "2019's Internet Obsessions", with writer Christie D'Zurilla writing: "Baby Yoda won the Internet in 2019."One of the more popular memes involved a screenshot from "Chapter 4: Sanctuary" in which Grogu casually sips from a mug of soup, which has been compared to a similar meme of Kermit the Frog passive-aggressively sipping a glass of tea.
Another popular meme used a scene from that episode in which Grogu randomly presses buttons in the cockpit of the Mandalorian's spaceship, with most of the memes changing the audio so that it appeared Grogu was trying to put various songs on the radio.
In late November 2019, the online GIF database Giphy temporarily removed its GIFs of Grogu due to "confusion" over the legal status of the images, sparking outrage among fans.
However, they were quickly restored, and Giphy issued an apology to Disney for having removed them.
Various sports teams have created their own memes with Grogu, including Los Angeles Clippers, New York Islanders, Phoenix Suns, Pittsburgh Steelers, San Francisco Giants, Sacramento Kings, Seattle Mariners, and Tennessee Volunteers football.

===
Cultural references ===
In December 2019, artwork of Disney CEO Bob Iger with Grogu appeared in the Time magazine article naming Iger their Businessperson of the Year.
The New Yorker published a cartoon of a woman pushing a baby stroller and saying to the baby inside it: "No offense, but Baby Yoda, like, blows you out of the water.
"
Ice2Ice, a musician associated with the website The Ringer, released "Dear Baby Yoda: A Love Song" on December 3, 2019, with the music based upon the song "Dear Theodosia" from the musical Hamilton.
The character was also mentioned in the December 2019 South Park episode "Basic Cable".
In the episode, a character named Scott Malkinson attempts to get Disney+
because the woman he is interested in loves Grogu, so he believes she will love him too if he gets the streaming service.
Grogu was also parodied in the December 14, 2019 episode of Saturday Night Live.
He was portrayed by comedian Kyle Mooney in a Weekend Update segment, in which he gossiped about the Mandalorian cast, talked about his future business ventures, and threatened Baby Groot.
At the 77th Golden Globe Awards, host Ricky Gervais jokingly mistook Joe Pesci for "Baby Yoda".
On February 20, the United States Army revealed that a M1 Abrams tank belonging to the 3rd Infantry Division of Fort Stewart in Georgia had been named after Grogu, with the words "BABY YODA" printed on the barrel of its gun.
Some critics have noted that other media companies introduced young versions of their own characters following the debut of Grogu, and suggested they could be attempts to capitalize on Grogu's success.
As an example, Ashley Carman of The Verge cited "Baby Sonic", a young version of the video game character Sonic the Hedgehog who appears in his 2020 film, which she described as "like something ripped out of Disney's playbook".
===
Merchandise ===
Due to the secrecy surrounding Grogu, designs of the character were withheld from product manufacturers in the months prior to the release of The Mandalorian.
As a result, toys and merchandise of the character were not available in time for the 2019 Christmas season, despite a high demand for them.
The Walt Disney Company accepted this plan despite knowing it would cost the company merchandising revenue in the short term; Favreau said "they understood the value of it".
Iger said if Grogu's design had been distributed for toys before the show's release, "it would have gone out to hundreds and hundreds of people, probably all over the world, and we didn't want to do that".
Iger reiterated that Disney is a story-first company which has "never set out to tell a story simply because it can become a toy or a game or a consumer product of some sort", and he described the wait to unveil Grogu as "worth it".
The Amazon product research tool Jungle Scout projected that Disney may have lost $2.7 million in revenue because of the delay in release merchandise of Grogu; demand for toys of Grogu were so high that Amazon customers searched for Baby Yoda products more than 90,000 times in one month.
David Lazarus, consumer columnist for the Los Angeles Times, said he understood Disney's strategy, but felt the company missed out on significant commercial opportunity: "The fact that they didn't anticipate that this was going to be a commercial goldmine is insane, and that they let this opportunity slip away strikes me as sheer madness.
"Due
to the scarcity of licensed merchandise of Grogu, many unlicensed products featuring the character were created and sold through the Internet, including via websites like Etsy.
These included felt and crocheted dolls, shirts, jewellery, Christmas ornaments, art prints, bumper stickers, coffee mugs, and more.
Do it yourself videos were also produced showing how fans could make their own toys based upon Grogu.
The top 47 unofficial Grogu products by Amazon merchants sold an average of 1,842 pieces of merchandise in the month following the show's release, at an average of $23 per product.
In mid-January 2020, Disney issued takedown notices against several Etsy sellers using the words "Star Wars", "Mandalorian", and "Yoda", citing copyright violations.
Official soft goods such as T-shirts were the first to be made available because they were the easiest to produce.
The first two official dolls of Grogu released were a 10-inch Funko figurine and an 11-inch plush toy from Mattel, which began shipping in February.
Pre-orders for the Funko doll made it the top toy on Amazon upon its release.
More official merchandise was expected to be released in early 2020.
In December 2019, the Electronic Arts video game The Sims 4 added "The Child Statue" as a purchasable decoration.
Several toys of Grogu were announced American International Toy Fair in New York City in February 2020, most notably a nearly life-sized animatronic Grogu toy by Hasbro, which moves, blinks, and makes sounds like the actual character.
The toy sold out within days of its announcement, with new deliveries not expected until December 2020.
Other toys announced at the Fair include a Grogu waffle iron, Chia Pets of Grogu, and a vehicle set as part of Hasbro's Mission Fleet toyline, which include the Mandalorian on a speeder bike and Grogu in his floating bassinet.
Build-A-Bear Workshop has also announced it will release a version of a Grogu doll in early 2020.
In August 2020, Lego released BrickHeadz figures of both Grogu and the Mandalorian, as well as a September 2020 release of a Lego set for the Mandalorian's Razor Crest spaceship, which included small figurine of Grogu, which has also appeared in the 2021 set Trouble on Tatooine (set 75299).
A large, buildable figure of Grogu has also been released, as well as a plush toy based on the minifigure.

===
In video games ===
In March 2020, an unofficial user-created mod for the video game Star Wars Battlefront II allowed the character BB-8 to be replaced with a playable version of Grogu.
Grogu appears in Fortnite Battle Royale as a pet that floats in the hover-pram behind the player in-game.

===
Medical education, radiology images ===
In 2021, Grogu's likeness was published in the scientific literature, in a medical journal article titled, "Baby Yoda: Pareidolia and Patternicity in Sacral MRI and CT Scans".

The lead author was Patrick Foye, M.D., a professor of physical medicine and rehabilitation at Rutgers University.
In this article, he introduced a novel way of visualizing the sacrum when viewing MRI and CT scans.
He noted that in certain image slices the human sacral anatomy resembles the face of "Baby Yoda".
Sacral openings for exiting nerves (sacral foramina) resemble Baby Yoda's eyes, while the sacral canal resembles Baby Yoda's mouth.
These and other comparisons can help physicians to use the "Baby Yoda sign" to evaluate both normal and abnormal anatomic findings on the imaging studies.

==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


==
External links ==
Grogu on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Phasma is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, portrayed by English actress Gwendoline Christie.
Introduced in Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015), the first film in the Star Wars sequel trilogy
, Phasma is the commander of the First Order's force of stormtroopers.
Christie returned to the role in the next of the trilogy's films, Star Wars: The Last Jedi (2017), and in the animated television series Star Wars Resistance (2018) and several video games.
The character also made an additional appearance in Before the Awakening, an anthology book set before the events of The Force Awakens.

J. J. Abrams created Phasma from an armor design originally developed for Kylo Ren and named her after the 1979 horror film Phantasm.
The character was originally conceived as male.
Phasma appeared prominently in promotion and marketing for The Force Awakens, but the character's ultimately minor role in the film was the subject of criticism, a complaint repeated for her appearance in The Last Jedi.
Nonetheless, merchandise featuring the character found success, and her figure was the best-selling of all The Force
Awakens action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
Concept and creation ==
The character's creation was inspired by a rejected design for Kylo Ren.
Costume designer Michael Kaplan came up with the concept of Kylo being "the Lord of the Stormtroopers, in bright shining silver armor".
Kaplan had a strong image in his head of what this concept should look like, which concept
artist Dermot Power turned into an illustration.
This image, however, was immediately rejected by director J. J. Abrams.
Later, producer Kathleen Kennedy found the design, reacting positively and calling it "fantastic".
Abrams then used the design to create a new character, Phasma.
He named Phasma after the 1979 horror film Phantasm because her armor reminded him of the film's spheres.
Kaplan intended for the visuals of the First Order to contrast with that of the Resistance, appearing in colors like "black, teal blue, and steel gray", with stormtroopers being updated to be more simplified and modernized.
Kaplan designed the character believing it would be "extremely cool" to have a silver armored character in the film.
The character was not originally conceived as a woman, but rather was changed from male to female during casting, less than three weeks before principal shooting began.
Phasma thereby became the second on-screen female Star Wars villain, after Zam Wesell.
With Captain Phasma, the filmmakers wished to "push the boundaries" of traditional roles for female characters.
Actress Gwendoline Christie, who had previously played Brienne of Tarth in Game of Thrones, was first officially confirmed as Captain Phasma in a Vanity Fair spread released May 4, 2015, following its leak.
Christie fought heavily to appear in the film, continually insisting her agent get her a part in it.
Christie was not aware that the character was originally a man.
Christie took inspiration from her armor—"it's very high-functioning, it's very imposing
and it's not malleable at all"—in how to play the character.
In playing Phasma, Christie felt encouraged to experiment more with the gesture of a character.
Her initial costume, used in The Force Awakens, had to be created over a period of "four or five days"; co-costume designer Dave Crossman described its physical creation as "a complete panic".
It took Christie roughly forty-five minutes to put on.
A new suit was created for The Last Jedi, with various tweaks.
Its helmet was re-chromed, the fit was altered, and the armor was made "much cleaner and shinier."
==
Character ==
The commander of the First Order's stormtroopers, Captain Phasma is described as a "tough veteran commander" and one of a "commanding triumvirate" of the First Order alongside Kylo Ren and General Hux.
Christie compared Phasma to Boba Fett in the sense of being a character who, while not "at the forefront of the action all the time", still has "a lot of impact".
The actress called the character "a malevolent force" who takes pleasure in her cruelty, something she attributed to a perceived difficult journey to becoming the only female stormtrooper of rank.
To contrast with other stormtroopers in the franchise, Christie portrayed Phasma with both some femininity and sassiness.
Glen Robert Gill, writing for Bright Lights Film Journal, saw Phasma as "the demonic or negative emanation of the maidenly anima".
Phasma is depicted wearing salvaged chromium armor, which in The Force Awakens' visual dictionary is established as coming from a Naboo yacht once owned by Palpatine.
It is said to serve "primarily as a symbol of past power".
Christie recognised the character's helmet as both being futuristic and having medieval elements.
Chris Laverty, creator of costume analysis site Clothes on Film, called her armor "probably the most regal costume" in The Force Awakens, and noted it as a reflection of her status.
He also felt her cloak, "elegantly slung over one shoulder", was a method of humanizing the character.
In-universe, the cloak is the "traditional cape of First Order command".
Gill felt her armor called to mind mirrors, symbols of "self-reflection and self-examination", the feelings she brings in Finn when she inadvertently helps inspire him to defect.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
The Force Awakens (2015) ====
The second trailer for the 2015 film Star Wars:
The Force Awakens introduced the character.
In the film, Phasma begins engaged in an attack at Tuanul, a settlement village on the desert planet Jakku, in search of a galaxy map that leads to the last Jedi, Luke Skywalker.
After the battle is won, Phasma and the other stormtroopers execute the remaining villagers.
Back on the Resurgent-class Star Destroyer Finalizer, she meets with stormtrooper FN-2187, and reprimands him for having removed his helmet without permission.
FN-2187
later flees and frees Poe Dameron (who renames him Finn).
Phasma is present when Finn's defection is discovered; she mentions that Finn had never committed any infractions in the past.
Finally, when Finn, Han Solo, and Chewbacca infiltrate Starkiller Base, they take Phasma hostage and pressure her to deactivate the base's shields, intending to drop her in the trash compactor.

====
The Last Jedi (2017) ====
Phasma appears in Star Wars:
The Last Jedi when Finn, mechanic Rose Tico, and computer hacker DJ infiltrate the Mega-class Star Dreadnought Supremacy, a 37.5 miles (60.4 km)-wide flagship, in an attempt to disable the ship's tracking device.
They are captured and brought before Phasma and her stormtroopers.
Phasma taunts Finn, and orders his execution with Rose in a "slow and painful" way.
Before this can occur, Vice Admiral Holdo plummets the MC85 Star Cruiser Raddus, her two-mile-long cruiser, into the First Order fleet at lightspeed.
In the ensuing chaos, Phasma and Finn fight.
At first, Phasma gets the upper hand, knocking Finn into a pit.
Finn emerges unharmed from the pit, riding its elevator; he knocks Phasma down, breaking the visor of her helmet, and exposing part of her face around the left eye.
The turf crumbles beneath Phasma, and she falls into the flames.

In a deleted scene, the battle with Phasma and her fate are significantly different: She and four stormtroopers manage to surround Finn, who taunts Phasma about her compliance to his demands in The Force Awakens.
Before the stormtroopers can turn on her, Phasma kills all of them and then prepares to attack Finn, but he manages to cut her hand off and blasts her into the ship's wreckage.

The Last Jedi director Rian Johnson said that Phasma's limited supporting role in the film was due to time constraints and an already large cast of characters, and indicated that there were no other plans for Phasma in the films.
Though Phasma's fate was left unknown and the possibility of her returning in Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker was hinted, John Boyega confirmed at the Episode IX panel during Celebration Chicago that Phasma indeed died in The Last Jedi, officially confirming her death.

===
Television ===
Phasma appears in the 2018 animated series Star Wars Resistance, voiced by Gwendoline Christie.

===
Literature ===
Before the Awakening, a prequel anthology, features the character in a short story centered around Finn.
In it, she monitors Finn's performance in combat simulation and, although praising his skill, she criticizes his rescuing of a weaker soldier.
Additionally, Phasma is featured in both the adult and junior novelizations of The Force Awakens.

In the lead-up to The Last Jedi's release, Phasma's backstory was explored in Star Wars: Phasma, a novel by Delilah S. Dawson.
Though Phasma's origins and character are discussed, the novel is not told from Phasma's perspective.

====
Comics ====
A four-part comic miniseries, Star Wars: Captain Phasma, was announced in April 2017 as part of the Journey to Star Wars:
The Last Jedi initiative.
The series was written by Kelly Thompson with art by Marco Checchetto, and published by Marvel Comics between September 6 and October 18, 2017.
It explains Phasma's escape from Starkiller Base during the climax of The Force Awakens, and subsequent events.
She pursues loose ends while framing Lieutenant Sol Rivas for lowering the shields to the First Order's superweapon.
Her pursuit takes her to the planet Luprora after she requisitions a TIE fighter, its pilot, and an astromech droid.
In a flashback in issue #3, Phasma mentions Siv, a character from the 2017 novel Phasma.
Reviewing for IGN, Jesse Schedeen wrote that Thompson's "efficient approach to storytelling, coupled with the gorgeous tag-team combo that is Marco Checchetto and Andres Mossa, makes this a Star Wars comic every Phasma fan should read."
===
Other media ===
The Lego Star Wars version of Phasma also appears in the 2016 short form animated series Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises.
She is also a playable character and boss in the Lego video game adaptation of The Force Awakens.

===
Merchandise ===
As part of the lead-up to the film, Disney released a wave of Star Wars toys on 2015's "Force Friday".
One such toy was a Phasma voice-changing mask, which contained the first dialogue heard by the public.
Other items included a costume for children as well as action figures.

== Reception ==
Phasma received attention before release.
Before her name was confirmed, Phasma had been dubbed "the Chrometrooper" by fans.
The trademarking of "Captain Phasma" led to speculation that it was the name of Christie's rumored character, said to be an Imperial officer pursuing Finn.
Phasma had been the name of a character in one Star Wars fanfic, Tarkin's Fist, leading to MovieWeb
wondering if it was an intentional homage.
IGN's "Keepin' It Reel" podcast discussed the possibility of Phasma being "the next breakout baddie" in the vein of Boba Fett and Darth Maul.
They responded positively to the character's name, despite some initial misgivings, for fitting in with the franchise's Flash Gordon roots.
They also praised her armor design, stating that character design had been important in the success of Fett and Maul.
They similarly had high hopes for Christie's acting.
During the lead-up to the film, Phasma became a fan favorite.
Polygon's Susana Polo considered The Force Awakens a great achievement for Hollywood for its diversity regardless of its quality, though she used Phasma as an example of how the film was not perfect, noting rumors of Phasma's minor role despite her being the first on-screen female stormtrooper.
Upon The Force Awakens' release, criticism fell on the character's minimal role in the film.
The Telegraph's Jonathan McAloon called his "one criticism" of The Force Awakens the underuse of Phasma, and wondered if her face would ever be revealed in the films.
Jason Guerrasio of Business Insider echoed the sentiment, noting her lack of screen time despite her great potential.
Scott Meslow, writing for The Week, criticized the film's lack of nuance in its villains, calling her "a total cipher" in the film despite her heavy appearance in its promotion.
He pointed to her appearance in Before the Awakening as a way to expand her character, noting her cold yet logical pragmatism in it.
Jesse Schedeen of IGN called Phasma "something of a disappointment in The Force Awakens", negatively contrasting her against Fett in that "even Fett had the distinction of outsmarting Han Solo before meeting an ignominious end".
Schedeen hoped Phasma would be revisited in Marvel's Star Wars comics, to help flesh out her character and build her into a better villain.
Max Nicholson, writing for Collider, noted the amount of hype for the character, as well as her minimal role in the story.
Nicholson suggested that Hux and Phasma should have been merged into one character, as they were too similar, or Phasma should have been given the melee fight scene given to a trooper nicknamed "TR-8R" by fans.
Bill Keveney of USA Today negatively compared Phasma's skill as a warrior to Christie's character Brienne of Tarth from Game of Thrones.
He further criticized Phasma's role in The Force Awakens by attributing the First Order's defeat to being largely her fault, as well as her "recycled" appearance in The Last Jedi.
Merchandise featuring the character proved popular.
David Betancourt of The Washington Post called Phasma's role in the film "little more than a shiny new prop", viewing her as a victim of the film's need to introduce all its new characters, yet noted the popularity and rarity of the merchandise surrounding the character.
Captain Phasma's figure was the bestselling of The Force Awakens' action figures on Amazon.co.uk.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Captain Phasma in the StarWars.com Databank
Phasma on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Captain Phasma on IMDb
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars is a Lego-themed action-adventure video game based on The Clone Wars animated film and its follow-up television series with the same name, both of them set between the films
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones and Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith.
The game was developed by Traveller's Tales, published by LucasArts, and released in March 2011 for the PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, Microsoft Windows and Nintendo 3DS consoles.
Lego Star Wars III features missions and characters from The Clone Wars film and television series, as well as favourite characters from the original Star Wars saga, in both single-player and multiplayer gameplay modes.
The Mac OS X version of the game has been released by Feral Interactive.

==
Gameplay ==
Gameplay in Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars is similar to the previous titles in the series, and other Lego video games.
Up to two players can switch between different characters to fight enemies in combat, solve puzzles, and progress through various levels.
It introduces a few novelties, including scene swap, where players can switch between teams in separate locations to complete multi-part objectives, and boss battles.
The game also features some real-time strategy elements, such as commanding large ground armies across battlefields.
Also, the space fights have been remodelled to use a more instinctive, 3D-space battle sensation.
It is set during the Clone Wars animated series, as well as certain scenes from Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, unlike the original games, which featured characters from the six films of Star Wars such as Lego Star Wars: The Video Game and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
The console version of the game features 115 characters.
The portable version features 77 characters.
The version for the PSP, 3DS, and DS have some differences from the console version.
For example, the ground battles are not featured.
The portable version features unlockable minigames like Snowball Fight, Volleyball Droids and more.
The rooms where vehicles are also not available to test in the ship itself unlike on the console version.
Some levels are removed from the portable version.
Some characters such as the Galactic Marine, Chi Cho, Ryo Chuchi, Thi-Sen and others, are featured on the portable version but not on the console version.

===
New features ===
Overall, the game engine used by previous Lego Star Wars games has been upgraded.
It can now hold more than 200 moving units or objects on-screen.
The graphics are more detailed than before, and the lighting has been improved.

New features include scenarios in which players can command large armies of clones to battle against droid armies (although not on DS), and Story Swap mode, in which players can switch between two characters in different areas whose stories run simultaneously.
The game includes split screen combat.
All new character features include lightsaber throwing, picking up droids and stepping on certain pads in which Jedi do "combo moves" to destroy certain objects.
Vehicle levels have been altered; now, players can land their ship and begin fighting on foot (similar to Star Wars: Battlefront II).
All the original elements seen in previous Lego Star Wars games have returned.
The hub has also been changed, taking place in a Republic Cruiser named the Resolute and also a Separatist Ship the Invisible Hand.
Characters can be purchased on these ships- Separatists on the Invisible Hand; characters from the Republic on the Resolute.

==
Plot ==
The plot is based on Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated film, and various episodes from the first two seasons of the Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series, with no dialogue and humorous deviations.

The first level acts as a prologue and depicts the Geonosian Arena battle from Attack of the Clones, which saw the start of the Clone Wars.
The following 18 levels are divided into three separate chapters, each depicting an episode from the TV series, and having either Count Dooku, General Grievous or Asajj Ventress as the main antagonist.
Levels can be played in whatever order the player desires, though the levels from the same chapter can only be played in a specific order.
After all of the chapters are completed, a 20th level is unlocked, based on the episode "The Zillo Beast", which acts as an epilogue to the story.

The game also features two bonus levels.
The first is based on The Clone Wars film, and depicts the Separatists' plan to kidnap Jabba the Hutt's son Rotta, from Count Dooku's perspective.
The second level is based on the episode "Hostage Crisis", as played from Cad Bane's perspective.
Upon completion, the latter level unlocks the Bounty Hunter Missions, where the player goes through different levels from the main story in search of a particular character hidden somewhere in the level.

==
Development and marketing ==
The game had been in development since late 2009 when the second season of Star Wars: The Clone Wars started.
The game was covered up and in June 2010 after the second-season finale The Lego Group started to work on adding the last part of the second season in and new things such as a new hub and a new way to use the lightsaber.
Then in late 2010, LEGO finished the game and started to make promotions for it.
On 23 June 2010, LEGO released the first trailer for the game and later in 2011 they released some demos and cutscenes.
Nintendo have made 3DS trailers for the game too and also some E3 convention videos with the gameplay of Lego Star Wars III: The Clone Wars.
The official release date of the game was 22 March 2011.

== Reception ==
The game has received mixed to positive reviews.
GameSpot gave 6.5/10 for PC, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Wii while 6/10 for Nintendo 3DS.
IGN's Anthony Gallegos rated the PC, Xbox 360, and PlayStation 3 versions of the game 7.5/10, the Wii version 7/10, and the DS, 3DS, and PSP versions 6.0/10.
He commented on the vast variety in the in-game Hub; "the hub world is open to players to explore, but this time around, Traveller's Tales have really outdone themselves".
They further stated "like so much of the Lego games design, when you combine these two relatively unexciting portions together, something strange happens:
It becomes a simple, engaging game".
GameTrailers gave the game 6.5/10, and called it "one of the dullest in the entire series", strongly criticising the game's repetition.
As of May 2012, the game has sold over 4 million copies worldwide.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
"The Imperial March (Darth Vader's Theme)" is a musical theme present in the Star Wars franchise.
It was composed by John Williams for the film The Empire Strikes Back.
Together with "Yoda's Theme", "The Imperial March" was premiered on April 29, 1980, three weeks before the opening of the film, on the occasion of John Williams' first concert as official conductor-in-residence of the Boston Pops Orchestra.
One of the best known symphonic movie themes, it is used as a leitmotif throughout the Star Wars franchise.
A leitmotif is a recurrent musical phrase associated with characters or events in a drama.

== Use in Star Wars ==
"The Imperial March" is sometimes referred to simply as "Darth Vader's Theme.
"
In the movies (except for the original Star Wars), the march is often played when Darth Vader appears.
It is also played during Palpatine's arrival on the Death Star in Return of the Jedi, though it does segue into the Emperor's own theme as he appears.
===
Original trilogy ===
"The Imperial March" is first heard in The Empire Strikes Back in low piccolos as the Galactic Empire sends probe droids across the galaxy in search of Luke Skywalker.
Its major opening occurs as Imperial-class Star Destroyers amass and Darth Vader is first presented in the film, 19 minutes into the movie.
The theme and related motifs are also incorporated into tracks such as "The Battle of Hoth" and "The Asteroid Field".
Return of the Jedi makes similar use of the theme, though its final statement is significantly different, making quiet use of a harp as a redeemed Anakin Skywalker dies in his son's arms.

===
Prequel
trilogy ===
"The Imperial March" appears on a few occasions in the prequel trilogy, most often used to foreshadow Anakin Skywalker's future as Darth Vader.
An innocent theme for the nine-year-old Anakin in The Phantom Menace is thematically based on "The Imperial March".
"
The Imperial March" is also heard towards the end, as Yoda acknowledges Anakin as Obi-Wan's apprentice in saying "The Chosen One, the boy may be.
Nevertheless, grave danger I fear in his training".
It is also heard softly at the end of the final credit roll, where it fades into the character's signature breathing, showing that the rest of the prequel trilogy will reveal how Anakin became Darth Vader.
In the second prequel,  Attack of the Clones, "The Imperial March" is sometimes played subtly when an event foreshadows Anakin's future: It is first played when Yoda senses Anakin slaughtering a tribe of Tusken Raiders to avenge his mother's death and later with more force when Anakin tells Padmé Amidala what he did.
It is played most prominently and recognizably during the final sequence when clone troopers assemble and depart Coruscant, foreshadowing that they will become the Imperial stormtroopers.
Although "Across the Stars" is featured most prominently in the film's end credits, several notes from "The Imperial March" are heard beneath it near the end.

In Revenge of the Sith "The Imperial March" is first played when Anakin rebukes the Jedi Council for denying him the rank of Jedi Master, although appointing him to the Council.
The track can also be heard when Anakin tells Mace Windu about Darth Sidious' true identity.
It is later played when Anakin is dubbed as the Sith Darth Vader, shortly after the death of Mace Windu. "
The Imperial March" is quoted when clone troopers find dead Wookiees on Kashyyyk and when Padmé confronts Anakin on Mustafar.
A few notes of the "March" are played when Vader arrives on Mustafar to kill the Separatists.
The piece is played more clearly during the "Battle of the Heroes" scene between Obi-Wan and Darth Vader at the movie's climax and in the simultaneous battle between Yoda and Sidious.
It is also played when Darth Vader receives his armor and when he looks up at the first Death Star.
===
Sequel trilogy ===
In the 2015 Star Wars: The Force Awakens, two bars from the brass motif of "The Imperial March" are played after antagonist Kylo Ren clutches the charred remains of Darth Vader's helmet, vowing to finally succeed where the Galactic Empire failed.
In the 2017 Star Wars: The Last Jedi, the track was briefly played after Supreme Leader Snoke compares antagonist Kylo Ren to Darth Vader, saying he saw the potential of "A new Vader.
"
In the 2019 Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker
the track is present in the scenes where the mask of Darth Vader is shown, when Darth Sidious first reveals the Final Order, a massive armada of Xyston-class Star Destroyers designed by the Sith Eternal, to Kylo Ren, and when Rey seeks the Sith wayfinder in the Death Star's wreckage.

===
Star Wars Anthology ===
Trailers for Rogue One:
A Star Wars Story featured the track prominently; the first notes of "The Imperial March" can be heard at the end of the trailer as the letters turn to reveal the name of the upcoming movie.
Prior to this, Darth Vader can be heard breathing and his appearance is seen as a reflection on the floor.
In the film proper, scored by Michael Giacchino, the theme can be heard when Vader emerges from his sanctum to confer with Director Orson Krennic, and again after Vader warns Krennic about overstepping his bounds.
The theme can be heard once more when Vader attacks the Rebel soldiers trapped in a hallway; it is slowed down enough not to be obvious and married with a chorus reminiscent of that from Revenge of the Sith.
The theme is finally heard outright when Vader witnesses the Tantive IV fleeing into hyperspace.

The track appears early in Solo:
A Star Wars Story as diegetic music in the Corellia spaceport as part of a commercial encouraging viewers to join the Imperial Navy, encouraging Han Solo to enlist as his ticket off the planet.
This brief appearance marks the first and thus-far only in-universe appearance of "The Imperial March" in a theatrical film.
===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars ===
"The Imperial March" has influence in short but dark moments revolving around Anakin.
For example, in episode 62, "Citadel Rescue," Anakin and Captain Wilhuff Tarkin both mention during their escape their good relationship with the Supreme Chancellor Palpatine.
Anakin shakes hands with Tarkin at the end of the episode, while Tarkin says he will inform the Chancellor of Anakin's good performance.
During that handshake, a hint is to be heard in the music referring to "The Imperial March.
"
Other episodes that feature the theme include "Brain Invaders" (when Anakin strangles Poggle), "Voyage of Temptation" (when Anakin kills Merrik), "Overlords" (multiple times), "Ghosts of Mortis" (multiple times), "Kidnapped" (when Obi-Wan talks with Anakin and then Ahsoka), "Deception" (multiple times) and "Friends and Enemies" (multiple times), "Crisis on Naboo" (when Anakin argues with Obi-Wan), "The Lawless" (during Darth Sidious scenes), and "The Jedi Who Knew Too Much" (multiple times).
The theme is used prominently during the sixth season.

===
Star Wars Rebels ===
In "Empire Day," the episode's title referring to the Empire's anniversary, "The Imperial Anthem" arrangement of "The Imperial March," is heard during the parade.
The march is also heard in "Call to Action" when Grand Moff Tarkin arrives on Lothal, in the final scene of "Fire Across the Galaxy" when Darth Vader arrives on Lothal, and in multiple scenes in "The Siege of Lothal."
==
Uses outside Star Wars ==
In January 2003, during Super Bowl XXXVII, ABC Sports took to using "The Imperial March" as a leitmotif for the Oakland Raiders.

In 2012, Volkswagen released a commercial for Super Bowl XLVI, featuring several dogs barking to the tune of "The Imperial March.
"
Shortly before the Scottish independence referendum, a pro-independence campaigner rode a rickshaw alongside a group of anti-independence Labour party politicians, who had travelled by train from London to Glasgow for a highly publicized visit, as they paraded through the center of the city, playing the Imperial March and announcing to Glaswegians: "Your Imperial Masters have arrived.
Bow down before your Imperial Masters!"

The main part of the song can be heard during Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra.

==
Inspiration and influences ==
"The Imperial March" took inspiration and stylistic influences from Chopin's Marche funèbre and English composer Gustav Holst's Opus 32, The Planets, written between 1914 and 1916.

== See also ==
"Duel of the Fates"


==
References ==
Star Wars:
The Force Awakens –
Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the film score to the 2015 film of the same name composed by John Williams with Williams and William Ross conducting, and Gustavo Dudamel appearing as a "special guest conductor".
The album was released by Walt Disney Records on December 18, 2015, in both digipak CD and digital formats.
The score received critical acclaim, receiving praise for its new themes and use of old ones.
The main theme, "Rey's Theme", was the subject of mass acclaim, with the track reaching 10 million views on YouTube.
For the score, John Williams received his 50th Oscar nomination, being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score, his first nomination for a Star Wars film since Return of the Jedi.
Williams won the Saturn Award for Best Music, his first win since Revenge of the Sith.
Williams also won the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media for the score, making it his 11th win in the category.

==
Overview ==
In July 2013, John Williams was confirmed to return to compose the sequel trilogy, beginning with The Force Awakens.

The music from the first two trailers for the film was reworked from earlier compositions.
Williams began working on the score in December 2014 and by June 2015, he had been through most of the film reels, working on a daily basis.
In May 2015, Williams said he would reuse themes from the previous films, such as those for Luke, Leia and Han, in ways that "will seem very natural and right in the moments for which we've chosen to do these kinds of quotes.
There aren't many of them, but there are a few that I think are important and will seem very much a part of the fabric of the piece in a positive and constructive way."
He said that working with J. J. Abrams was similar to the process he went through with George Lucas in the earlier films.
Recording sessions for The Force Awakens began on June 1, 2015, at the Sony Pictures Studios' Barbra Streisand Scoring Stage in Culver City, with William Ross conducting most of the music.
Williams attended the sessions and conducted the remainder of the recordings.
He called the recording process “very luxurious,” with 12 sessions scattered over a five-month period between June and November.
The score was recorded by a freelance orchestra—making it the first live-action Star Wars soundtrack not to feature the London Symphony Orchestra—with sessions continuing on and off over that five-month period.
The 85-piece orchestra recorded 175 minutes of music, although nearly an hour of that was discarded, modified, or rerecorded as Abrams re-edited the film.
The theme for Snoke was recorded by a 24-voice men’s chorus.
Gustavo Dudamel conducted the opening and end title music for the film at Williams' behest.
The last recording session took place on November 14, 2015.Leading up to the release of The Force
Awakens
multiple music streaming services began offering users Star Wars-themed playlists. "
Streaming platforms didn't exist for the [previous] movies, so that's something that we'll be rolling out, along with character-driven playlists with sounds and dialogue from the movie," said Ken Bunt, president of the Disney Music Group.
"
People love to hear dialogue and sound effects, so we're working on some ideas now that will incorporate some of that into playlisting.
"
Upon its release, the soundtrack for The Force Awakens became available to stream via Spotify.
== Reception ==
The musical score has received critical acclaim.
James Southall of Movie Wave said, "The new themes are great, hearing the old ones again is wonderful, the action music is remarkably energetic and the musical storytelling as vibrant as ever.

It’s just so good hearing
Williams return to this universe."

Jørn Tillnes of Soundtrack Geek said, "The fact is that this score is not even close to the classic trilogy and it struggles with the prequel trilogy as well.
I don’t know if it's the weakest in the saga.
Time will tell.
What I do know is that it's one of the best scores I've heard in a while.
"
uDiscover gave the score a positive review, saying, "The expansive, dramatic passages are as full-bodied as one would hope for a film as epic as The Force Awakens, but the attention to detail within the score – and the exquisitely recorded performance – make the results a subtle and engaging listen.
"Jonathan
Broxton of Movie Music UK praised the score, saying, "Even when you look at it objectively, what John Williams has achieved with this score is nothing short of remarkable.
He has written five new themes, two of which – 'Rey's Theme' and the 'March of the Resistance' – are wonderfully memorable, and can stand shoulder-to-shoulder with the already bulging cache of memorable themes within the Star Wars universe.
"It was nominated for Best Original Score category at 88th Academy Awards and lost to Ennio Morricone's score for The Hateful Eight.

==
Commercial performance ==
The soundtrack debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 chart for the week ending November 26, 2015, with 100,000 album-equivalent units, of which 94,000 were pure album sales.
It marked the highest debut for a score-only soundtrack since 1999, when The Phantom Menace placed at number 3.
Additionally, it is the sixth Star Wars soundtrack in the main Star Wars film series to reach the top ten;  only the Return of the Jedi soundtrack failed to reach top ten, peaking at number 20 in 1983.

The album has sold 206,000 copies in the US as of April 2016.

==
Track listing ==
All music is composed by John Williams.

==
Personnel ==
Credits adopted from Allmusic:


==
Additional music ==
Additional music featured in The Force Awakens:


==
Charts ==


==
References ==
Wilhuff Tarkin is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, introduced in the original 1977 Star Wars film (played by Peter Cushing) as the main antagonist.
In the film, Tarkin is depicted as the commander of the Death Star, the Galactic Empire's dwarf planet-sized battle station, and one of the highest-ranking officers in the Empire, even outranking Vader.
He orders the destruction of the planet Alderaan by the station's superlaser, and is killed at the end of the film, when Luke Skywalker destroys the Death Star.

Outside of the original film, Tarkin has made appearances in various canon and non-canon Star Wars media, including the animated series The Clone Wars, Rebels, and The Bad Batch, and the films Revenge of the Sith and Rogue One.
He is also the protagonist of the 2014 novel Tarkin, which details the character's backstory and rise to power within the Empire's ranks.
In the novel, Tarkin advocates for the Tarkin Doctrine, an entirely fear-based military system in which the Empire uses large numbers of intimidating capital ships and strike fighters to seem undefeatable, so that no one would dare to try and rise up against it.
His philosophy of "ruling through fear of force" becomes central to Imperial policy and earns him the position of the first Grand Moff in the Empire.

Tarkin's character has been well-received, and he has been called "one of the most formidable villains in Star Wars history."
==
Concept and creation ==
Grand Moff Tarkin's character was originally conceived as a holy man from the planet Aquila, but was changed later in the creative process into an antagonist.
As the Emperor would not appear until later in the original trilogy, Lucas used Tarkin's final version as the "main villain" of the first film, a personification of the Empire.
According to a book created to help promote the original film to prospective theaters, he aspires to become the Emperor.

===
Portrayals ===
During the production of Star Wars, Peter Cushing found Tarkin's boots, furnished by the wardrobe department, to be very uncomfortable.
Director George Lucas agreed to limit shots where Cushing's feet would be visible, allowing him to wear slippers.
Cushing admitted many years later to not knowing what a "Grand Moff" actually was, joking that it sounded like "something which infests a clothes closet" and decided to play him as a "deeply cross and unpleasant
gentleman".
In the 2005 prequel film Revenge of the Sith, Wayne Pygram was able to achieve the likeness of a young version of Tarkin through the use of prosthetic makeup.
For his performance as Tarkin in the animated series The Clone Wars, voice actor Stephen Stanton researched Cushing's performances and then tried to imitate what Cushing might have sounded like in his mid-thirties and soften his voice to portray a level of humanity.
In the 2016 anthology film Rogue One, archive footage and a digital scan of Peter Cushing's life mask made for the 1984 film Top Secret!
were used to create a 3D CGI mask which was augmented and mapped to actor Guy Henry's face.
Henry had studied Cushing's mannerisms many years previously for the lead role in British TV show Young Sherlock, but insisted on a screen test as he was not comfortable that his vocal imitation was accurate, stating he sounded more "Peter O'Toole than Peter Cushing".
The ILM team searched through hours of footage to find suitable material of Cushing to build from, footage from A New Hope was lit very differently to the lighting used in Rogue One and had to be digitally changed.
The more they manipulated the lighting to match the other actors in the scenes the less like Cushing the character model looked, which meant creating a balancing act between "a digital figure" and "one who looked precisely like Cushing".
The owners of Cushing's estate were heavily involved with the creation and had input right down to "small, subtle adjustments".
The result, which has been called "one of the most complex and costly CGI re-creations ever", received a mixed response, with questions being raised about the morality of using a dead actor's likeness.

==
Appearances ==


===
Film ===


====
Star Wars (1977) ====
Introduced in the first film in the original Star Wars trilogy, Grand Moff Tarkin is the Governor of the Imperial Outland Regions, and commander of the Death Star.
After Emperor Palpatine dissolves the Imperial Senate, Tarkin and Darth Vader (portrayed by David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones) are charged with pursuing and destroying the Rebel Alliance.
He threatens Princess Leia Organa (Carrie Fisher) with the destruction of her home planet, Alderaan, if Leia does not reveal the location of the Rebel main base of operations.
When Leia names the planet Dantooine as the base's location, he destroys Alderaan regardless, hoping to make an example out of the planet's support of the Rebellion.
Upon learning that Leia's coerced information was false, Tarkin orders Leia's execution.

He allows the Rebels to escape the Death Star with Leia after placing a tracking beacon on the Millennium Falcon in order to find the Rebel base.
He orders the Death Star to destroy the Rebel base on Yavin 4.
In the film's climax, Tarkin refuses to believe that the Death Star is in danger from the Rebel starfighter attack; as a result, he refuses to evacuate due to his arrogance.
He is subsequently killed by Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill), who succeeds in destroying the Death Star by firing torpedoes into the exhaust port.

====
Revenge of the Sith (2005) ====
At the end of Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith, the final film in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, a younger version of Tarkin, played by Wayne Pygram, makes a cameo appearance overseeing the original Death Star's construction, standing beside Darth Vader (Hayden Christensen) and Emperor Palpatine (Ian McDiarmid)


====
Rogue One (2016) ====
In the film Rogue One (which takes place just before the events in A New Hope), Orson Krennic (Ben Mendelsohn), Director of Advanced Weapons Research for the Imperial Military, meets with Tarkin, who expresses his skepticism about Krennic's management of the Death Star project.
Tarkin oversees the Death Star's first attack on the Rebellion when it is used to destroy the Holy City of the planet Jedha.
Impressed, he congratulates Krennic before announcing that he is going to take command of the Death Star from that point on, pointing out security breaches that had occurred under Krennic's command (much to Krennic's chagrin).
Later in the film, Tarkin is informed of a Rebel attack on Scarif, the planet where the plans to the Death Star are kept.
He orders the jump to hyperspace to the planet, where an ongoing battle between the Empire and the Rebel Alliance rages.
Tarkin has the Death Star target and destroy the Scarif base, killing Krennic, Jyn Erso (Felicity Jones), Cassian Andor (Diego Luna), and any other survivor of the ground battle.

===
Television series ===


====
The Clone Wars (2010–2013) ====
In the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, set during the events of the prequel trilogy, a younger Tarkin (voiced by Stephen Stanton) is depicted as a Captain and later an Admiral in the Galactic Republic Navy.
In the third season, Captain Tarkin and Jedi Master Even Piell
(Blair Bess) are ambushed and attacked by Separatist forces.
Prisoners to the Citadel,
Tarkin and Piell are freed from captivity by a rescue team.
Initially pessimistic about being in enemy territory, Tarkin puts himself at odds with Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker (Matt Lanter), but their respective opinions of each other improve when each realizes that both know Supreme Chancellor Palpatine (Ian Abercrombie).
During a skirmish, Tarkin fights and attempts to execute Citadel Warden Osi Sobeck (James Arnold Taylor), but fails when Sobeck swiftly retaliates and nearly kills him.
However, Tarkin is rescued just in time by Anakin's Padawan Ahsoka Tano (Ashley Eckstein).

In the fifth season, Tarkin, now an admiral, suspects Ahsoka of masterminding a terrorist attack on the Jedi Temple, and attempts to have the Padawan arrested.
After Ahsoka is recaptured, Tarkin requests that the Jedi Order expel her and turn her over to the Republic so she can receive more "impartial" judgement.
The Jedi concede and Ahsoka is tried before a jury of senators, with Tarkin heading the prosecution while Padmé Amidala (Catherine Taber) heads the defense.
Despite Padmé's impressive defense, Tarkin casts doubt by mentioning that Ahsoka had been seen with Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress (Nika Futterman).
After Tarkin and Padmé's arguments conclude and the jury reaches a verdict that Palpatine is about to read, Anakin arrives with Barriss Offee (Olivia d'Abo), the real mastermind of the attack.

====
Star Wars Rebels (2014–2018) ====
In the television series Star Wars Rebels, Tarkin (voiced once again by Stanton) starts off as Governor of the Outer Rim territories, including Lothal, but eventually receives his Grand Moff title.
He visits the planet Lothal to deal with its growing Rebel activity, and reprimands Minister Maketh Tua (Kath Soucie), Agent Kallus (David Oyelowo), and the Inquisitor for their repeated failures to stop the planet's Rebel cell.
Tarkin has the Inquisitor execute Commandant Aresko and Taskmaster Grint (both David Shaughnessy) for their inability to deal with the cell's leader, Jedi Knight Kanan Jarrus (Freddie Prinze Jr.).
Later, Tarkin sets a trap for the Rebels and manages to capture Kanan during their mission to send a message through one of the planet's communication towers.
The Rebels' message gets sent out, but Tarkin then orders the tower to be destroyed.
Kanan is tortured by the Inquisitor and transported to the Mustafar system aboard Tarkin's Star Destroyer.
During Kanan's rescue by Rebel forces, Tarkin's Star Destroyer is destroyed, and the Inquisitor is killed.
On Lothal, Tarkin introduces Agent Kallus to Darth Vader (James Earl Jones).

Taking the loss of his Star Destroyer personally, Tarkin orders that Maketh Tua be brought before him for her failure to find the Lothal rebels.
Knowing the true meaning behind the summoning after the deaths of Aresko and Grint, Tua attempts to defect, but she is killed before she can leave Lothal.
Tarkin later appears in the season three premiere where he meets with Governor Pryce (Mary Elizabeth Glynn) regarding the Lothal Rebels.
He subsequently grants her request for use of the Seventh Fleet, commanded by Grand Admiral Thrawn (Lars Mikkelsen).
Tarkin appears via hologram in the season three finale, being briefed on Thrawn's imminent attack on Atollon to stymie a coordinated Rebel attack on Lothal.
Towards the end of season four, he warns Thrawn that he must prove the worth of his TIE Defender program, Thrawn's prototype design of a new Imperial Star Fighter, or it will be shut down in favor of diverting resources to Krennic's "Stardust project" - which would eventually become the Death Star.

====
Star Wars: The Bad Batch (2021) ====
Tarkin (voiced again by Stanton) appears in the Disney+ series Star Wars: The Bad Batch, set between the events of The Clone Wars and Rebels.
Admiral Tarkin arrives on Kamino to discuss with Prime Minister Lama Su if the Empire should continue to produce clone troopers, noting that conscripted soldiers would be less expensive.
He later evaluates Clone Force 99, a group of genetically enhanced clone troopers also known as the Bad Batch, through a battle simulation.
While impressed by their extraordinary skills, he also notices disobedience in them.
He then dispatches them to the planet of Onderon to eliminate a group of "insurgents" led by Saw Gerrera, as a test of their loyalty.
When the Bad Batch disobeys orders, Tarkin has them arrested, but separates Bad Batch member Crosshair from the others after noticing that he is more loyal to the Empire.
Tarkin has Kaminoan scientist Nala Se to intensify the programming of Crosshair's inhibitor chip, turning him against the Bad Batch.
However, the other members escape from him.

===
Novels ===
Tarkin appears in Catalyst: A Rogue One Novel, the prequel novel to Rogue One, where Tarkin forms a rivalry with Advanced Weapons Director Orson Krennic.

====
Tarkin (2014) ====
Star Wars:
Tarkin explores the title character's origins, and chronicles how he meets and aligns himself with Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader prior to the events of A New Hope.
The novel was one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015.
Tarkin's Star Destroyer, the Executrix, is introduced; it later appears in Rogue One.

===
Legends ===
With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company, most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non-canon to the franchise in April 2014.In
the Star Wars Expanded Universe
, Tarkin appears in Death Star, Cloak of Deception, Rogue Planet and Dark Lord:
The Rise of Darth Vader.
The original Marvel Star Wars comic series features a powerful superweapon called "The Tarkin" after the late Grand Moff.

West End Games' roleplaying material describes the "Tarkin Doctrine", which emphasizes ruling "through the fear of force, rather than force itself", and has been mentioned various other times in the Star Wars canon.
He is also mentioned during the Legacy of the Force novel series as having been present on Zonama Sekot with Anakin Skywalker.
In the comics series Darth Vader and the Lost Command, Tarkin is seen telling Vader of a missing convoy of Imperial craft and adds that his own son was in command of the convoy and is also missing.

==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Grand Moff Tarkin in the StarWars.com Databank
Grand Moff Tarkin on IMDb
Wilhuff Tarkin on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
This list of characters from the Star Wars franchise contains only those which are considered part of the official Star Wars canon, as of the changes made by Lucasfilm in April 2014.
Following its acquisition by The Walt Disney Company in 2012, Lucasfilm rebranded most of the novels, comics, video games and other works produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars as Star Wars Legends and declared them non-canon to the rest of the franchise.
As such, the list contains only information from the Skywalker Saga films, the 2008 animated TV series Star Wars: The Clone Wars, and works published after April 2014.

The list is organized in humans and various alien species.
No droid characters are included, so for those, see the list of Star Wars droid characters.
Some of the characters featured in this list have additional or alternate plotlines in the non-canonical Legends continuity.
To see those or characters who do not exist at all in the current Star Wars canon, see the list of Star Wars Legends characters and list of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters.

==
Humans ==
Humans are a sentient, sapient species in the fictional Star Wars universe.
They are the most numerous and dominant species, with apparently millions of major and minor colonies galaxy-wide.
Humans are native to many different worlds, and they are characterized by multidimensional complex personalities that are both individual and unique.
They are the only race accepted as pure by Emperor Palpatine.

By the time the hyperdrive was invented, humans were already present on a few scattered worlds throughout the galaxy; according to the New Essential Chronology, the humans of Coruscant managed to send out a number of 'sleeper ships' between the fall of the Rakatan Infinite Empire and the invention of the hyperdrive.
Star Wars humans are mostly biologically identical to real-life humans.
The presence of ordinary humans in the story is important dramatically and the first movie establishes their vulnerability and weakness.
Luke Skywalker's introduction early in the first movie was rewritten to establish this.
In the Star Wars mythology, the human homeworld, according to the New Essential Chronology, is generally believed to be Coruscant.
However, there is actually no real consensus on the issue; according to releases from the official Starwars.com site, the ancient human home world has simply been lost to history.

Star Wars humans live on many different worlds throughout the galaxy, with many populations living together with several other species—something which is most common either on the cosmopolitan worlds at the core, such as on Coruscant, or on the frontier at the Outer Rim of the galaxy, such as on Tatooine.

===
Skywalker and Solo families ===


====
Extended family ====
Naberrie family - Padmé Amidala's family
Lars family - Luke's adoptive familyOrgana
family - Leia's adoptive family


===
Force-wielders ===
Human Force-sensitive characters.
They are divided into Jedi and those affiliated with the light side of the Force; and Sith and those affiliated with the dark side (such as Dark Jedi, who are former Jedi who have fallen to the dark side, and Inquisitors, who are Jedi hunters trained by Darth Vader and serving the Empire).
===
Mandalorians ===
Mandalorians are a culture of humans from the planet Mandalore with strong warrior traditions.
Most of them wear armor and helmets, the strongest ones made from beskar, a blaster-resistant steel that is originally from Mandalore.
The Mandalorian culture was carried on by humans from Mandalore around the galaxy.
The name of their home planet, "Mandalore", is the same as the title given to their leader.
The Mandalorians are also associated with the Darksaber, a black-bladed lightsaber built by Tarre Vizsla, the first Mandalorian Jedi, which has since become a symbol of power for the Mandalorian people and is passed from a leader to the next.
===
Galactic Republic ===
The Galactic Republic is a democractic government, overseen by a Galactic Senate, that governed most of the known galaxy for thousands of years.
With the help of the Jedi Order, it maintained intergalactic peace, but during its last years, it became highly corrupt, causing numerous planets and systems to abandon the Republic and form the Confederacy of Independent Systems.
The ensuing conflict between the two factions became known as the Clone Wars, which Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious and the mastermind behind the war, took advantage of to manipulate the Republic's Senators and citizens into supporting his plans for the government's reorganization into the Galactic Empire for the purpose of intergalactic "peace".
The Republic serves as the protagonist faction of the prequel trilogy, which depicts its downfall and conversion into the Empire.

====
Clone troopers ====
Clone troopers were the soldiers of the Galactic Republic's army during the Clone Wars.
Created from Jango Fett's DNA, they were genetically modified to have accelerated growth and be predisposed toward unquestioning obedience to the chain of command, including being outfitted with mind-controlling biochips, which were put to use during Order 66, when the clone troopers turned on and tried to kill their Jedi Generals.

===
Confederacy of Independent Systems ===
The Confederacy of Independent Systems (CIS) is an organization of multiple planets and systems formerly part of the Galactic Republic, who decided to secess after becoming annoyed with the corruption and injustice within the Galactic Senate.
Formed by Count Dooku under the orders of his master, Darth Sidious, it is the main antagonistic faction of the prequel trilogy.
Most of the planets that made up the Confederacy attempted to earn their freedom by force, engaging in the three year-long Clone Wars with the Republic using an army of battle droids.
Once Sidious achieved his goal of scaring the people of the Republic into supporting his plans for the formation of a Galactic Empire, he ended the Clone Wars by having his new apprentice, Darth Vader, kill the Separatist Council leaders.
The remaining systems of the Confederacy were subsequently reabsorbed into the newly formed Empire.
===
Rebel Alliance ===
The Rebel Alliance is an organization of multiple planets and systems that oppose the rule of the Galactic Empire, with which it engages in the five year-long Galactic Civil War.
It serves as the protagonist faction of the original trilogy.
The Partisans are a faction or Rebels led by Saw Gerrera known for their extreme methods, who have distanced themselves from the rest of the Alliance.
Rogue One is a squad of Rebel soldiers formed in the film of the same name that embarked on a suicide mission to steal the Death Star's schematics.

====
Erso and Gerrera family ====


===
Galactic Empire ===
The First Galactic Empire is an autocracy formed by Emperor Palpatine at the end of the Clone Wars, replacing the old Galactic Republic.
Palpatine's rise to power and manipulation of the Galactic Senate into supporting his plans for the formation of an empire and extermination of the Jedi Order with the purpose of intergalactic "peace" are depicted in the prequel trilogy.
In the original trilogy, the Empire serves as the main antagonistic faction.
At its peak, the Empire sprawled most of the known Star Wars galaxy.
The Empire was eventually defeated by the Rebel Alliance and collapsed, but some remnants continued to exist for 30 years and reunited to form the First Order.

The stormtroopers are the elite, faceless shock troops serving the Empire's military.
Originally the clone troopers of the Republic's army, over time they became mostly human recruits.

===
Resistance ===
The Resistance is a military organization founded and led by Leia Organa, and the successor of the Rebel Alliance.
It fought against the First Order to defend the New Republic and maintain peace in the galaxy, 30 years after the conclusion of the Galactic Civil War.
It is the protagonist faction of the sequel trilogy.

===
New Republic ===
The New Republic is a democractic government established in the aftermath of the Galactic Empire's defeat.
Formed from the Rebel Alliance and meant to be a restoration of the old Galactic Republic, it governed most of the known galaxy, until it fell after the First Order destroyed its capital, the Hosnian Prime system.
The New Republic is only briefly featured in the sequel trilogy, but has a more prominent presence in related works.
===
First Order ===
The First Order is an autocratic military dictatorship and the successor of the Galactic Empire, formed from its remnants.
Its main goal is to overthrow the New Republic and destroy the Resistance and Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi.
It is the central antagonistic faction of the sequel trilogy.
Ruled by Supreme Leader Snoke, a Force-sensitive being created by the resurrected Darth Sidious to act as his puppet ruler, the First Order succeeded in destroying the New Republic and conquering much of the known galaxy, especially during Kylo Ren's reign, who killed Snoke and became the next Supreme Leader.
Near the end of its one-year-long war with the Resistance, it allied itself with the Sith Eternal, a secret cult of Sith loyalists led by Sidious on Exegol, though both were ultimately defeated by the remains of the Resistance and the civilians of the galaxy, who finally gathered the courage to rise against their oppressors.

Much like the Empire before it, the First Order uses stormtroopers as its main military.
Most stormtroopers are children who had been abducted from their homes and brainwashed into serving the First Order.

===
Bounty hunters, mercenaries, and criminals ===


===
Naboo humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Naboo.

===
Tatooine humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Tatooine.
===
Sorgan humans ===
Humans who are native to the planet of Sorgan.
===
Versio family ===


===
Uncategorized humans ===


==
Other sentient species ==
A mix of non-human characters from the Star Wars galaxy, organized by species, in alphabetical order.

===
A–E ===


====
Abednedos ====
Abednedos are a humanoid, sentient species native to the planet Abednedo.
They have either brown or tan skin, mouth tendrils, long faces, and widely spaced fleshy nostrils.
Abednedos are known for their ingenuity, and generally peaceful nature, being acceptant of other species.

====
Abyssins ====
Abyssins are a humanoid, cycloptic, sentient species native to Byss.
They have green or blue skin, can regenerate missing limbs, and can live for up to 300 years.

====
Aleena ====
The Aleena are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Aleen.
They have scaly skin, elongated skulls, and large mouths with tiny teeth.

====
Anacondans ====
Anacondans are a large, snake-like sentient species.

====
Anzellans ====
Anzellans are a diminutive sentient species native to Anzellan.
Their eyes have corneal micro-lenses that can see microscopic details.

====
Aqualish ====
The Aqualish are a species of tusked humanoids from the planet Ando.
They can have either two or four eyes, fur around their cheeks, and varying skin color and number of fingers.
The Aqualish have a reputation of being nasty, crude, and aggressive.

====
Ardennians ====
Ardennians are a species of short, four-armed, monkey-like humanoids from the planet Ardennia.

====
Artiodacs ====
Artiodacs are a hulking, humanoid, sentient species from Artiod Minor.
They are distinguished by their broad, flat noses, bulging arms, and deep, rumbling voices.

====
Askajians ====
Askajians are a near-human species from Askaji, whose bulky appearance is given by their internal water storages.
They are also distinguished by their wrinkled foreheads and six breasts (present at females).

====
Bardottans ====
Bardottans are a humanoid, reptilian-like sentient species from Bardotta.
They are distinguished by their long, curving necks, pointed snouts, and crested heads, and are a generally insular and secretive society.

====
Besalisks ====
Besalisks are a humanoid, four-armed, sentient species from Ojom.
Often thick-set, they are also distinguished by their bony, three-pronged headcrests, inflatable wattles, and wide mouths, with large, pudgy lips.
Besalisks are known to be industrious and hardworking.

====
Bith ====
The Bith are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Bith.
They are distinguished by their bald, domed heads, black, glassy eyes, and skin flaps on their faces, which are used to smell because they lack noses.
They are a generally intelligent and peaceful species, and are known to be good scientists, engineers, and musicians.

====
Blarina ====
The Blarina are a species of short, pudgy, sentient humanoids from the planet Rina Major.
They have snouts, tough skin, and small eyes.
The Blarina are famously accomplished liars, and are known to be highly sociable and fond of words, often talking very quickly and incomprehensibly.

====
Cereans ====
Cereans are a near-human species from the planet Cerea, distinguished by their coned skulls, which hold their binary brains.
They are known to be an intelligent species, although their homeworld lacks most of the advanced technology found on other planets.

====
Chagrians ====
Chagrians are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from the planet Champala.
They are distinguished by their long horns, head tentacles with additional horns, forked tongue, and varying skin color.
Chagrians are known for their skills as military commanders.

====
Chiss ====
The Chiss are a near-human species native to Csilla, distinguished by their blue skin, red eyes, and dark blue-black hair.
Prior to Thrawn's rise within the ranks of the Galactic Empire, the Chiss had relatively very little contact with the rest of the galaxy, and some even considered their existence a myth.

====
Clawdites ====
Clawdites are a species of sentient, shape-shifting, reptilian humanoids from the planet Zolan.
With their unique ability they can impersonate virtually any humanoid, although the shape-shifting requires great concentration and they return to their true, reptilian form if knocked unconscious or killed.

====
Cloddograns ====
Cloddograns are a humanoid species with four arms and nose tendrils.

====
Cosians ====
Cosians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Cosia.
They are short in stature and have beaked mouths, four-fingered hands, and medium-length tails.
A genetically-engineered subspecies called Nu-Cosians also exists.

==== Crolutes ====
Crolutes are a species of hulking, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the planet Crule, distinguished by their blobfish-like faces.
They are all males, while their mates, called Gilliands, are exclusively female.
Crolutes rarely travel beyond their homeworld and its moons.

====
Delphidians ====
Delphidians are a near-human species from the planet Delphidian Cluster, with dark gray, leathery, and striated skin.

====
Devaronians ====
Devaronians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Devaronian.
They are distinguished by their two horns (present only at males), pointed ears, and sharp teeth.
The males are known for their spirit of travel and are among the first species in the galaxy to develop interstellar travel, while the females usually remain on their homeworld to look after the children and govern the place.

====
Dianoga ====
The Dianoga are large, highly adaptable cephalopods from the planet Vodran.
They live in semi-aquatic environments, like swamps and sewers, and are a sentient, but primitive species.

====
Dowutins ====
Dowutins are a species of large, sentient humanoids native to Dowut.
They have a bulky build, brown-orange skin, and two chin horns.
They are known for their strength, and can live for several centuries.

====
Dressellians ====
Dressellians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Dressel, distinguished by their round, hairless, wrinkled faces.

====
Dugs ====
Dugs are a sentient species from the planet Malastare, distinguished by their elongated faces, and the fact that they walk on their arms.
They are known to be very greedy.

====
Duros ====
Duros (or "Durosians") are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Duro, with large, ovular heads, red eyes and blue skin.
They are known for their superior astronavigational skills, and were supposedly the first to discover and utilize hyperspace, resulting in the development of hyperdrives and other related technological advancements.

====
Er'Kit ====
The Er'Kit are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Er'Kit.
They have white-blue skin, long skinny legs, and elongated skulls.

====
Ewoks ====
Ewoks are a small, furry, sentient species who live in trees on the forest moon of Endor.
While primitive, they have proven themselves to be loyal, skilled hunters, and ingenious in designing their traps.

===
F–J ===


====
Falleen ====
The Falleen are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species native to Falleen.
They have green skin, ridged skulls, and long, black hair, usually worn in ponytails.

====
Faust ====
The Faust are a species of tall, slender, gray or purple-skinned humanoids native to Adana.
They are recognized by their narrow faces and two sets of eyelids.

====
Gabdorins ====
Gabdorins are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species with large, round heads, ridged nostrils, and massive sweat glands.

====
Gamorreans ====
Gamorreans are a humanoid, pig-like, sentient species native to Gamorr.
They have green, thick, and hairless skin, large-nostriled snouts, and upturned tusks.
Gamorreans are known for their low intelligence, strength, and love of conflict and violence.

====
Gand ====
The Gand are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species native to Gand.
They have three-fingered hands, two-toed feet, and large, silver-coloured eyes.
They wear respiratory masks in oxygen-rich environments, because it is toxic to them.

====
Geonosians ====
Geonosians are a humanoid, winged, insectoid sentient species native to Geonosis.
They live in large colonies like insects, and are generally regarded as a primitive species, but are skilled engineers and operated the Confederacy of Independent Systems' battle droid factories during the Clone Wars.

====
Gossams ====
Gossams are a humanoid, sentient species native to Castell.
They have wrinkled skin, squat bodies, and long, thin necks.
They are known to care about status, power, and wealth, and most wear expensive jewelry for this reason, such as neck rings.

====
Gran ====
The Gran are a humanoid, three-eyed, sentient species native to Kinyen and Malastare, and with major colonies on several other planets, such as Hok and Varkana.
They have brown-orange skin, goat-like snouts, bulky hands, and small antennae-like nubs.
The Gran of Kinyen are known for their peaceful nature, pursuing simple careers like farmers, while others have more dangerous pastimes.

====
Gungans ====
Gungans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient and sapient species native to the swamps of Naboo.
They have a very flexible skeletal structure, long necks and head tails, and muscular tongues.
While usually regarded as clumsy and primitive, they have proven themselves to be very loyal and ingenious.

====
Harches ====
Harches are a humanoid, spider-like, sentient species native to Secundus Ando.
They have six arms, six red eyes, fangs, and brown or white hair that covers most of their body, and can supposedly live for centuries.

====
Hutts ====
Hutts are a portly, grotesque, slug-like sentient species native to Nal Hutta.
They are often depicted as being very greedy and very gluttonous.
Some famous Hutts, such as Jabba the Hutt, are crime lords, and speak in their native language, Huttese.

====
Iktotchi ====
The Iktotchi are a near-human species from the planet Iktotch, recognized their large cranian horns.

====
Ithorians ====
Ithorians are a species of humanoids from the planet Ithor, with curved necks and two mouths, located on the sides of the neck.
Their faces resemble those of hammerhead sharks, for which reason they were nicknamed "hammerheads".
===
K–O ===


====
Kaleesh ====
The Kaleesh are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from the planet Kalee.
They have red skin, elongated ears, and flat noses (which are rarely seen because they wear masks), and are known for being skilled and merciless warriors and hunters.

====
Kaminoans ====
Kaminoans are a species of tall, thin, amphibian, sentient humanoids from the ocean planet Kamino.
They have white skin, large eyes, and long necks and limbs.
Kaminoans are skilled scientists specialized in cloning technology, and oversaw the creation and training of the Republic's Clone army during the Clone Wars.

====
Karkarodon ====
The Karkarodon are a humanoid, shark-like, amphibian sentient species from the planet Karkaris.
With their webbed feet and hands and sharp teeth, they are fast swimmers and skilled hunters.

====
Kel Dors ====
Kel Dors are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Dorin.
Their body is covered by a leathery hide, which allows them to survive the vacuum of space for a brief time, and they wear respiratory masks and protective eye goggles on planets with oxygen-rich atmospheres, because it is toxic to them.

====
Kiffar ====
The Kiffar are a near-human species from the planets Kiffu and Kiffex, distinguished by their ceremonial tattoos and scarlet blood.

====
Kitonak ====
The Kitonak are a species native to Kirdo III, distinguished by their white-pink and tough skin, large hands and feet, and tiny eyes, ears and mouths.
They are known to be slow and patient, but also skilled musicians.

====
Klatooinians ====
Klatooinians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Klatooine.
They are distinguished by their leathery skin, imposing brows, and toothy underbites.

==== Koorivar ====
The Koorivar are a near-human sentient species with reptilian-like skin and a large cranial horn that spirals upwards from their skull.

====
Kowakian monkey-lizards ====
Kowakian monkey-lizards are a small, semi-sentient species from Kowak.
They have beak-like mouths, long ears, medium-length tails, and a distinct laughter, which is used to scare predators on their homeworld.
Most are kept as pets by members of the underworld.

====
Kubaz ====
The Kubaz are a humanoid sentient species from Kubindi, distinguished by their long snouts, dark skin, protective eyewear, and unique manner of speech, consisting of a series of whirring syllables.

====
Kyuzo ====
The Kyuzo are a humanoid, sentient species from Phatrong.
They have green skin, wrinkled faces, and yellow eyes, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and fast reflexes.
When not on their homeworld, Kyuzo always wear masks to filter the atmosphere, which conceal most of their faces.

====
Lanniks ====
Lanniks are a species of short humanoids from the planet Lannik, with long, droppy ears.
They are known for their honor and bravery.

====
Lasats ====
Lasats are a humanoid, sentient species native to Lira San, though they later settled on Lasan.
They are very tall, strong, and agile, and possess superior sight and hearing thanks to their large eyes and ears, respectively.
Lasats are distinguished by their prehensile feet, and varying fur patterns, which are unique for every individual.
The species was nearly driven to extinction by the Empire.

====
Latero ====
The Latero are a short, four-armed, humanoid sentient species from Lateron.
They have small, pointed ears, gray skin, and gray sideburns hair.

====
Lepi ====
The Lepi are species of bipedal, humanoid, sentient rabbits.

====
Lurmen ====
The Lurmen are a species of diminutive, lemur-like humanoids from Mygeeto.
They have brown and gray fur, large yellow eyes, and medium-length tails.
Pacifists by nature, they have often found themselves oppressed for this reason.

====
Melitto ====
The Mellito are a humanoid, insectoid, sentient species from Li-Torran.
They lack eyes and mouths, and are capable of sensing their environment using super-sensitive hairs called cilia.
They also wear masks and use breathing tubes to filter other planets' atmospheres, as most contain substances that are toxic to them.

====
Miraluka ====
The Miraluka are a species of near-humans, distinguished by their lack of eyes.
The only known member of this species, Prosset Dibs, could use the Force to make up for his lack of eyesight and become familiar with his surroundings


====
Mirialans ====
Mirialans are a near-human species from Mirial.
They are distinguished from humans by their skin color (yellow, green, pink, or purple), and geometric tattoos on their faces.
Mirialans are known for their spirituality and strong connection with the world around them.

==== Mon Calamari ====
Mon Calamari are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species native to Mon Cala.
They have salmon-coloured skin (though their skin may have other tones as well, including light blue, dark blue, green, and purple), a high-domed head with large, sideways eyes, and webbed hands.
They are known for their swimming and engineering abilities.

====
Mortis Gods ====
The Mortis Gods are a family of three mythical, immortal, and god-like beings who are the sole inhabitants of the Force realm Mortis.
They are believed to be the embodiments of the Force itself: the light side, the dark side, and the balance between the two.

====
Muuns ====
Muuns are a tall, thin, humanoid sentient species with elongated skulls and flat noses.
Known across the galaxy as greed-driven bankers, they ran the InterGalactic Banking Clan during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Mythrol ====
The Mythrol are a humanoid, sentient species with blue skin and amphibious traits.

====
Nautolans ====
Nautolans are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Glee Anselm.
They are distinguished by their head tentacles, which allow them to detect chemicals, and large, black, pupil-less eyes.
Nautolans are a generally peaceful species, but can be strong warriors when needed to.

====
Neimoidians ====
Neimoidians are a humanoid large-eyed, amphibian, and reptilian-like sapient species native to Neimoidia.
They are known for their dishonesty, wealth, and cowardice, as well as for being in charge of the Trade Federation during the Galactic Republic era.

====
Nikto ====
The Nikto are a humanoid sentient species native to Kintan.
There are at least three known subspecies: the Red Nikto (Kajain'sa'Nikto), the Green Nikto (Kadas'sa'Nikto), and the Mountain Nikto (Esral'sa'Nikto); the former two have scaly, coarse skin and horns and spikes on their face, while the latter present no horns and have facial fins instead.

====
Noghri ====
The Noghri are a humanoid, short, sentient species native to Honoghr.
They have grey, leathery skin with a row of horns on their head, sharp teeth, and clawed fingers, and are known for their exceptional combat abilities and keen sense of smell.

====
Nosaurians ====
Nosaurians are a humanoid sentient species from the planet New Plympto.
They are distinguished by their six horns, red eyes, and orange, white, and yellow skin, and are considered to be ill-tempered.

====
Ongrees ====
Ongrees a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Skustell.
They are distinguished by sideways eyes, located underneath their mouths, four nostrils, and lipless mouths.
Most Ongrees are considered to be even-minded individuals and are skilled diplomats and negotiators.

====
Ortolans ====
Ortolan are a species of squat, blue-skinned, sentient humanoids from Orto.
They are distinguished by their large, floppy ears, trunk-like noses, and black eyes, and are known to consume large amounts of nutrients through their fingers.
Some Ortolans have no arms.

====
Ovissians ====
Ovissians are a humanoid, sentient species, distinguished by their four head horns (two sideways horns, and two extending from the chin).
They can have either green or orange skin, which matches the color of their blood.

===
P–T ===


====
Pa'lowicks ====
Pa'lowicks are a sentient species from Lowick.
They have bulbous bodies supported by long, reed-thin legs, small eyes located in stalks on the top of their heads, and long, thin, trunk-like mouths.

====
Palliduvans ====
Palliduvans are a near-human species, with chalky white skin, and long, bony fingers, with which they can draw blood.

====
Pantorans ====
Pantorans are a near-human species from the moon of Pantora, distinguished by their blue skin.

====
Pau'ans ====
Pau'ans are a species of gaunt, tall, and long-limbed humanoids from Utapau.
They have white or gray skin, sunken eyes, and sharp, jugged teeth.
Pau'ans are an intelligent and peaceful species, though they often seem afraid of outsiders.

====
Phindians ====
Phindians are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Phindar.
They have green-yellow skin, long arms, and elongated skulls, and are known to be very cautious.

====
Pykes ====
Pykes are a humanoid, sentient species from Oba Diah.
They are distinguished by their elongated, tapered skulls with an undersized face.
The Pykes are best known for running the Pyke Syndicate, an illegal spice-dealing group.

====
Quarren ====
The Quarren are a humanoid, amphibian, sentient species from Mon Cala.
They have four tentacles protruding from their jaws, for which reason they are nicknamed "squid heads" around the galaxy, as well as suction-cup tipped fingers, and the ability to spit ink in self-defense.
They are more introverted than the Mon Calamari, with whom they share their homeworld, and rarely invite strangers to their planet.

====
Quermians ====
Quermians are a species of gaunt, tall, long-necked and white-skinned humanoids from Quermia.

====
Rodians ====
Rodians are a humanoid, sentient species native to Rodia.
They have green skin, antennas, large pupil-less eyes, a row of spike on the back of their head, slender snouts, and fingers with suction cups at the end.

====
Shawda Ubb ====
The Shawda Ubb are a diminutive, amphibian, sentient species with green skin and small faces that sport heavy brow ridges.

====
Skakoans ====
Skakoans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Skakoa.
They have crown-shaped skulls and are required to wear special suits with breathing masks to survive off their homeworld.
Skakoans are best known for running the Techno Union during the Galacic Republic era.

====
Snivvians ====
Snivvians, also known as "snaggletooths", are a short, humanoid, sentient species native to Cadomai Prime.
They have a protruding lower jaw with two small tusks, and large nostrils.
Snivvians have great tracking skills, and are good scouts and trackers.

====
Sullustans ====
Sullustans are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sullust.
They are mouse-eyed and have two flaps of jowls around their cheeks.
Sullustans are a sophisticated species and experts at manufacturing, scientific and technological development, and economics.

====
Tarsunt ====
The Tarsunt are a humanoid, sentient species from Tarsunt.
They have long faces, widely spaced nostrils, and hair on various places of their body, including their faces, where it resembles a beard.

====
Teedos ====
Teedos are a short, humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Jakku.
They have three-fingered hands and feet, and are almost always wrapped completely in clothing.
All Teedos are identical, sharing the same name and a telepathic connection that allows one Teedo to recount events experienced by another.

====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers ====
Terrelian Jango Jumpers are a humanoid, sentient species from Terrelia.
They are tall, slender and very acrobatic, while having blue, gray, and white skin.

====
Thisspiasians ====
Thissipiasians are a humanoid, serpentine, sentient species from Thisspias.
While the lower part of their bodies is snake-like, they have arms and can grow facial hair.

====
Tholothians ====
Tholothians are a near-human species from Tholoth, distinguished by their scaled craniums and head tendrils.

====
Togruta ====
The Togruta are a humanoid, sentient species from the planet Shili.
They are distinguished by their three, rarely four "head tails" called lekku (similar to those of Twi'leks), which are striped to help them blend in with their natural surroundings.
Togrutas are known for their solidarity and for possessing a form of passive echolocation by means of their hollow montrals, which allows them to sense space and the proximity and movement of physical objects around them.

====
Toong ====
The Toong are a humanoid, sentient species from Tund, with disproportionately large heads for their bodies.

====
Toydarians ====
Toydarians are a species of short, winged humanoids from Toydaria.
They have long snouts, tusks, and webbed feet, and have been shown to be strong-willed, resisting Force mind tricks.

====
Trandoshans ====
Trandoshans are a humanoid, reptilian-like, sentient species from Trandosha, known for their hunting abilities and bad history with the Wookiees.
They are tall and muscular and have a pointed skull, sharp teeth, long claws, and four fingers on their hands and three on their feet.

====
Triffians ====
Triffians are a humanoid, sentient species recognized by their triangle-shaped appendages that extend from their shoulders to their heads.

====
Trodatome ====
The Trodatome are a slug-like sentient species that lack arms, but possess sensory antennas and flippers.

====
Troigs ====
Troigs are a two-headed and four-armed humanoid sentient species from Pollillus.

====
Tusken Raiders ====
Tusken Raiders, also known as Sand People or simply Tuskens, are a culture of nomadic, primitive sentients indigenous native to Tatooine.
They are almost always wrapped completely in clothing, concealing their identity.
Tuskens are known for their aggressivity towards strangers, which they consider possible threats, and unique manner of speech, which combines vocal sounds (mostly screams) with sign language.

====
Twi'leks ====
Twi'leks are a humanoid, sentient species native to Ryloth.
They are distinguished by their "head-tails" called lekku that extend from the back of their head, and varying skin color.
Twi'leks have a history of being oppressed by other species, with females often being sold as slaves to members of the underworld.

===
U–Z ===


====
Ugnaughts ====
Ugnaughts are a short, humanoid, sentient species from the planet Gentes, with pig-like faces.
They are considered to be one of the hardest-working species in the galaxy.

====
Umbarans ====
Umbarans are a near-human species from Umbara, distinguished by their pale skin and colorless eyes, with which they can see in the ultraviolet spectrum.
They have developed technology much more advanced than that found in the rest of the galaxy.

====
Veknoids ====
Veknoids are a humanoid, sentient species from Moonus Mandel, distinguished by their large under-bites, sharp teeth, slender tails, and fleshy ears.

====
Vulptereens ====
Vulptereens are a species of stocky humanoids, recognizable by their shovel-like snouts which sport six tusks and a single long feeler.

====
Vurk ====
The Vurk are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sembla.
They are distinguished by their bony crests on the top of their heads (similar to those of the parasaurolophus), and three-fingered hands.
While regarded as a primitive species, the Vurk are highly empathetic and skilled mediators.

====
Weequays ====
Weequays are a humanoid, sentient species native to Sriluur.
They are distinguished by their though, leathery skin, which helped them survive the harsh life conditions of their homeworld.
Most of them are pirates, mercenaries, and bounty hunters, as a result of the Hutts' takeover of Sriluur.

====
Wookiees ====
Wookiees are a large, hairy, primate-like sentient species native to Kashyyyk, that slightly resemble the modern-day depictions of Sasquatch.
They are known for their strength, loyalty, unique manner of speech (depicted as a series of growls and purrs), and bad history with the Trandoshans.

====
Xexto ====
The Xexto are a species of short, four-armed humanoids from the planet Troiken.
They have white skin, glassy eyes, and long necks and fingers.

====
Yakora ====
The Yakura (also known as Yakorans) are a humanoid, sentient species, with yak-like faces.

====
Yoda's species ====
"Yoda's species" is the name given to a species of diminutive, green-skinned, sentient creatures, of which the popular character Yoda is a member.
The species is characterised by their pointy ears, strong connection to the Force, and slow aging, for which reason they can live for several centuries.
Much about the species, including its name and origins, has been deliberately left vague.

====
Yuzzums ====
Yuzzums are a humanoid, round-bodied, furred, sentient species from the forest moon of Endor.
They have long limbs compared to the rest of their body, medium-length antennae, big mouths, and no neck.
Yuzzums are considered a primitive and unintelligent species.

====
Zabraks ====
Zabraks are a near-human, sentient species, distinguished by their horns and tattoos.
Most originate from Iridonia (in which case they are also referred to as Iridonians), though some males also lived on Dathomir (in which case they are referred to as Dathomirians), as part of the warrior clan called the Nightbrothers, who served the witches known as the Nightsisters.

====
Zygerrians ====
Zygerrians are a humanoid, feline-like sentient species from Zygerria, who had built and run the biggest slave empire in the galaxy, until the Jedi overthrew them and outlawed slavery.
Attempts to rebuild the empire were made during the Clone Wars and the Imperial Era, but were thwarted.

===
Unknown species ===


==
See also ==
List of The Mandalorian characters
List of Star Wars creatures
List of Star Wars droid characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters
List of Star Wars Rebels characters
List of Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic characters
List of Star Wars cast members
List of Star Wars:
The Clone Wars cast members
List of Star Wars books
== Notes ==


==
References ==
Lego Star Wars is a Lego theme that incorporates the Star Wars saga and franchise.
Originally it was only licensed from 1999 to 2008, but The Lego Group extended the license with Lucasfilm, first until 2011, then until 2016, then again until 2022.
The brand has spawned an eponymous video game series containing six video games, developed by Traveller's Tales: Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005), Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006), Lego Star Wars: The Complete Saga (2007), Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016) and Lego Star Wars:
The Skywalker Saga (TBA).
Many short films and miniseries have also been produced.

==
Construction sets ==
According to Bricklink, The Lego Group released a total of 796 Lego sets and promotional polybags as part of Lego Star Wars theme.
The first few sets based on the original trilogy were released in 1999, coinciding with the release of The Phantom Menace.
The first wave of Lego Star Wars sets included model 7140, an X-wing fighter.
Sets based on the prequel trilogy (Episodes I to III) of Star Wars would follow, starting with Episode I – The Phantom Menace.
As each new film in the prequel trilogy neared its release date, Lego issued new models of ships and scenes in those films, as well as additional sets from the original trilogy.
Lego also produced models based on Clone Wars, The Clone Wars, The Old Republic, The Force Unleashed , Rebels, The Force Awakens, Battlefront, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, Resistance, The Mandalorian, The Rise of Skywalker and The Bad Batch.
Sets based on Galaxy's Edge and The Freemaker Adventures have also been produced.

===
Ultimate Collector Series (UCS) ===
In addition to the regular Minifigure-scale sets, Lego has released several sets (between 30-36) for the Ultimate Collector Series.
These models are often considerably larger, more detailed, and meant more for display purposes than other sets.
They often cost more than regular Lego sets as well.
Many of them include an information plaque and often a display stand.
The largest of these is 75192, the 2017 UCS version of the Millennium Falcon, complete with ten Minifigures.
At 7541 pieces, it is the largest Star Wars Lego set ever released; and the second largest set of any collection ever commercially released.
On June 5, 2015, an unopened box of the older 2007 Millennium Falcon Lego set (10179) was auctioned at online auction house Catawiki for 5,000 euros (US$5556.5 at the time) making it the most expensive LEGO set ever.

===
Master Builder Series (MBS) ===
With similar complexity to the Ultimate Collector Series sets, sets under the Master Builder Series are built with the purpose of playing, featuring numerous play features, functions, and interior details as compared to the UCS, which are meant more for display purposes.
The first set of the MBS is the 75222 Betrayal at Cloud City, which was released in 2018.
In 2020, 75290 Mos Eisley Cantina was released as the largest MBS set with over 3,000 pieces and 21 minifigures.

===
The Helmet Collection ===
In 2020, Lego released three brick-built helmets of selected iconic characters from the Star Wars universe.
They are 75277 Boba Fett, 75276 Stormtrooper, and
75274 TIE Fighter Pilot.
Meant to be displayed, name plaques of the helmets' characters are included.
In March 2021, Lego announced that it will be releasing helmets 75304 Darth Vader, and 75305 Scout Trooper on April 26, 2021.

=== Minifigures ===
Most characters from the Star Wars universe have materialized in Lego minifigure form.
The minifigure with the first code, i.e. sw0001, is a tan battle droid that appeared in The Phantom Menace.
Some minifigures repeatedly appear across multiple Lego sets, while others can be very rare, vastly increasing their resale value.
In 2019, the number of Lego Star Wars minifigures has surpassed 1000, with the Battlefront II protagonist Iden Versio bearing code sw1000.
===
Lego Art ===
On August 1, 2020, Lego released 31200 Star Wars
The Sith under the Lego Art theme.
It consists of 3,406 pieces and offers builders the option to recreate any one of the three Star Wars villains (Darth Maul, Kylo Ren, and Darth Vader) in a mosaic-like format using Lego 1x1 studs.

===
BrickHeadz ===
Lego has since released 20 Star Wars themed sets under the BrickHeadz theme.
They include characters from the sequel trilogy, the original trilogy and The Mandalorian.

==
Video games ==
Traveller's Tales president Jon Burton stated in a July 2008 interview with Variety that the series had collectively sold 15 million copies.
As of February 13, 2009, Lego Star Wars: The Video Game has sold over 6.8 million copies worldwide, Lego Star Wars II has sold over 8.3 million, The Complete Saga has sold over 4.1 million, and the three combined have sold over 21 million.
In May 2009, Wired reported combined sales of 20 million.
As of 2012, all Lego Star Wars video games had collectively sold more than 30 million copies.
As of 2016, more than 36 million games were sold.
As of 2019, the series has sold more than 50 million copies of Lego Star Wars video games.

== Films and videos ==
Several films and videos based on Lego Star Wars have been produced; additionally, Lego Star Wars characters cameo in The Lego Movie (2014).

===
Short films ===
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Brick is the first computer-animated Lego Star Wars short film.
It premiered on Cartoon Network in mid-2005, in conjunction with the theatrical release of Revenge of the Sith.

Lego Star Wars:
The Quest for R2-D2 is a short movie which aired on Cartoon Network on August 2009, and was uploaded to the Lego Star Wars website, in order to celebrate 10 years of Lego Star Wars,
Lego Star Wars: Bombad Bounty, is another CGI Lego short film, it was released in 2010.
In it, Vader hires Boba Fett to track down the Gungan Jar Jar Binks for an accident he caused to Vader.
The film also takes place at the same time as the original movies showing that Jar Jar was responsible for the destruction of the first Death Star and was with Boba Fett on Jabba's Barge during the events of Return of the Jedi.

===
Television specials ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Padawan Menace released on July 7, 2011, is a 30-minute, exclusive TV special written by Michael Price is about a Jedi Academy field trip.
When Master Yoda leads a group of rambunctious Jedi younglings through Senate chambers when he senses a disturbance in the Force.
Summoned to help save the Republic, he discovers that a young boy pretending to be a Jedi youngling secretly boarded his ship... and has a taste for adventure.
Meanwhile, C-3PO and R2-D2 are put in charge of the boisterous group and find themselves in over their heads.
Yoda and the droids proceed to save the younglings from Sith Lords as well as the vile Jabba the Hutt.
The special premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network on July 22, 2011, at 7 p.m. and in the United Kingdom on October 17 at 5:30.
The DVD and Blu-ray include several special features such as The Quest for R2-D2 and Bombad Bounty as well as other short films.

Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Out released on September 26, 2012, airing on Cartoon Network in the United States, and would be one of the last Star Wars productions to be made before Lucasfilm was sold to The Walt Disney Company a month later.
In this special, Luke Skywalker embarks on a mission to find and destroy an Imperial base on Naboo, but is relentlessly chased by a group of fanatic fangirls, who think of him as a celebrity for destroying the Death Star.
Meanwhile, Darth Vader engages a "sithling" rivalry with Darth Maul, in order to prove he's the best Sith Lord to Emperor Palpatine, who is constructing a second Death Star.

The LEGO Star Wars Holiday Special was released on November 17, 2020 on Disney+, a spiritual successor to and satirisation of the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978).
In the special, set after Episode IX, Rey begins to doubt her abilities as a teacher to Finn.
She travels to a temple and finds a time key, which allows her to travel to different moments in time throughout the Star Wars saga to observe past Jedi Masters and their students.
However, she loses the key to Emperor Palpatine and Darth Vader, who use it to go to the future, meeting Kylo Ren.
After learning from him about his demise at Vader's hands, Palpatine seeks to make Kylo his new apprentice (
unbeknownst to Vader) and ensure he will rule the galaxy forever.
Meanwhile, Finn, Rose and Poe try to organize the perfect Life Day party, but chaos ensues at every step.

===
Television series ===
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles trilogy:
"The Phantom Clone", aired on May 29, 2013.
General Grievous steals the lightsabers of a group of Padawans at the Jedi Training Academy, and he and Count Dooku plan to use the lightsabers' crystals to create an army of super-powered Sith clones on Kamino.
Yoda and Mace Windu embark on a quest to stop them.
Meanwhile, the Padawans try to retrieve their lightsabers, much to C-3PO's concern.

"Menace of the Sith" , aired on September 4, 2013.
The only surviving Sith clone, Jek-14, decides not to fight for the dark side of the force and wants to be left alone to build in peace, but both the Jedi and the Sith want him on their side, with the latter planning to use him to clone an evil army.
Meanwhile, C-3PO quits being the substitute teacher for the Padawans, and the Jedi Council hires Anakin Skywalker as his replacement.

"Attack of the Jedi", aired on November 27, 2013.
After the Sith's plan to create Sith clones has failed, they start teaching a group of "Badawans" on the planet Mustafar.
When the Jedi get a tip of this, they head there to stop them, but when they reach complications, they must persuade Jek-14 to help them, despite him not wanting to fight for either side of the Force.
Meanwhile, Darth Sidious tries to meet up with the evil padawans, but has trouble getting away from C-3PO.The series continued to a second season with five episodes airing in 2014 but now renamed "The New Yoda Chronicles" to avoid legal disputes over ownership between Disney and Cartoon Network.

Lego Star Wars:
Droid Tales aired on Disney XD between July and November 2015, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic re-telling of the first six Star Wars films from C-3PO's point of view.

Lego Star Wars: The Resistance Rises aired on Disney XD between February and May 2016, as a 5-part animated mini-series.
The series serves as a comedic prequel to Star Wars: The Force Awakens.

Lego Star Wars:
The Freemaker Adventures aired on Disney XD.
It was announced by Disney on February 17, 2016, as a new Lego animated series.
Set between Episode V and Episode VI, it tells the story of the Freemakers, a family of scavengers that find themselves pulled into the conflict between the Rebels and the Empire.

Lego Star Wars:
All-Stars premiered on Disney XD on October 29, 2018.
It consists of five half-hour episodes, the first of which is a compilation of eight separately-released short films.
Set during multiple Star Wars eras, it tells the story of other relatives of the Freemaker family, including their parents Pace and Lena during the time of Solo, and Zander's daughter Moxie during Episode VII and Episode VIII.

== Reception ==
In 2015, The Lego Group has seen its first half results jump 18 per cent for 2015, fuelled by the popularity of Lego Star Wars, Lego Jurassic World and Lego Technic.
In 2018, the Toy Retailers Association listed BB-8 set and Millennium Falcon set on its official list of 2018 Toy of the Year Awards.
In 2020, Lego Star Wars theme became the Top-selling themes for the year.
In 2021, the Toy Retailers Association listed The Razor Crest set on its official list of 2021 Toy of The Year Awards.

== See also ==
Lego Indiana Jones


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===
LEGO (R) Star Wars Brickmaster.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2010.
ISBN 1-40535-622-7
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40537-358-X
Lego Star Wars: Anakin: Space Pilot: Space Pilot (3d).
Authored by Ace Landers and Dave White.
Published by Scholastic, 2011.
ISBN 0-54530-440-7
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Heroes Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-440-8
LEGO (R) Star Wars Villains Ultimate Sticker Book.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2011.
ISBN 1-40536-439-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Phantom Menace.
Authored by Hannah Dolan.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75668-693-8
Ultimate Sticker Collection: LEGO (R)
Star Wars: Minifigures:
More Than 1,000 Reusable Full-Color Stickers.
Authored by Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2012.
ISBN 0-75669-049-8
LEGO (R)
Star Wars Brickmaster Battle for the Stolen Crystals.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-40932-605-5
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars: Attack of the Clones.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 0-75668-695-4
DK Readers L3:
Lego Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2013.
ISBN 1-46540-869-X
Lego Star Wars: A New Hope.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-027-4
Lego Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-029-0
Lego Star Wars: Return of the Jedi.
Authored by Emma Grange.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2014.
ISBN 1-46542-031-2
LEGO Star Wars Character Encyclopedia, Updated and Expanded: With Minifigure.
Authored by Hannah Dolan and Shari Last.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2015.
ISBN 1-10189-852-6
LEGO Star Wars: Yoda Chronicles
Trilogy No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54562-901-2
Lego Star Wars: Padawan Menace
No Level.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2015.
ISBN 0-54540-450-9
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens.
Authored by David Fentiman.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2016.
ISBN 1-46543-819-X
LEGO STAR WARS TALES OF REBELLION.
Authored by Ace Landers.
Published by Scholastic, 2016.
ISBN 0-54587-326-6
Ultimate LEGO Star Wars :
Includes two exclusive prints.
Authored by Chris Malloy and Andrew Becraft.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2017.
ISBN 0-24128-844-4
DK Readers L2:
Lego Star Wars:
The Last Jedi.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN
1-46546-663-0
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2019.
ISBN 0-24135-752-7
LEGO Star Wars Visual Dictionary, New Edition :
With exclusive Finn minifigure
Lego Star Wars Character Encyclopedia New Edition : With Exclusive Darth Maul Minifigure.
Authored by Elizabeth Dowsett.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46548-956-8
DK Readers Level 2:
Lego Star Wars the Rise of Skywalker.
Authored by Ruth Amos.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 1-46547-907-4
LEGO Star Wars Holiday Sticker Book.
Authored by Tori Kosara.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2020.
ISBN 0-24147-820-0
LEGO Star Wars Yoda's Galaxy Atlas.
Authored by Simon Hugo.
Published by Dorling Kindersley, 2021.
ISBN 0-24146-765-9


==
External links ==
Official website 
Brickset:
Your Lego Set Guide
MiniFigs.nl
Lego Star Wars minifigs
LEGO on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Star Wars has been expanded to media other than the original films.
This spin-off material is licensed and moderated by Disney+
, though during his involvement with the franchise George Lucas reserved the right to both draw from and contradict it in his own works.
Such derivative works have been produced concurrently with, between, and after the original, prequel, and sequel trilogies, as well as the spin-off films and television series.
Commonly explored media include books, comic books, and video games, though other forms such as audio dramas have also been produced.

With the exception of the CGI-animated The Clone Wars TV series, non-film material produced prior to April 2014 was collectively known as the Star Wars Expanded Universe (EU).
Lucasfilm later rebranded the Expanded Universe as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canonical to the franchise.
Most works produced after April 25, 2014, are part of the official canon as defined by Lucasfilm, although a handful of Legends media has been released after that date.

==
Publication history ==


=== 1976–1987
: Early films and television series ===
The first Star Wars spinoff material was Star Wars:
From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker (1976), the novelization of the 1977 film.
Lucas later commissioned Alan Dean Foster, who ghostwrote the novelization, to write a sequel, which resulted in Splinter of the Mind's Eye (1978).
Lucas originally intended to use this as the basis for a potential low-budget sequel to Star Wars, but when it became one of the most successful films of all time, Lucas decided to write his own story for the film sequel, The Empire Strikes Back (1980).
While this was in production, Lucas approved the Star Wars Holiday Special (1978), with which he had limited involvement.

Running from April 1977 to May 1986, the Star Wars comic book series from Marvel Comics met with such strong sales that former Marvel editor-in-chief Jim Shooter credited it with saving Marvel financially in 1977 and 1978.
The series became one of the industry's top selling titles in 1979 and 1980.
An adaptation of the third theatrical film, Return of the Jedi, was released as a separate four-issue limited series (1983–1984).Two novel trilogies with original storylines were written, The Han Solo Adventures by Brian Daley (1979–1980), and 1983's The Adventures of Lando Calrissian by L. Neil Smith.
Daley also wrote radio dramatizations of the original trilogy, which aired in 1981, 1983, and 1996.

The first Star Wars electronic game was released in 1979 by Kenner, followed by a handful of Atari and Parker Brothers video games in the early 1980s, mainly adaptations of film scenes.

Two spin-off television films focusing on the life of the Ewoks, introduced in Return of the Jedi, aired in 1984 and 1985.
The furry creatures were also the subject of an American/Canadian animated television series produced by Nelvana, which ran for two seasons between 1985 and 1986.
A sister series, Droids, features the further adventures of R2-D2 and C-3PO.
In 1985, Marvel Comics' Star Comics imprint published a bi-monthly Ewoks tie-in comic, which ran for two years, and in 1986, published an eight-issue Droids series.
The two series featured a crossover storyline.
The Star Tours ride was opened at Disney Parks in 1987 to commemorate the saga's 10th anniversary.

=== 1987–1991: "The Dark Times" ===
Following the series' 10th anniversary, the release of Star Wars spin-off media was largely halted.
In 1987, the fan newsletter Bantha Tracks was absorbed by the official Lucasfilm magazine, which focused on the company's projects outside of Star Wars.
Some fans feared that the franchise had come to an end, and the period between 1987 and 1991 has been called the "Dark Times.
"There were some bright spots in this era, however.
In 1987, West End Games began publishing Star Wars: The Roleplaying Game, and the subsequent ancillary role-playing game material such as sourcebooks, gamebooks, and adventure modules.
These have been called "the first publications to expand greatly beyond what was known from the vintage era of the movies," and would serve as a resource for a number of franchise novelists.

===
1991–1996:
Thrawn novels and Dark Empire comics ===
The lack of new Star Wars material ended with the 1991 release of Timothy Zahn's novel Heir to the Empire.
Heir to the Empire, which reached #1 on the New York Times Best Seller list, began what would become a large collection of works set before, between, and especially after the original films.
StarWars.com wrote in 2014 that the novel "jumpstarted a publishing program that endures to this day and formalized the Expanded Universe".
It introduced, among others, the popular characters Grand Admiral Thrawn and Mara Jade, and was followed by the sequels Dark Force Rising (1992) and The Last Command (1993).
The Thrawn trilogy is widely credited with revitalizing the Star Wars franchise.
In The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski suggests this renewed interest was a factor in Lucas's decision to create the prequel trilogy.
Around this same time, the comics license was transferred to Dark Horse Comics, who launched a number of series set after the original film trilogy, including the popular Dark Empire sequence (1991–1995) by Tom Veitch and Cam Kennedy.
The comic launched months after the first Thrawn novel and was a sequel to those novels; it notably resurrected the film characters Emperor Palpatine and Boba Fett.
Zahn was critical of the concept of resurrecting Emperor Palpatine through cloned bodies, feeling it undermined and contradicted the meaning of the ending of Return of the Jedi.
The Jedi Prince series of young-reader novels, released between 1992 and 1993, depicts Luke, Leia, and Han about a year after Return of the Jedi.
The Truce at Bakura (1993) depicts the immediate aftermath of the aforementioned film.
In 1993, Dark Horse published Tales of the Jedi, expanding the fictional universe to the time of the Old Republic, approximately 4,000 years before the films.
The series spawned many other productions, including books, further comics, and eventually the Knights of the Old Republic computer roleplaying games.
In 1994, Lucas Licensing's Allan Kausch and Sue Rostoni discussed the relationship between Lucas' creations and the derivative works by other authors:

Gospel, or canon as we refer to it, includes the screenplays, the films, the radio dramas and the novelizations.
These works spin out of George Lucas' original stories, the rest are written by other writers.
However, between us, we've read everything, and much of it is taken into account in the overall continuity.
The entire catalog of published works comprises a vast history—with many off-shoots, variations and tangents—like any other well-developed mythology.

=== 1996–1999
:
Special Editions and Shadows of the Empire ===
The 1996 Steve Perry novel Shadows of the Empire, set in the as-yet-unexplored time period between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, was part of a multimedia campaign that also included a comic book series and video game.
The multimedia project was largely meant to reinvigorate the franchise ahead of the prequel trilogy, along with Lucas's 1997 Special Editions of the original trilogy.
Lucas incorporated elements of the Expanded Universe into the Special Editions; for example, Coruscant, the New Republic capital planet created by Zahn in the Thrawn trilogy, made its film debut in the Special Edition of Return of the Jedi, before being featured more heavily in the prequel trilogy.
An eponymous comic book series, later subtitled Republic, launched in 1998 and introduced Ki-Adi-Mundi ahead of his appearance in the films.
In 1999, Star Wars book publishing moved from Bantam Spectra to Del Rey Books.
A new series set between 25 and 30 years after the original films, The New Jedi Order (1999–2003), was written by multiple authors and introduced a new threat: the Yuuzhan Vong, a powerful alien race attempting to invade and conquer the entire galaxy.
The first novel in the series, R. A. Salvatore's Vector Prime, killed off popular character Chewbacca.

=== 1999–2014
:
Prequel film trilogy and The Clone Wars ===
Before 1999, the bulk of Expanded Universe storytelling explored the time periods either after Return of the Jedi or long before A New Hope (e.g. the Tales of the Jedi series).
The time period shortly before the original trilogy (including the rise of the Galactic Empire and the personal histories of Anakin Skywalker and Emperor Palpatine) was left open for Lucas to develop in the form of a prequel trilogy, which begin with Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999).

The character Aayla Secura, introduced in 2000 in the Republic comic book series, appears in Episode II:
Attack of the Clones (2002).
The 2003 animated series Clone Wars and various spin-off books, comics, and video games explore the titular conflict in more detail leading up to Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005).
Ahead of the film's release, Lucas announced a 3D "continuation" of Clone Wars, which was released as the animated film The Clone Wars (2008) and a television series of the same name (2008–2014).
These reveal that Anakin had a Padawan learner, Ahsoka Tano, during this period.
Various characters seen only briefly in the films or in other spin-off material are featured in more depth.
At this time, Lucas denied any plans to ever make a Star Wars sequel trilogy.
As of 2004, over 1,100 Star Wars titles had been published, including novels, comics, non-fiction, and magazines.
Then-president of Lucas Licensing, Howard Roffman, estimated that there were more than 65 million Star Wars books in print.
He said, "The books are a way of extending the fantasy of Star Wars.
The movies have had a really profound effect on a couple of generations.
Star Wars has become a cultural touchpoint, and our fans are avidly interested in exploring more stories."

====
Holocron database and canonicity ====
Originally, Lucasfilm tracked the narrative content of the Expanded Universe in story bibles, alongside official reference books such as A Guide to the Star Wars Universe (1984/1994) and the Star Wars Encyclopedia (1998).
In 2000, LucasArts lead tester Leland Chee was hired as Continuity Database Administrator for Lucas Licensing, and developed a database of franchise continuity based in part on 1998's encyclopedic Star Wars: Behind the Magic CD-ROM.
The database came to be known as the Holocron, a term used within the Star Wars universe for "ancient repositories of knowledge and wisdom".
The Holocron consists of over 55,000 entries for franchise characters, locations, species, and vehicles.
Lucas Licensing's managing editor Sue Rostoni said in 2001, "Our goal is to present a continuous and unified history of the Star Wars galaxy, insofar as that history does not conflict with, or undermine the meaning of Mr. Lucas's Star Wars saga of films and screenplays.
"
Lucasfilm's director of fan relations Steve Sansweet clarified:

When it comes to absolute canon, the real story of Star Wars, you must turn to the films themselves—and only the films.
Even novelizations are interpretations of the film, and while they are largely true to George Lucas' vision (he works quite closely with the novel authors), the method in which they are written does allow for some minor differences ...
The further one branches away from the movies, the more interpretation and speculation come into play.
LucasBooks works diligently to keep the continuing Star Wars expanded universe cohesive and uniform, but stylistically, there is always room for variation.

In August 2005, Lucas said of the Expanded Universe:
I don't read that stuff.
I haven't read any of the novels.
I don't know anything about that world.
That's a different world than my world.
But I do try to keep it consistent.
The way I do it now is they have a Star Wars Encyclopedia.
So if I come up with a name or something else, I look it up and see if it has already been used.
When I said [other people] could make their own Star Wars stories, we decided that, like Star Trek, we would have two universes:
My universe and then this other one.
They try to make their universe as consistent with mine as possible, but obviously they get enthusiastic and want to go off in other directions.

Regarding the Holocron database in 2012, Chee said: "What sets Star Wars apart from other franchises is that we develop a singular continuity across all forms of media, whether it be the films, TV series, video games, novels and comics, and the Holocron is a key component to Lucasfilm being able to do this."
The Holocron was divided into five levels of canon (in order of precedence):
G-canon was "George Lucas canon":
Episodes I–VI (the released films at that time) overrode the lower levels of canonicity, even when referring to elements introduced in other media.
In the words of Leland Chee: "George's view of the universe is his view.
He's not beholden to what's gone before."

T-canon was Television canon:
The canonicity level comprising The Clone Wars, which Lucas co-created.

C-canon was Continuity canon: Most of the material from the Expanded Universe including books, comics, and video games.
The creation of stories that introduced radical changes in the continuity, like The Force Unleashed video game (which introduced Darth Vader's secret apprentice), required Lucas's approval, and he spent hours explaining the character relationships to the developers.

S-canon was Secondary canon:
Any element introduced in Continuity canon that was contradicted by other material.
The Holiday Special is an example, except for elements referenced in higher levels of canon.

D-canon was Detours canon: Elements of the unreleased show Detours, though primarily intended as a parody of the franchise, were to follow a serial storyline that existed in a low level of canonicity.

N-canon was Non-canon: "What if" stories (such as the first 20 issues of the Star Wars Tales comic anthology), crossover appearances (such as Star Wars character appearances in Soulcalibur IV), game statistics, and anything else directly contradicted by higher levels of canon.

====
Disney acquisition and canon restructuring ====
In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for US$4.06 billion (equivalent to about $4.52B in 2019).
Subsequently, Lucasfilm formed the "Lucasfilm Story Group", which was established to keep track of and define the canon and unify the films, comics, and other media.
Among its members are Chee, Kiri Hart, and Pablo Hidalgo.
To prevent the planned sequel trilogy from being beholden to and restrained by the plotlines of the Expanded Universe works, the choice was made to discard that continuity.
On April 25, 2014, Lucasfilm rebranded the Expanded Universe material as Star Wars Legends and declared it non-canonical to the franchise.
The company's focus would be shifted towards a restructured Star Wars canon based on new material.
Chee said in a 2014 Twitter post that a "primary goal" of the story group would be to replace the previous hierarchical canon (of the Holocron) with one cohesive one.
The final season of The Clone Wars, which was released in 2020, retconned aspects of the 2016 novel Ahsoka.
The next year, The Clone Wars spin-off series The Bad Batch reimagined some canon elements from the 2015 Kanan comic book series.
The Bad Batch executive producer Jennifer Corbett explained that "Everything we did was for a reason and it might not match 100%
but it's sort of just wanting to honor what existed but also give another take on it in this story."

===
2014–2020:
Sequel trilogy and anthology films ===
In its 2014 announcement, Lucasfilm explained that the only preexisting works to be considered canonical within the franchise would be the primary episodic films and the 2008 The Clone Wars film and TV series.
The announcement called these works "the immovable objects of Star Wars history, the characters and events to which all other tales must align.
"
It was also made clear that a planned Star Wars sequel trilogy, and subsequent works developed within the restructured canon, would not be based on Legends material but could possibly draw from it.
The first new canonical novel was A New Dawn by John Jackson Miller, published in September 2014, acting as a prologue to the CGI-animated television series Star Wars Rebels, which was released a month later.
Marvel began publishing new Star Wars comic book series in January 2015, and the Journey to Star Wars publishing initiative included books and comics tying in to the sequel trilogy films.

The first sequel trilogy film, The Force Awakens, was released in December 2015.
There was some minor fan backlash against the restructured canon, with one group successfully campaigning to buy a billboard pleading for Lucasfilm to continue the original non-canonical Expanded Universe separately from the canon.
Rebels supervising director Dave Filoni reintroduced popular Legends character Thrawn into the canon in the 2016 third season of Rebels.
Timothy Zahn was hired to write new canonical novels about the character.
Since co-creating The Clone Wars, Filoni has followed Lucas (who incorporated Expanded Universe elements into the Special Editions, prequels, and The Clone Wars) in incorporating multiple spin-off elements into his series.
Some cancelled The Clone Wars episodes were adapted into books and comics in The Clone Wars Legacy multimedia project.

After The Force Awakens, multiple films were released, including the anthology films Rogue One (2016)
and Solo (2018), as well as the second and third sequel trilogy films, The Last Jedi (2017) and The Rise of Skywalker (2019).
Dozens of novels, comics published by Marvel and IDW, and games like Battlefront II (2017) were released.
Additionally, the animated series Resistance, set in the sequel trilogy era, premiered in late 2018 and ran until early 2020.
The Mandalorian, a post-Return of the Jedi live-action series written by Jon Favreau premiered in late 2019 on the Disney streaming service Disney+.
In early 2020, a final season of The Clone Wars animated series debuted on the streaming service.

=== 2020–present:
The High Republic and further titles ==
=
In February 2020, it was announced that a new line of books and comics, labeled The High Republic, would begin publishing starting in August.
The line takes place 200 years prior to the events of The Phantom Menace and will not overlap any films or series currently planned for production.
In December 2020, multiple live-action series were announced for Disney+, including Obi-Wan Kenobi, Andor, Lando, three Mandalorian spin-offs, and The Acolyte (set during the High Republic).
On April 2, 2021, several legacy Star Wars films and series were added to Disney+.
The Bad Batch debuted on May 4.Multiple Marvel comics rebooted in 2020, moving to the era between The Empire Strikes
Back and Return of the Jedi.

== Legends fictional timeline ==


==
See also ==
List of Star Wars characters
List of Star Wars Legends characters


==
References ==
Footnotes
Citations


==
External links ==
Official website (Archived)
Star Wars Legends on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
Angry Birds Star Wars was a puzzle video game, a crossover between the Star Wars franchise and the Angry Birds series of video games, launched on November 8, 2012, first for Windows, iOS, and Android devices, later also to Mac and BlackBerry.
The game is the sixth Angry Birds game in the series.
The characters are copyrighted from George Lucas's double-trilogy.
On July 18, 2013, Rovio announced that Angry Birds Star Wars would be heading for the PlayStation 3, PlayStation Vita, Xbox 360, Wii, Wii U, and the Nintendo 3DS on October 29, 2013, in conjunction with Activision.
As of August 2013, the game has been downloaded over 100 million times on its various platforms.
The game is a launch title for the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One.

On July 15, 2013, Rovio announced a sequel, entitled Angry Birds Star Wars II.
It is based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy and the television show Star Wars Rebels.
Angry Birds Star Wars II was released on September 19, 2013.
Angry Birds Star Wars was discontinued on February 3, 2020 along with Angry Birds Star Wars II and Angry Birds Rio.
==
Gameplay ==
The game combines elements of both Angry Birds and Angry Birds Space, featuring levels that take place on both standard terrain and in outer space.
The game begins on Tatooine, Anakin Skywalker and Luke Skywalker's home desert planet, moves to the Death Star I, travels to Hoth, then Cloud City, and eventually ends up with Endor and Death Star II.
With the exclusion of Blue Bird, all the Birds are given new powers not yet seen before in a canon Angry Birds title, some of these that are upgraded as the game progresses further.
Players can replay previously completed levels with the upgraded abilities.

Differences from other games are that Birds may still perform their chosen abilities a split second after colliding with an object.
The Millennium Falcon is called the Mighty Falcon and used instead of the Mighty Eagle found in previous games.
When a certain number of stars are earned, the player gets a reward.
It can be either 5 Mighty Falcons (an item that may be used during normal levels to try to earn badges) or access to a Golden Droid level.
There are additional bonus levels if the player manages to hit golden droids in selected levels.
On June 13, 2013, power-ups were added.

There was a Facebook version of Angry Birds Star Wars that included weekly tournaments in addition to some story levels.
It closed down on March 3, 2014.

== Reception ==
The game has received favorable reviews with a Metacritic score of 88/100 based on 22 reviews.
Mark Brown of Pocket Gamer gave the title a Gold Award, praising the game for being "faithful to the source material" and "filled with content".
Justin Davis of IGN says it is a great game with Star Wars references and Force powers, and has a huge variety of perfectly tuned stages.
In a 2013 poll on the Rovio website, the game collected the most votes for favorite Angry Birds game.
The Facebook version has garnered a lot of positive response as well.
At the 2013 Webby Awards, the game was awarded as the "Best Game" from both the Judges and as the People's Choice.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Angry Birds Star Wars II was a puzzle video game, a crossover between Star Wars and the Angry Birds series, that was released on September 18, 2013.
The game is the eighth Angry Birds game and the second where players can play as pigs (the first is the original game in King Pig Mode), developed by Rovio Entertainment.
The game is a prequel to Angry Birds Star Wars and is based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy, as well as the television show Star Wars Rebels.
Angry Birds Star Wars II was discontinued on February 3, 2020 along with Angry Birds Star Wars and Angry Birds Rio.
==
Gameplay ==
In Angry Birds Star Wars II, players must destroy targets fortified in or out of their created fortresses including various bosses, depending on the side they are in (Bird or Pork side).
Players also earn up to 3 stars, as of other games in the series.
The game features over 56 playable characters.
The game differs from the other Angry Birds games because the player can summon a specific bird/pig instead of the pre-determined selection.
This summoning can be done to replace each bird/pig.

===
Telepods ===
The game is compatible with Hasbro Telepod technology, which is similar in concept to the "Portal of Power" from the Skylanders video game series, allowing the player to summon a specific character into the game via its QR code; this summon is once per level, but the player can use multiple Telepod summons per level.
Each Telepod can be used on up to 15 separate devices and one must rescan the Telepod to get access to the particular bird/pig if the game is fully closed.

As of December 2013, Hasbro has sold over 1 million Angry Birds Star Wars II Telepods, like Darth Vader, Yoda, General Grievous, C-3PO, and more.
===
Shop ===
The player can via in-app purchase or through achievement rewards, have the use of certain birds or pigs during gameplay.
With the Rise of the Clones following up with the Revenge of the Pork and the TV show Rebels update, the former Watto's shop, which was a separate area of the game to buy usable birds/pigs, was removed and was merged within the character swap menu.

==
Characters ==
In Angry Birds Star Wars II, birds and pigs play the roles of characters from the Star Wars prequel trilogy.
Characters from the original trilogy and the television show Star Wars Rebels also make appearances in bird/pig form.
In official books and annuals, characters' names are changed to fit whether they are portrayed by bird or pig.
(
e.g. Boba Fett becomes Boba Fatt).

==
Release ==
The game was released on September 18, 2013.
PC and Mac
OS X versions of the game were announced and the Windows PC version was released on October 24.
The Mac version's release plan was discontinued, and on November 13, 2014, the Windows PC version was no longer available for purchase or download and will not be updated.

== Reception ==
The game has received generally favorable reviews with a Metacritic score of 77/100 based on 24 reviews.
While the game continues the gameplay of its predecessor with fun new ideas, some reviewers have noted that the increase in the number of playable characters may make the levels unbalanced due to characters having different powers.
Some reviewers did not like the numerous microtransactions but found the game fun.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Angry Birds Rio was the third puzzle video game in the Angry Birds series, developed and published by Rovio Mobile.
Based on Angry Birds, Angry Birds Rio was released for devices using Apple's iOS and Mac OS X, as well as Google's Android in March 2011.
The game was released as a marketing tie-in with the 20th Century Fox  and Blue Sky Studios animated films Rio and Rio 2, and was promoted with those movies.
While utilizing the same basic gameplay as the original game, Angry Birds Rio added a number of new elements, most notably the first use of boss levels.
Angry Birds Rio was discontinued on February 3, 2020 along with Angry Birds Star Wars and Angry Birds Star Wars II.

==
Gameplay ==
In Rio, the Angry Birds have been kidnapped and taken to Rio.
Just as in the original Angry Birds, players use a slingshot to launch the birds at nearby structures, with the intent of hitting targets located on or within them.
Instead of the pigs that have stolen eggs, players must now rescue caged exotic birds or defeat Nigel's marmosets, depending on the level being played.
Because of the game's setting, several characters from Rio make appearances.
Blu and Jewel both feature as types of bird exclusive to this game, along with all the existing birds from the series.

The game also includes the first boss fights to appear in the series, when the player uses the birds to defeat Nigel, the main antagonist from the film, as well as Mauro, the leader of the marmosets.
In other levels, Luiz helps defeat the marmosets and destroys materials and blocks to get the player extra points, as well as hidden items to collect as the player progresses through the game.

==
Release ==
Angry Birds Rio initially included two chapters, "Smugglers' Den" and "Jungle Escape", each with 30 levels.
Since then, the game has been expanded with three additional 30-level chapters called "Beach Volley" (released in May 2011), "Carnival Upheaval" (released in June 2011), and "Airfield Chase" (released in August 2011) along with a 15-level chapter, "Golden Beachball", which is unlocked by finding a hidden item in "Beach Volley" (iOS, Android) or by entering a redeem code from Rio DVD (PC, Mac).
A final chapter named "Smugglers' Plane" (released in November 2011) was released with initially with 15 levels, with the final 15 levels released later (January 2012).
Each chapter has a special fruit that may be rarely found as gold.
"
Smugglers' Den" has pineapples, "Jungle Escape" has bananas, "Beach Volley" has watermelons, "Carnival Upheaval" has papayas, "
Airfield Chase" has apples, "Smugglers' Plane" has mangoes, "
Market Mayhem" has strawberries, and "Rocket Rumble" has golden rockets.
In July 2013, the "Golden Beachball" episode received 15 more levels, golden cherries, a new background, and this episode is now available from the start of the game.

In March 2012, the Trophy Room update was released, with 12 new levels that are each unlocked when a player finishes a chapter or collects all 15 of a certain golden fruit.
This update was first released in the Android (Amazon Appstore ad-free) version before making its way to iOS.

On December 18, 2012, a new update landed for iOS and Android adding 24 new levels.
This levels are earned by getting from 30 to 70 stars on each episode or by earning 10 Mighty Eagles' Feathers on each episode (4 extra levels on each episode).
This episode also added Power-Ups.
The Power-Ups were Super Seeds and Sling Scope from the Angry Birds
original app and 2 new power-ups
(Samba Burst and TNT Drop, which this has been seen on a previous Angry Birds Friends Christmas Tournament).
On March 11, 2013, another update was released, adding a "Market Mayhem" episode with 34 levels (3 stars levels and 1 Mighty Eagle level).
On July 25, 2013, AB Rio's app icon was updated and Golden Beachball added a golden fruit and 15 new levels.
In addition, The trophy room levels were combined into the episode they were earned from.

Four
Angry Birds Rio episodes — all visually tied to Rio 2 was released from December 2013 to July 2014 and these episodes featured refreshed graphics.
The Timber Tumble episode adds a hint feature that tells where to sling the bird.
In the July 2015, a game update added bird coins that allow players to unlock levels that were previously locked.
===
Ports ===
At the 2012 Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles, California, Rovio and distribution partner Activision announced plans to bring Angry Birds Rio and two other games, the original Angry Birds and Angry Birds Seasons, to the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and Nintendo 3DS systems.
Bundled together as Angry Birds Trilogy, the games will be built specifically for their respective consoles, taking advantage of their unique features, such as support for PlayStation Move, Kinect, high-definition displays, and glasses-free 3D visuals.
It is also available for Wii and Wii U as part of Angry Birds Trilogy.

== Reception ==
The game has received generally favorable reviews, with a Metacritic score of 87/100 based on 18 reviews.
Ryan Rigney of GamePro saying the iOS version "boasts some notable improvements on its predecessors" and Levi Buchanan of IGN, in his review of the Android version, calling the game "a smart, snappy new chapter for the series".
Jim Squires of Gamezebo complimented the game's attempts to add new material and mechanics, saying "some evolution needs to happen if it wants to have the long term staying power of a Mario or a Pac-Man."
However, Squires did take issue with the new boss battles, calling them "a little anti-climactic".
Tracy Erickson of Pocket Gamer noted that "what Angry Birds Rio lacks in new ideas and freshness, it makes up in quality gameplay and good value".
Since release, Angry Birds Rio has been downloaded more than 10 million times, and it has been one of the top downloaded games at both the Apple App Store and Google Play.

== See also ==
List of most downloaded Android applications


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Angry Birds (Finnish: Vihaiset linnut; Swedish:
Arga fåglar
; Turkish: Sinirli kuşlar) is a Finnish action-based media franchise created by the Finnish company Rovio Entertainment.
The series focuses on the angry birds that try to save their eggs from green-colored pigs, their enemies.
Inspired by the game Crush the Castle, the game has been praised for its successful combination of fun gameplay, comical style, and low price.
Its popularity led to many spin-offs; versions of Angry Birds created for PCs and video game consoles, a market for merchandise featuring its characters, Angry Birds Toons, a televised animated series, and two films; The Angry Birds Movie and its sequel The Angry Birds Movie 2.
By January 2014, there had been over 2 billion downloads across all platforms, including both regular and special editions.
By July 2015, the series' games had been downloaded more than 3 billion times collectively, making it the most downloaded freemium game series of all time.
The original Angry Birds has been called "One of the most mainstream games out right now", "One of the great runaway hits of 2010", and "The largest mobile app success the world has seen so far".
The first main-series video game sequel, Angry Birds 2, was released on 30 July 2015.

The first game in the series was initially released in 31 December 2009 for iOS.
At the time, the swine flu epidemic was in the news, so the staff decided to use pigs as the enemies of the angry birds.
The company released ports of the game to other touchscreen smartphone operating systems, including Android.
As of late 2019, all Angry Birds games released before October 2014 (with the exception of Friends) have been discontinued and removed from app stores, Rovio has declined to explain their reasoning behind the decision apart from a brief support response.

==
Characters and synopsis ==
The game revolves around a group of angry birds whose eggs are stolen by the legion of pigs who wish to eat them.
The birds then use a slingshot to destroy the structures on/in which the pigs reside during battle.
The birds include Red, Chuck, Bomb, Matilda, The Blues (Jay, Jake and Jim), Hal, Stella, Terence, Bubbles, Silver, and Mighty Eagle.
The pigs are led by the evil King Pig Smooth Cheeks, the son of the former King Mudbeard, both are assisted by Chef Pig, Corporal Pig, Foreman Pig, and many Minion Pigs.
Ever since Smooth Cheeks was king, all characters have lived in Piggy Island, though the birds formerly lived on Bird Island when Mudbeard was king.

==
Video games ==


===
Spin-offs ===
===
Compilations ===


=== Cancelled ===
These games were soft-launched in select countries, but were discontinued after few months of its release.
Some of them never made a release.

===
Promotional ===
From 2011 to 13, Angry Birds has collaborated with many other companies and released variations of the game in the respective companies' theme.
Most of them were Flash-based.
All of the games featured exclusive levels and elements that aid in promotion.

Angry Birds Chrome
Angry Birds Google+
Angry Birds Free with Magic
(specific NFC-compatible Nokia phones only)
Angry Birds Volcano (Fazer's Tyrkisk Peber Volcano)
Angry Birds Breakfast (Nesquik cereal)
Angry Birds in The Hunt
For The Golden Pistachio (Wonderful Pistachios)
Angry Birds
Vuela Tazos (PepsiCo's Tazos)
Angry Birds Cheetos
Angry Birds Lotus F1 Team
Angry Birds McDonald's
(China only)
Angry Birds
Coca-Cola
(Chinese Olympic team partnership, China only)
Angry Birds Heikki (Heikki Kovalainen partnership)
Angry Birds
Telepizza
Angry Birds Fuji TV
Angry Birds in Ultrabook Adventure (Intel's Ultrabook)
Angry Birds
Philadelphia Eagles
===
Cameos ===
This features Angry Birds and Bad Piggies as playable characters or exclusive rewards featuring them.

==
Media ==
Rovio is investigating ways to expand the Angry Birds brand, including merchandise, television shows and movies.
Mikael Hed, CEO of Rovio Mobile, has envisioned a feature film in the stop-motion animation style of Aardman Animations.
To that end, Rovio has purchased a Helsinki-based animation studio to prepare Angry Birds short cartoons on the Nicktoons station's Nickelodeon Extra, the first of which was a Christmas special named "Wreck the Halls" that debuted in December 2011.
Hed acknowledges that such a film would be years away, and that Rovio must keep the characters relevant until then, by producing sequels or new ports of the original game.

===
Television adaptations ===
Angry Birds Toons, a TV series based on the game, made its debut on 16 March 2013.
Angry Birds Toons is released through third-party video distribution platforms, including Comcast's Xfinity On-Demand in the US, Samsung Smart TVs, and Roku set-top boxes.
It is also available in a number of countries on traditional television broadcasts.
Angry Birds Toons is available on mobile devices by an additional Angry Birds Toons channel on all of the Angry Birds apps homescreens.
DVD version for the TV series was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment.
The series has a total of 3 seasons.

On 11 April 2014, Rovio released Piggy Tales, a stop motion animated series.
It tells the stories of the Minion Pigs' life.

On 1 November 2014, Rovio released Angry Birds Stella, a 2D/3D animated series, telling the stories of Stella's life and that of her friends on their own island.

On 12 July 2015, Real Angry Birds, inspired by the game Angry Birds, premiered on Nat Geo Wild.

On 10 March 2017, Rovio released Angry Birds Blues, a computer-animated series based on The Angry Birds Movie.
It shows the lives of the Blues having fun, while the Hatchlings were doing random stuff and ruining their plans.

On 3 July 2017, Netflix and KidsClick picked up every Angry Birds Toons, Angry Birds Stella, and Piggy Tales episode in the form of 23 compilations.

On 1 June 2018, U.S. television production company Big Fish Entertainment announced that they would be partnering with Rovio to create a game show based on Angry Birds currently called Angry Birds Challenge.
On 9 June 2018, a series titled Angry Birds BirLd Cup was released on YouTube.
On 17 November 2018, a series titled Angry Birds on the Run was released on YouTube.

In late 2018, Rovio announced that a new, long-form Angry Birds television series titled Angry Birds: Summer Madness is in production and due for release in 2021 on Netflix.
On 1 June 2019, a series titled Angry Birds MakerSpace was released on YouTube.
On 18 January 2020, a series titled Angry Birds Slingshot Stories was released on YouTube.
On 31 August 2020, a new series titled Angry Birds Bubble Trouble  was released on Amazon Freetime Unlimited and YouTube.
It is based on Dream Blast movie designs.

===
Film adaptations ===
A 3D computer-animated film adaptation, The Angry Birds Movie, was released on 20 May 2016, which fully anthropomorphizes the characters for the first time in franchise history, giving them limbs and voices.
Developed, produced and financed by Rovio Entertainment, it is animated by Sony Pictures Imageworks and distributed worldwide by Sony Pictures Entertainment under their Columbia Pictures banner.
It is directed by animation veterans Clay Kaytis and Fergal Reilly in their directorial debut.
Jon Vitti wrote the film's screenplay, and John Cohen and Catherine Winder served as the producers.
Rovio also hired David Maisel, former executive producer of Marvel Studios films such as Iron Man, to be the executive producer of its feature-length films.
A sequel
, The Angry Birds Movie 2 was released on 13 August 2019, which was co-produced by both Rovio Animation and Sony Pictures Animation.
Directed by the creator of The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack, Thurop Van Orman, the sequel breaks from the series' source material by having the Birds and Pigs ending their rivalry to form an alliance to battle a larger threat, as well as becoming one of the most well critically received video game film adaptations ever made, garnering an unprecedented score of 73% from Rotten Tomatoes.

==
Merchandise ==


===
Toys adaptation ===
There have been several toys made from Angry Birds characters.
The game's official website offers plush versions of the birds and pigs for sale, along with T-shirts featuring the game's logo and characters.
In May 2011, Mattel released an Angry Birds board game, titled "Angry Birds: Knock on Wood".
Over 10 million Angry Birds toys have been sold thus far.
Rovio opened the first official Angry Birds retail store in Helsinki on 11 November 2011 at 11:11 a.m. local time.
It expects to open its next retail store somewhere in China, considered the game's fastest-growing market.
Merchandise has been successful, with 45% of Rovio's revenues in 2012 coming from branded merchandise.
The most notable toys are the Telepods, created by Hasbro.
These figures are created for Angry Birds Star Wars II, Angry Birds Go!
,
Angry Birds Stella, and Angry Birds Transformers.
Telepods use a similar digital toy hybrid concept as Skylanders or Disney Infinity characters, but there is a different technology behind it.
These are figures used to "teleport" a character of the corresponding figure into the game by scanning a tiny QR code via the device's camera.
The Telepod platform technology was invented by ReToy, a bMuse company, in partnership with Hasbro.
Telepods figures are not only for this use, but can also be used with the toy set that comes with the toy, like other Angry Birds board games.

One of the 2012 New Models for Hot Wheels cars from Mattel is based on the Red, Blue, and Yellow Birds from Angry Birds.
The package card bears both the Hot Wheels and Angry Birds logo.

In 2016, Lego released six sets based on The Angry Birds Movie.

===
Print publications adaptation ===
On 2011, Rovio published a cookbook titled "Bad Piggies: Egg Recipes", along with doodle books based on some characters of the game.
After a few weeks of the release of Angry Birds Space, they also released Angry Birds Space books about numbers, alphabets, and stickers.

On 20 March 2012, National Geographic published a paperback book titled Angry Birds Space: A Furious Flight Into The Final Frontier shortly before the release of Angry Birds Space which became available on 22 March 2012.
National Geographic also has a book titled Angry Birds Feathered Fun for learning all about birds.
In the same year, Rovio created a contest with the prize
Angry Birds:
Hatching a Universe, a book about the franchise and all the characters.
It was released for sale by Titan Books in May 24, 2013; And again by Insight Editions in June 4, 2013.
The book was written by Danny Gordon with a foreword by Mikael Hed.

As of 10 March 2014, IDW Publishing announced that they will be publishing Angry Birds Comics starting in June 2014, with Paul Tobin being the writer.
In the summer of 2017, GoComics announced that it will be running a comic strip series based on the world of The Angry Birds Movie, with each issue available to view on its website.
The strip ran for over a year, from 3 August 2017 to 20 September 2018.

===
Food products adaptation ===
In early 2012, Olvi started to manufacture Angry Birds soft drinks, after licensing with Rovio with two different tastes: Tropic (tropical fruits) and Paradise (pineapple-mandarin).
In September 2012
Olvi released two new tastes to the soft drink collection:
Lagoon (pear-apple) and Space Comet (orange-cola).
==
Parks and attractions ==


===
Angry Birds Land adaptation ===
The game's characters have been used, officially or otherwise, in amusement park attractions.
In September 2011, the Window of the World theme park in Changsha, China opened an unlicensed Angry Birds attraction.
Visitors to the park uses a large slingshot to launch stuffed versions of the bird characters at green balloons that represent the pigs.
Upon learning of the attraction, Rovio Entertainment reported to be considering working with the theme park to officially license it.
In March 2012, Rovio announced plans for an official Angry Birds Land, that opened on 28 April 2012, at the Särkänniemi adventure park in Finland.
Angry Birds Land opened in May 2014 at Johor Bahru City Centre in Malaysia.
The first Angry Birds themed park in the UK, was created in Sundown Adventureland, an attraction in the Nottinghamshire countryside.
Most recently it was announced that UK theme park Thorpe Park would open their own Angry Birds Land themed area within the park in May 2014.
The new area consists of the reinstatement of the 4D Cinema with a 10-minute-long Angry Birds film with 4D effects, a new addition of themed Angry Birds Dodgems and a slight re-theme of existing drop tower ride Detonator.

===
Angry Birds Activity Park adaptation ===
Rovio also opened "Activity Parks" of the game.
The first one was opened in Lightwater Valley that features dancefloors, and playgrounds that includes slides, and massive touchscreen devices for visitors to play Angry Birds.
The attraction also opened in Vuokatti.
Vuokatti features obstacle courses and races, and a separate "Angry Birds Town" with cars for kids to ride.

===
Angry Birds Space Encounter adaptation ===
In June 2013, Rovio and NASA opened an Angry Birds Space theme park at the Kennedy Space Center titled "Angry Birds Space Encounter".
It features various experiences to the Angry Birds Space video game, such as creating characters and shooting birds at pigs.
The attraction was also opened in the Space Center Houston.

===
Angry Birds World adaptation ==
=
It was announced that the first Angry Birds World theme park will open at Doha Festival City.
The first phase (which includes the indoor part) opened on 3 June 2018.

===
Angry Birds Not-So-Mini Golf ===
On 23 May 2019, Rovio announced that it will build a miniature Angry Birds golf course at American Dream Meadowlands in East Rutherford NJ USA.
The golf course opened on October 1 2020 but the mall opened on October 25 2019.

== Reception and legacy ==


==
Global impact ==


===
Television ===
The Angry Birds characters have been referenced in television programs throughout the world.
The Israeli comedy show Eretz Nehederet (in English: a Wonderful Country), one of the nation's most popular TV programs, satirized recent failed Israeli-Palestinian peace attempts by featuring the Angry Birds in peace negotiations with the pigs.
Clips of the segment went viral, getting viewers from all around the world.
The sketch received favorable coverage from a variety of independent blogs such as digitaltrends.com, hotair.com and intomobile.com, as well as from online news media agencies such as Haaretz, The Christian Science Monitor, The Guardian, and MSNBC.
American television hosts Conan O'Brien, Jon Stewart and Daniel Tosh have referenced the game in comedy sketches on their respective series, Conan, The Daily Show, and Tosh.0.
In the 30 Rock episode "Plan B", guest star Aaron Sorkin laments to Liz Lemon, "Our craft is dying while people are playing Angry Birds and poking each other on Facebook".
He then provides a tip for Liz to improve her score in the game.
In February 2011, American journalist Jake Tapper mockingly introduced U.S. Senator Chris Coons as the "Angry Birds champion of the Senate" during the National Press Club's annual dinner.
Some of the game's more notable fans include ex-Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom, who plays the iPad version of the game, and author Salman Rushdie, who claims he is "something of a master at Angry Birds".
Basketball star Kevin Durant is an avid fan of Angry Birds, and regularly plays other NBA stars in matches, although he is wary of cheating.
In August 2011, the Milwaukee Brewers played the Angry Birds theme song during the pre-game introductions of the arch-rival St. Louis Cardinals players, in reference to former Cardinals' manager Tony LaRussa's propensity to bean opposing players.
Angry Birds also appears briefly, for comic relief, during a scene in the 2013 film G.I. Joe: Retaliation, in which Zartan plays the game while waiting for the world leaders' response to his threats of annihilation.
Angry Birds were featured in the 2013 Helsinki episode of Veep.
Angry Birds was referenced in the film The Starving Games, a parody of The Hunger Games.
A group in the Indian show Dance+ have done a dance based on Angry Birds..
Angry Birds was referenced in the Family Guy episode "Turban Cowboy" where one failed skydiving attempt by Peter results in him landing in a level.
The TV show Robot Chicken also parodied Angry Birds in one sketch.

===
Advertisements ===
Angry Birds and its characters have been featured in advertisements for other products.
In March 2011, the characters began appearing in a series of advertisements for Microsoft's Bing search engine.
At the 2011 South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, Nokia used scrims on a downtown building to project an advertisement for its new N8 handset that included the game's characters.
A June 2011 T-Mobile advertisement filmed in Barcelona, Spain included a real-life mock-up of the game in a city plaza, while Nokia used the game in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia to promote an attempt to set a world record for the largest number of people playing a single mobile game.
Finnair has also used Angry Birds in their advertising, including taping an Airbus A340 airliner with the Angry Birds figures and holding an Angry Birds tournament on board a flight to Singapore.
Rovio has also prepared a number of web-based promotional variants of Angry Birds themed around creations of other companies, such as Finnish snack company Fazer, Spanish pizza delivery chain Telepizza, and Japanese television network Fuji TV, as well as promotions of American brands including Cheetos, Wonderful Pistachios and Coca-Cola.
In November 2013, Indian brand Parle started a marketing campaign in which a trading card is included in each packet of Parle's Wafers and it included a related contest to win Angry Birds merchandise.
In February 2016, Cadbury India had Angry Birds small figurines or tattoos in Cadbury Gems packs or Surprise balls.
In June 2016, Kurkure India started an offer to win daily themed prizes and a trip to Angry Birds Activity Park in Malaysia.

===
Sports ===
Finnish Formula One driver Heikki Kovalainen used an Angry Birds-themed helmet in the 2012 season, following a sponsorship deal with Rovio.
Angry Birds also sponsored the Lotus F1 Team that year, with its logo on the top of each Lotus Renault F1 car's nosecone.
As part of the deal, fellow Finn Kimi Räikkönen ran an Angry Birds 'Space' logo on his branded caps.
Hockey Bird, an angry hockey playing bird, was the official mascot of the 2012 IIHF Ice Hockey World Championships.
It was designed by Toni Kysenius and Rovio Entertainment.
Premier League association football club Everton F.C. inked a deal with Rovio in 2017, whereby the Angry Birds logo appears on the club shirt's left sleeve beginning from the 2017–18 Premier League campaign.

===
Video games ===
The game's popularity has spawned knock-off and parody games that utilize the same basic mechanics as Angry Birds.
For example, Angry Turds features monkeys hurling feces and other objects at hunters who have stolen their babies.
Another game, titled Chicks'n'Vixens and released in beta form on Windows Phone devices, replaces the birds and pigs with chickens and foxes, respectively.
The developer of Chicks'n'Vixens intended the game as a challenge to Rovio Mobile, which stated at the time that a Windows Phone port of Angry Birds would not be ready until later in 2011.
The Angry Birds theme song (Balkan Blast Remix) and its characters appear in Just Dance 2016.

===
Religion ===
Angry Birds has inspired works of religious analogy.
A five-part essay titled "Angry Birds Yoga — How to Eliminate the Green Pigs in Your Life" was written by Giridhari Dasa of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness of Brazil, utilizing the characters and gameplay mechanics to explain various concepts of yoga in Gaudiya Vaishnavism as understood and interpreted by the Hare Krishna.
The piece attracted much media attention, in Brazil and abroad, for its unique method of philosophico-religious presentation.
The piece was also recognized and appreciated by Rovio Mobile's Peter Vesterbacka, who was prompted to comment on Twitter, "Very cool!
I can see Angry Birds Yoga becoming a worldwide craze;-)".

===
Education ===
Rovio also launched the Angry Birds Playground in partnership with University of Helsinki.
Based on the Finnish national curriculum the program covers maths, science, music, language, arts & crafts, physical education and social interaction.
Focused on preschoolers of kindergarten age, the program introduced interactive learning material including books, posters, games and digital content.
In 2015, a spin-off from the Rovio Angry Birds Playground was established as Fun Academy by co-founder and CEO Sanna Lukander, former Rovio's vice president of learning and book publishing, and co-founder Peter Vesterbacka, former Rovio's ‘Mighty Eagle’.
Fun Academy is currently present in 9 countries across the world.

==
Controversy ==


===
Leaking user data ===
In January 2014, it was revealed that Angry Birds was considered a "leaky app" and was used to collect data about its users including their sexual orientation and location by the National Security Agency (NSA) and GCHQ.
In retaliation, anti-NSA hackers defaced Rovio's Web site.
Claims were made by Edward Snowden that the app was leaky and that they were capable of siphoning data.

According to The Register, the information was leaked through the in-game advertisement code like that embedded by Millennial Media: "Millennial's tracking software generates a personal record for each user that can store information from their political affiliation and sexual orientation to whether their marital state was single, married, divorced, engaged or 'swinger'.
This information is used to target in-app ads more effectively, and can be collected by UK and US intelligence agencies for analysis".
In a statement to the press, Rovio denied that they were providing any information to the intelligence agencies, but did not exclude the possibility that their advertisers might do so.
Following this revelation, on 29 January, the Angry Birds site was defaced by hackers who replaced it with "Spying Birds" via a DNS hijacking attack.
According to Rovio, "The defacement was caught in minutes and corrected immediately".
The Syrian Electronic Army tweeted after the incident that the attack had been carried out by "a friend" of theirs.

== See also ==
Boom Blox


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==

Official website
Angry Birds Transformers is a run and gun video game.
The tenth installment in the Angry Birds series, the game is a crossover between Angry Birds and Transformers, featuring battles between the Autobirds and Deceptihogs, Angry Birds versions of the Autobots and Decepticons.
It is published by Rovio Entertainment with collaboration from Hasbro.
The game was released on October 15, 2014, for iOS, released on October 30, 2014, for Android.
The release includes related licensed merchandise and a toy line from Hasbro.
The game's catchphrase is "Birds Disguised as Robots in Disguise".
==
Plot ==
The EggSpark has crashed into the surface of Piggy Island, cyberforming the Birds and Pigs and turning them into the Transformers.
It has also turned the eggs into the EggBots, which are turning all pigs (except for King, Foreman, Chef, Corporal, Minion, and Professor Pig) into their minions and then turning non-living things into monsters that want to destroy life, replacing it with technological beings across the island.
The Autobirds and Deceptihogs must put their differences aside to destroy the transformed pigs and to chase the mischievous Eggbots, ultimately rescuing the fate of their homeland.

==
Gameplay ==
The goal is to survive through the run, shooting at pigs, structures, and targets and transforming into vehicles, including cars, trucks, motorbikes, tanks, submarines, planes and flying saucers (which all stay at ground level)- since failure to survive results in no pigs popped and/or having no health for that character.
Pigs can be eliminated by shooting directly at them, but it is sometimes easier to defeat them by shooting at the structures or making TNT explode.
Since the gameplay is a side-scrolling video game, pigs who have gone out the screen can no longer be eliminated.
The player can use the user's Facebook friends unlocked characters or randomly generated characters to assist in a level for a limited time.

Coins may be collected either during runs, popping pigs and/or simply by waiting and collecting coins that generate over time from freed areas.
Some levels or features can be only unlocked when the player has upgraded enough Transformers to level 15.
In addition, gems can also be collected and can be used to purchase and to keep going through the run.

==
Telepods ==
The game is the fourth game in the franchise to be compatible with Angry Birds' Telepods, a toy line that is also used in other Angry Birds games such as: Angry Birds Star Wars II, Angry Birds Go, and Angry Birds Stella.
When using Telepods, it can summon the toy's Transformer, and either boost its power or recharge its armor.
It is a necessary to scan the toy's QR code each time after the app is closed since the application will "forget" the Telepods the user has previously scanned in.

==
Comic series ==
At SDCC 2014, IDW Publishing and Rovio announced an Angry Birds Transformers crossover comic books series; it was written by John Barber and art by Marcelo Ferreira and published in early 2015 as a four issue mini-series.

== Reception ==
Angry Birds Transformers has received generally positive reviews, with a Metacritic score of 70/100 based on 13 reviews.
The Guardian praised that the game appeals to Transformers fans, while also providing more proof that the Angry Birds can fit neatly into new stories and game genres, while the downside there are timers of multiple hours to upgrade a character, however gems to upgrade instantly  (slowly earned or purchased with real money) make the upgrade happen instantly.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
This is a list of Star Wars video games.
Though there have been many hobbyist-made and freeware games based on the Star Wars movie series and brand, this page lists only the games that have been developed or published by LucasArts, or officially licensed by Lucasfilm.

Platforms: Arcade, Apple II, Atari 2600, Famicom, Nintendo Entertainment System, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Nintendo 64, Sega Master System, Sega Dreamcast, Game Gear, GameCube, DOS, Microsoft Windows, Macintosh, Classic Mac OS, macOS, PlayStation, PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, Xbox, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii, Wii U, Game Boy, Game Boy Color, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, iOS, Android, Linux, Stadia.

==
Episode-related titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are based on the feature films.
They are listed in order of release by film.

===
Episode IV:
A New Hope ===
Star Wars (1983–88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: Atari 2600, Atari 5200, Commodore 64, Atari 8-bit family, ColecoVision, BBC Micro, ZX Spectrum, Acorn Electron, Amstrad CPC, Atari ST, Apple II, DOS, Macintosh, Amiga.

Star Wars (1987) – Famicom
Star Wars:
Attack on the Death Star (1991) – PC-9801, X68000
Star Wars (1991–93) – NES, Game Boy, Master System, Game Gear
Super Star Wars (1992) – SNES
Re-released for: Wii Virtual Console, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita
Star Wars Arcade (1993) –
Arcade
Re-released for: 32X


===
Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back
===
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1982) –
Atari 2600, Intellivision
Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1985/88) –
Arcade
Re-released for: BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST.

Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1992)
– NES, Game Boy
Super Star Wars:
The Empire Strikes Back (1993) –
SNES
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


===
Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi ===
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Death Star Battle (1983/84) –
Atari 2600, Atari 8-bit family, Atari 5200, ZX Spectrum
Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1984/88) –
Arcade, BBC Micro, Commodore 64, ZX Spectrum, Amstrad CPC, Amiga, Atari ST,
GameCube
Super Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi (1994) – SNES, Game Boy, Game Gear
Re-released for:
Wii Virtual Console


==
=
Episode
I:
The Phantom Menace ===
Star Wars:
Episode
I – The Phantom Menace (1999) – Microsoft Windows, PlayStation
Star Wars
Episode I (1999) –
Pinball
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020), Xbox One (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Episode
I: Jedi Power Battles (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast, Game Boy Advance
Star Wars
Episode
I: Battle for Naboo (2000) – Nintendo 64, Microsoft Windows
Star Wars
Episode
I:
Obi-Wan's Adventures (2000) –
Game Boy Color
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Xbox,
Arcade
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Obi-Wan (2001) –
Xbox


===
Episode II:
Attack of the Clones ===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2, Xbox
Star Wars:
Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: The New Droid Army (2002) –
Game Boy Advance


===
Episode III: Revenge of the Sith ===
Star Wars:
Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) – PlayStation 2, Xbox, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance
, Mobile Phone


== Series titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars games that are not based on a particular feature film, and form part of a series.
The list is ordered from the oldest series to the latest.

=== X-Wing ===
Star Wars: X-Wing (1993) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s):
Imperial Pursuit (1993) and B-Wing (1993)
Compilation: X-Wing (Collector's CD-ROM) (1994)
Star Wars: TIE Fighter (1994) – DOS, Macintosh
Expansion(s): Defender of the Empire (1994)
Compilation:
TIE Fighter (Collector's CD-ROM) (1995)
Star Wars: X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter (1997) –
Windows
Expansions:
Balance of Power Campaigns (1997), and Flight School (1998)
Star Wars: X-Wing Alliance (1999) –
Windows


===
Rebel Assault ===
Star Wars: Rebel Assault (1993) DOS, Mac, Sega CD, 3DO
Star Wars: Rebel Assault II:
The Hidden Empire (1995) DOS, PlayStation,
Microsoft Windows


===
Jedi Knight ===
Star Wars:
Dark Forces (1995) DOS, Mac, PlayStation
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Dark Forces II
(1997)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Mysteries of the Sith (1998)
Windows
Star Wars Jedi Knight II:
Jedi Outcast (2002)
Windows, Mac, Xbox, GameCube
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2019), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars Jedi Knight:
Jedi Academy (2003)
Windows, Mac, Xbox
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)


===
Rogue Squadron ===
Star Wars: Rogue Squadron (1998)
Windows, Nintendo 64
Star Wars Rogue Squadron II:
Rogue Leader (2001)
GameCube
Star Wars Rogue Squadron III: Rebel Strike (2003)
GameCube


===
Star Wars Racer ===
Star Wars
Episode
I: Racer (1999)
– Windows, Mac, Dreamcast, Nintendo 64, Game Boy Color
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2020), PlayStation 4 (2020)
Star Wars: Racer Arcade (2000) –
Arcade
Star Wars Racer Revenge (2002) – PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation Store (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)


===
Galactic Battlegrounds ===
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds (2001)
Windows, Mac
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Galactic Battlegrounds:
Clone Campaigns (2002)
Windows, Mac


===
Starfighter ===
Star Wars: Starfighter (2001) Windows, PlayStation 2
Star Wars:
Starfighter Special Edition (2001)
Xbox
Star Wars: Starfighter (2003)
Arcade
Star Wars: Jedi Starfighter (2002)
Xbox, PlayStation 2


===
Knights of the Old Republic ===
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic (2003) Windows, Xbox, Mac, iOS, Android
Star Wars:
Knights of the Old Republic II:
The Sith Lords (2005)
Windows, Linux (SteamOS), Xbox, Mac , Android
Star Wars:
The Old Republic (2011) (MMORPG)
Windows
Expansion(s)
: Rise of the Hutt Cartel (2013), Galactic Starfighter (2014), Galactic Strongholds (2014), Shadow of Revan (2014), Knights of the Fallen Empire (2015), Knights of the Eternal Throne (2016), and Onslaught (2019)


===
Star Wars: Galaxies ===
Star Wars Galaxies:
An Empire Divided (2003)
Windows (Shutdown)
Expansion(s):
Star Wars Galaxies:
Jump to Lightspeed (2004)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Episode III Rage of the Wookiees (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
Trials of Obi-Wan (2005),Compilation(s):
Star Wars Galaxies: Starter Kit (2005)
, Star Wars Galaxies:
The Total Experience (2005), and Star Wars Galaxies:
The Complete Online Adventures (2006)


===
Battlefront ===
The Battlefront series has been handled by two different developers.

Pandemic Studios

Star Wars: Battlefront (2004) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, Mac, Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Battlefront II (2005) – PlayStation 2, Windows, Xbox, PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront: Renegade Squadron (2007) –
PlayStation Portable
Star Wars Battlefront:
Elite Squadron (2009) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars Battlefront: Mobile Squadrons (2009) –
Mobile PhoneEA DICE

Star Wars Battlefront (2015) – PlayStation 4, Windows, Xbox One
Star Wars Battlefront II
(2017) – PlayStation 4, Windows,
Xbox One
===
Empire at War ===
Star Wars: Empire at War (2006
) Windows, Mac OS X
Expansion(s):
Star Wars: Empire at War: Forces of Corruption  (2006
) WindowsCompilation:
Star Wars: Empire at War:
Gold Pack (game and expansion package) (2007)
Windows


===
The Force Unleashed ===
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed
(2008) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii, Nintendo DS, iOS
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed – Ultimate Sith Edition (
2009) Windows, Mac OS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3
Star Wars:
The Force Unleashed II
(2010)
Windows, Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, iOS


===
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars animated series ===
Star Wars: The Clone Wars – Lightsaber Duels (2008) –
Wii
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Jedi Alliance (2008) – Nintendo DS
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars – Republic Heroes (2009) –
Windows, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS, PlayStation Portable, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii
Clone Wars Adventures (2010) – Windows, Mac (Shutdown)


==
Stand-alone titles ==
The following is a list of stand-alone Star Wars games that do not form part of a series, released primarily for consoles, personal computers, handhelds and arcade.
The titles are grouped together depending on the decade in which they were released.

=== 1980s ===
Star Wars: Jedi Arena (1983) – Atari 2600
Star Wars: Droids (1988) – Amstrad CPC,
ZX Spectrum


=== 1990s ===
Star Wars: Shadows of the Empire (1996) – Nintendo 64, Windows
Star Wars: Masters of Teräs Käsi (1997) – PlayStation
Star Wars: Yoda Stories (1997) –
Windows
Re-released for: Game Boy Color (1999)
Star Wars: Rebellion (Star Wars: Supremacy – UK) (1998) –
Windows
Star Wars Trilogy Arcade (1998) –
Arcade
Star Wars
Millennium Falcon CD-Rom Playset (1998) –
Windows


=== 2000s ===
Star Wars: Force Commander (2000) –
Windows
Star Wars: Demolition (2000) – PlayStation, Dreamcast
Star Wars: Super Bombad Racing (2001) – PlayStation 2
Star Wars: Bounty Hunter (2002) – GameCube, PlayStation 2
Re-released for: PlayStation 3 (2015), PlayStation 4 (2019)
Star Wars: Flight of the Falcon (2003) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars Trilogy:
Apprentice of the Force (2004) –
Game Boy Advance
Star Wars: Republic Commando (2005) – Xbox, Windows
Re-released for: Nintendo Switch (2021), PlayStation 4 (2021)
Star Wars: Lethal Alliance (2006) – PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS
Star Wars: The Best of PC (2006) –
Windows


=== 2010s
===
Star Wars Battle Pod (2014) –
Arcade
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) –  Card trading
Vader Immortal (2019) –
Oculus Rift, Oculus Quest, PlayStation VR
Star Wars Jedi:
Fallen Order (2019) –
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Stadia


=== 2020s ===
Star Wars: Squadrons (2020) – Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One
Star Wars:
Tales from the Galaxy's Edge (2020) – Oculus Quest
== Games by genre ==
The following games are grouped together because they share the same genre, rather than because they are officially part of the same series.
Excluded are the games listed above.
===
Table games ===
Star Wars Chess (1993) – DOS, Sega CD, Windows
Monopoly Star Wars (1997) –
Windows


===
Pinball ===


====
Physical pinball ====
The Empire Strikes Back by Hankin
(1980)Star Wars by Data East (1992)
Star Wars
Original Trilogy by Sega Pinball (1997)
Star Wars
Episode
I by Williams (1999)
Star Wars by Stern Pinball
(2017)
Star Wars
The Pin by Stern Pinball (2019)


====
Virtual pinball ====
Star Wars Pinball (2013
) Windows, Mac, Wii U, Xbox 360, 3DS, PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Kindle Fire, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode V:
The Empire Strikes Back (2013)
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Boba FettStar Wars Pinball:
Balance of the Force (2013)
Xbox 360,
PSVita, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Android, iOS
Star Wars Episode VI:
Return of the Jedi (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Darth Vader
Star Wars Pinball:
Starfighter AssaultStar Wars Pinball:
Heroes Within (2014)
Xbox 360, PSVita, PS3, PS4, Android, iOS

Star Wars Pinball: Masters of the Force
Star Wars Episode IV:
A New Hope (2013)
Star Wars Pinball:
Droids
Star Wars Pinball:
Han SoloStar Wars Pinball:
Star Wars Rebels (2015)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Force Awakens (2016)
Star Wars Pinball:
Star Wars: Resistance
Star Wars Pinball:
Might of the First OrderStar Wars Pinball: Rogue One (2017)
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi (2018)

Star Wars Pinball:
Ahch-To Island
Star Wars Pinball:
The Last Jedi - SurviveStar Wars Pinball:
Solo Pack (2018)
Star Wars Pinball:
Solo
Star Wars Pinball:
Calrissian Chronicles
Star Wars Pinball:
Battle of MimbanA twentieth pinball table, based on the first season of The Mandalorian, was announced to be in development in late October of 2020 and due for a spring 2021 release.

===
Kinect Motion Sensor ===
Kinect Star Wars (2012)
(Kinect) Xbox
360


===
Educational ===
Developed by Lucas Learning:
Star Wars: Yoda's Challenge
Star Wars: The Gungan Frontier
Star Wars: Droid Works (1999)
Windows, Mac
Star Wars:
Pit Droids Windows, iOS
Star Wars Math:
Jabba's Game Galaxy (Developed by Argonaut Games)
Star Wars: JarJar's Journey Adventure Book
Star Wars:
Anakin's Speedway
Star Wars:
Early Learning Activity CenterOther educational:
Star Wars: Jedi Math (2008)
(Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars: Jedi Reading (2008) (Educational)
Leapster
Star Wars:
The Clone Wars (2008)
(Platform/Educational)
Didj
Star Wars: Jedi Trials (2009)
Didj


===
Jakks Pacific-
Plug It
In & Play TV Games ===
Star Wars: Lightsaber Battle Game (2005)
Handheld TV game
Star Wars: Revenge of the Sith (2005) – Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars GameKey (expansion)
(2006)
Star Wars:
Original Trilogy (2007)
Jakks Pacific TV Game
Star Wars: Republic Squadron (2009)
Jakks Pacific TV Game


===
Non-video game PC software ===
Star Wars Screen Entertainment (1994) (Screensaver) –
Windows
Star Wars:
Behind the Magic (1998) (CD-ROM encyclopedia) – Windows, Macintosh


==
Mobile titles ==
The following is a list of Star Wars titles that are only for mobile operating systems.

Star Wars: Battle For The Republic (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Grievous Getaway (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Battle Above Coruscant (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Republic Commando:
Order 66 (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Lightsaber Combat (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Trivia (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars:
Ask Yoda (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Puzzle Blaster (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars: Jedi Assassin (2005) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Imperial Ace 3D (2006) – Mobile Phone
Star Wars Cantina (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Trench Run (2009) –
iOS
Star Wars Battle of Hoth (2010) –
iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars Arcade: Falcon Gunner (2010) –
iOS
Star Wars: Imperial Academy (2011) –
iOS
Star Wars:
Force Collection (2013) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Tiny Death Star (2013) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Assault Team (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Commander (2014) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Galactic Defense (2014) – Android, iOS
Star Wars Journeys: The Phantom Menace (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars Journeys:
Beginnings (2014) –
iOS
Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes (2015) –
Android, iOS
Star Wars: Uprising (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Heroes Path (2015) – iOS
Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions (2015) –
Android, iOS, Windows Phone
Star Wars: Card Trader (2015) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Force Arena (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Puzzle Droids (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars: Jedi Challenges (2017) – Android, iOS
Star Wars:
Rise to Power (TBA) –
Android


==
Browser games ==
StarWars.com
Carbon Connection
Force Flight
Garbage Masher
Sharpshooter Clone Training (2008)
Live Fire (2008)
Clones vs. Droids
Ewok VillageDisney.com

Star Wars Rebels:
Ghost Raid – StarWars.com, Disney.com
(2014)
Star Wars Rebels: Rebel Strike – Disney.com (2014)
==
Crossovers ==
In some cases, Lucasfilm has allowed other video game franchises to do their own Star Wars games, resulting in crossover hybrid franchises.

===
Lego Star Wars ===
Lego made video games based on their Lego Star Wars toys, as part of their Lego video games franchise.

Lego main series
Lego Star Wars: The Video Game (2005):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, Nintendo DS,
Game Boy
Advance
Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy (2006):
Windows, Mac, PlayStation 2,  Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube, Nintendo DS, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars III:
The Clone Wars (2011): PlayStation 3, Xbox 360,  3DS, Wii,  Windows, Mac, Nintendo DS, Nintendo, PlayStation Portable
Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (2016):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 3,  Xbox One, Xbox 360, Wii U,  Mac, Nintendo 3DS, PlayStation Vita, iOS
Lego Star Wars: The Skywalker Saga (2021):
Windows, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X, Nintendo Switch
Compilation(s): Lego Star Wars:
The Complete Saga (2007) includes Lego Star Wars: The Video Game, and Lego Star Wars II:
The Original Trilogy.
Windows, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Mac, Nintendo DS, iOS, AndroidMobile game and web browser

Lego Star Wars: The Quest for R2-D2 (2009):
Unity
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault (2011) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars: Ace Assault 2 (2012) –
Windows
Lego Star Wars:
Battle Orders (2012) –
Unity
Lego Star Wars:
The Yoda Chronicles (2013) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars:
The New Yoda Chronicles (2014) –
Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Microfighters (2014) – Android, iOS
Lego Star Wars: Battles (2020) – Android, iOSLego
Indiana Jones
Lego Indiana Jones:
The Original Adventures (2008), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo and cameos from other Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Windows
Lego Indiana Jones 2:
The Adventure Continues (2009), LucasArts – Action-adventure game featuring cameos from Star Wars characters.
Wii, Nintendo DS, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, PlayStation Portable,
Windows


===
Angry Birds Star Wars ===
Angry Birds Star Wars (2012)
Angry Birds Star Wars II
(2013)


===
Roblox ===
Star Wars (2014-2019):
Windows, Xbox One, Xbox One S, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift (VR) - Sponsors and events for Star Wars Rebels, Rogue One, The Last Jedi, Solo, and The Rise of Skywalker, which contained objectives with in-game virtual prizes (accessories and gears) attached to the events’ respective games, as well as free items in the Catalog (currently known as the Avatar Shop) for 1 ticket or for free.
List of sponsors:
Star Wars Rebels:
Season One (2014)
Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two (2015)List of events:

Universe (2016) - Sponsored by Rogue One: A Star Wars Story
Space Battle (2017) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Last Jedi
Battle Arena (2018) - Sponsored by Solo: A Star Wars Story
Galactic Speedway Creator Challenge (2019) - Sponsored by Star Wars:
The Rise of SkywalkerAdditional notes:
Besides the main events, a Disney XD crossover event known as Summer Camp (2015) included a virtual prize of the Star Wars: Rebels character, Chopper, in the form of a tiny shoulder pal.

The event also included promotional billboards of the Star Wars: Rebels TV series in the maps of the events’ respective games.

Similarly to Summer Camp (2015), Disney Infinity 3.0 was also featured as a sponsored event in 2015, and had the maps decorated in the games that were part of the event that included promotional billboards that featured the characters Princess Leia, Darth Vader, Yoda, Anakin Skywalker and Sabine Wren.

While the characters were advertised in billboards in the events’ respective games, none of the actual virtual prizes or free items tied directly into any Star Wars media.

As part of the sponsor, Star Wars Rebels:
Season Two not only included free items, but was also featured on the promotional material of the billboards in the maps of two pre-existing games on the platform, and also included the limited-time branding on the games’ respective thumbnails.

===
Disney Infinity ===
The Disney Infinity series allowed the use of Star Wars characters alongside characters from other franchises owned by Disney, including characters from the Marvel and Pixar films.

Disney Infinity 3.0 (2015):
Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Xbox 360, Xbox One, Wii U, iOS, Android


===
The Sims ===
The Sims 4: Journey to Batuu (2020): Microsoft Windows, Mac, PlayStation 4, Xbox One - Ninth game pack for The Sims 4.
Adds a new destination world called Batuu with a Star Wars-style storyline.
Adds new types of aliens and other Star Wars-inspired outfits, objects and characters.

===
Minecraft ===
Star Wars (2020):
Windows, PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Amazon Kindle Fire, Amazon Fire TV, IOS, Android, Oculus Rift, Gear VR - DLC for Minecraft: Bedrock Edition purchasable through the Minecraft Market place.
Adds Star Wars maps, quests, mobs, skins, items and vehicles from the Original Trilogy and The Mandalorian into the game.

==
Cultural impact ==
This category refers to video games from other franchises where the inclusion of Star Wars characters is very minor and restricted only to small easter eggs or unlockable character cameos.

Night Shift (1990) – Platform game featuring action figures of various Star Wars characters.
Amiga, Atari ST, Commodore 64, Mac, PC, Amstrad CPC, ZX Spectrum
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater series:
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 (2001) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Darth Maul.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 4 (2002) – Skateboarding game featuring unlockable Jango Fett.
Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, PC
Secret Weapons Over Normandy (2003) – Flight simulation game featuring unlockable X-wing and TIE Fighter.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
, PC
Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction (2005) – Features unlockable character Han Solo.
Xbox, PlayStation 2
Soulcalibur IV (2008) –
Fighting game.
At release featuring Darth Vader exclusively in the PlayStation 3 version, with Yoda exclusively in the Xbox 360 version, and Darth Vader's apprentice Galen Starkiller Marek in both versions.
Months after the release, Darth Vader and Yoda were made available for purchase as downloadable content, each at the version they were absent at release.
Each of the Star Wars characters had his own ending on the "Story Mode".
However, in late 2016, all dlc in SoulCalibur IV was removed from the PlayStation and Microsoft stores due to licensing from the purchase of Star Wars by Disney.

Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings (2009) – Action-adventure game featuring unlockable Han Solo.
Wii, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS,
PlayStation Portable


== Canceled games ==
Games that were never finished, nor released.

Star Wars:
Return of the Jedi – Ewok Adventure – Atari
2600 (unreleased)
Star Wars: Battlefront III (2008) PlayStation 3, Windows, Xbox 360
Star Wars: First Assault (2012) (First-person shooter)
Star Wars 1313 (2013)
(Action-adventure)
Star Wars Outpost (2013)
Star Wars: Attack Squadrons (2014)
Star Wars: Battle of the Sith Lords (2015) (Action-adventure)
Star Wars: Knights of the Old Republic III (Windows, Xbox)
Star Wars: The Force Unleashed III (Windows, Wii U, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)
Project Ragtag (Windows, Xbox One, PlayStation 4)


==
References ==
Angry Birds Go!
was a kart racing game and the eighth game in the Angry Birds video game series.
The game was co-developed by Rovio Entertainment and Exient Entertainment, and was released on November 15, 2013.
The game was compatible with Hasbro Telepods that will allow the player to summon a specific kart.
The game's tracks are located on the 3D-rendered Piggy Island.
The game also featured upgradable karts and unique powers for each character.
As of October 2015, Go!
has been downloaded over 100 million times and team multiplayer was added.
In 2018 Angry Birds Go!
stopped receiving major updates from Rovio.
As of December 2019, the game has been hidden/removed from the App Store and the Google Play Store, silently being discontinued.

In mid-2020s, the game was finally removed from the App Store and Google Play, however, the game can still be played by downloading it through other pages, it's unknown if the game will ever be returned to App Store or Google Play.

==
Gameplay ==
In Angry Birds Go!,
players can choose how they want to move their kart.
If players choose "tilt", they must the tilt the device into the direction
they want the kart to move into.
If players choose "touch", players must then tap on either the left or right part of the screen to move the kart to the left or right respectively.
To start the race, they must pull the kart back from a large slingshot, then release when the "GO!"
text appears.
If players release it early, all other opponents will also launch early, but the player's kart will spin, slowing it down.
Players can collect coins while racing.
Players can also use a character's special power, depending on the bird or pig they selected to race.
But instead of collecting it on the track, they charge up, and be reusable in a race for three gems.
The races, however, has no laps whatsoever and when finished with the race one energy unit, originally shown as cupcakes, is lost and is slowly regained with time.

When players are not racing, they may use the collected coins to upgrade their kart.
This feature is essential on progressing for certain race types may only be repeated if a kart's CC or "Cake Capacity" is high enough, which can be increased by upgrading.
Players can also change characters when not racing, for each character has their own unique special power, that can greatly help players on certain race types, and most importantly if the chosen racer is out of energy.

Gems are an in-game currency that is either purchased with real money or slowly gained by competing races.
This may be used to buy additional karts.

The July 2015 update added Formula One driver Ayrton Senna to the character roster, he is similar to Chuck and is playable permanently.
The update also came with a way to earn Senna's racing helmet in-game by placing in 41 races with Senna; this is the number of races won during Senna's career.
In June 2016, the game was overhauled to version 2.0.
Players can race (or visit an ad every few hours) to earn tickets, which can be redeemed to open treasure chests containing coins, gems, and parts.
The parts can be used to upgrade karts.
Energy was still used to initiate races, and it recharges with time, watching ads, and/or spending gems.

===
Race types ===
There are different types of racing for each of the courses:
Race is a downhill race against up to seven other opponents.

Time Boom is a solo challenge where you have to reach the finish before the timer runs out, while also avoiding obstacles.

Fruit Splat is either solo or against up to two other racers where you have to hit a set number of fruits.
After the fruit meter is emptied, the fruits change to coins.
On the Sub Zero course, it is called "Ice Splat", where the fruits are replaced by ice cream sandwiches and related sweet treats.

Versus is against another racer with Easy, Medium and Hard option to choose for vary of difficulty or coins earned when won.

Champion Chase is a head-to-head race against a new racer; after three wins you will unlock the racer.
(
version 1.0 only)
Slalom (only in Sub Zero and Weekly Tournament) is a race type involves driving through gates in a certain amount of time.
Every time you miss a gate, a portion of time is taken off the clock and 5 TNT crates drop in front of your kart.
(
version
1.0 only)In version 1.0, for Race, Time Boom and Fruit Splat races
, these can only be played for five rounds with increase in difficulty until all five rounds each are completed, and then players can complete challenges.
Each race type except "Versus" has a CC (Cake Capacity, earned from getting upgrades) requirement before you can enter that race type each time.
In addition, there is a Jenga mode unlocked either by entering a code from the Angry Birds Jenga toy or with an in-app purchase; this has the racer going down a ramp to smash into blocks and pigs.

In version 2.0, Race, Time Boom, and Fruit Splat are the main types of racing.
Versus is available against Boss characters.

==
Development ==
On 12 June 2013, developer Rovio Entertainment posted a teaser trailer website showing the Red Bird speeding into the distance after a "Ready, Set, Go" countdown.
The teaser fueled speculation by journalists and fans that the game would be either a racing game or an endless running game.
Rovio decided the kart racing was a good fit due to supply and demand - there were calls on various forums for a mobile karting game.
Angry Birds Go!
was one of the first apps released simultaneously on the four major smartphone platforms: iOS, Android, Windows Phone and BlackBerry 10.
This app supports Rovio accounts so players can sync progress between different devices on the same operating system.

In version 2.0, the game was completely redesigned with a new chapter structure.
Races can be replayed although rewards for each challenge are given only once.
Daily challenges and tournaments involving a selection of active online players trying to accumulate points in a limited time enable players to win tickets, which can be redeemed for upgrade parts, coins, and gems.
Coins can also be used to buy upgrade parts.

===
Telepods ===
Telepods are figures created by Hasbro that was first used for Angry Birds Star Wars II.
It allows you to summon a specific kart, but not the specific racer shown on the toy.
The summoned kart works in any track, but not all the karts can be played in every track.
If a kart of a locked course is summoned, it will unlock the course, but the only playable race type is the "Versus" mode of the first track.
When using Telepods, to summon the specific kart it is necessary to scan the QR code each time after the app is fully closed.

===
Multiplayer ===
Rovio announced on December 13, 2013 that the multiplayer feature will be included in the upcoming Spring 2014 update.
After the release of the May 2014 update, multiplayer was partially featured as a "Weekly Tournament", where the player tries to compete in five events against the player's Facebook friends, similar to Angry Birds Friends.

In the July 2014 update, multiplayer was further added within the game.
According to Rovio, this is part one of the update.
The online multiplayer is asynchronous, thus players are not competing with each other at the same time.
However, Rovio hints that part two of their update may contain synchronous online racing.
In the November 2014 update, multiplayer features team racing with 3 other racers at the same time, and night racing is an option.
In early 2015 update, local multiplayer where players can race each other if they are all using the same Wi-Fi network.
Then somehow in 2017, the same year that Rovio closed down production, the tournament will no longer work.

== Reception ==
The game has received mixed reviews, with a Metacritic score of 60/100 based on 24 reviews.
The Guardian liked the gameplay and was not overly bothered by the in-app purchases.
Tech2 did not like the energy system, which only allows you to play five races with a bird, after which they are locked unless you wait or unlock with crystals (which are slowly earned in-game or with an in-app purchase) and did not like the vehicle upgrade process using in-game currency that is slowly earned by racing or with an in-app purchase for coins.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Website from Rovio
Angry Birds Stella (also known as Angry Birds Slingshot Stella) was a puzzle video game and the second spin-off from the Angry Birds series, developed by Rovio Entertainment.
The game was marketed to females by using characters that have a spirit of female heroism and friendship, but was intended to appeal to all sexes.
Announced on February 13, 2014, Rovio stated that the game would be accompanied by a toy-line with Telepods, and a television series.
The game was released on September 4, 2014.This game is based on an Angry Birds character who was first introduced in the Angry Birds Seasons level set "Back to School", which was released in August 2012.

It begins with Stella leaving the rest of the Angry Birds
flock and setting off to Golden Island to visit four other friends for vacation.

However, Gale and an army of pigs steal Stella's photo album, which leads Stella and her friends to embark on a journey to retrieve it.

==
Gameplay in Angry Birds Stella ==
Just as in the original game of the series, players use a slingshot to shoot an assortment of birds to nearby structures, with an intent to pop all the green pigs that can be either near, in, or on the structures.

Players must also make use of each bird's unique abilities, activating them at strategic places and times while in flight to aid in defeating the pigs or destroying obstacles.

The December 2014 update, New Pigs on the Block, added a storyline that features Stella and her friends in their treehouse looking for their house's missing items that were stolen by the pigs.
They must complete random levels to retrieve the items.

== Sprites for players ==
Stella:
The main protagonist, a feisty galah who can parkour to shake things up.

Poppy:
A pale yellow cockatiel who can instantly drop down from mid-air, smashing obstacles along the way.

Dahlia: A young long-eared owl who can phase through solid obstacles, before unleashing a destructive blast.

Luca: A male california scrub jay with a ranged sonic attack that will destroy any fragile objects.

Willow: A western crowned pigeon who can blast through obstacles with a sharp change in direction.

Gale: A violet-backed starling who becomes Stella's nemesis, ruling over the pigs.

==
Telepods ==
This is the third game of the franchise to be compatible with Hasbro's Telepods, a toy line also used in other Angry Birds games, such as Angry Birds Star Wars II.
The Telepods are able to summon characters into the game that correspond to the scanned figure.

Other than this use, the Telepods pack may come with other toy pieces and accessories for normal playing.

==
Stella in other media ==


===
TV ===
Rovio announced an animated series based on the game, with the first episode released on November 1, 2014 on ToonsTV, named Angry Birds Stella.
The first episode was "A Fork in the Friendship", that shows how Gale, Stella's former best friend and queen of the pigs on Golden Island, separated from Stella and her other friends.

The series lasted for two seasons, ending just a few months before the release of the feature film based on the main Angry Birds series.

===
Books of Stella in Angry Birds ===
Rovio has partnered with Worldreader and Room to Read, two literacy charities, to produce a series of books featuring its Angry Birds Stella characters.
Stella also appears in some issues in various Angry Birds comic book series and short story collections.

Stella, along with Poppy, Luca, Willow, Dahlia and Gale was featured in a manga story published in the Nakayoshi magazine not long after the game was released, titled Stella:
Nana and the Magic English Words.

Belgian publisher Le Lombard later released a two-volume comic book series based on the spin-off in 2015 and 2017 exclusively in mainland Europe, first in France, before they were translated in Czech, Dutch, Spanish and German.

Willow appears on the front cover of Angry Birds Comics Quarterly: Monsters and Mistletoe, released on December 13, 2017.
Although she does not appear in any of the issue's four stories, this marks the first time any of Stella's friends have ever appeared in an English-language Angry Birds comic book.

More than a month later, Gale appeared in one issue in the year-long The Angry Birds Movie comic strip run, published by GoComics.

===
Film ===
Stella and all of her friends, except Luca, appear in the animated Angry Birds film adaptations with fully visibly wings and talons, as well as Gale, the spin-off's main antagonist.

However, they play very small, mostly non-speaking roles in these films.

As both films show that Stella's friends all lived in Bird Island in the first place, and that Gale was always a benevolent friend, they effectively retcon out the spin-off's plot and setting.

In The Angry Birds Movie, Kate McKinnon voices Stella, and Charli XCX voices Willow, while Maya Rudolph voiced Poppy for one scene without being credited.

Stella and her friends put together a welcome celebration for the Bad Piggies when they first arrived.

After the Pigs turned on the Birds and stole their eggs, Stella and Willow joined Red's effort to launch a counterattack on the Pigs and take back the stolen eggs, with the former being launched from the slingshot into Pig City.

Stella and most of her friends also appear in The Angry Birds Movie 2, but none of the voice actresses who portrayed some of them in the first film reprise their roles.

Stella is seen running an apple stand at the time, while Dahlia, Gale and Willow are later seen taking part in a speed dating session, with Dahlia and Willow being suitors to Chuck and Bomb respectively in a rare moment in Angry Birds history where any of Stella's friends have a face-to-face encounter with birds from the classic Angry Birds flock.

Gale and Dahlia are also enrolled in Avian Academy, unimpressed with Silver's invention, the Super String, despite the latter's knack for science in the source material.
Willow and Poppy both witnessed the destruction of Mighty Eagle's mountain cave, caused from an attack from Zeta, the film's main antagonist.

Stella, Poppy, Willow and Dahlia later attended the wedding of Mighty Eagle and Zeta after the latter is defeated.

===
Music ===
Willow, voiced by Charli XCX, sings the song "Explode", while performing with Stella and most of her friends as part of a welcome celebration for the pigs in The Angry Birds Movie.

The full song is available on the film's soundtrack, and was also released online as a free YouTube video by the soundtrack's distributor, Atlantic Records.

== Reception ==
The game has received generally mixed reviews with a Metacritic score of 66/100 based on 9 reviews.
Pocket Gamer said, "It's Angry Birds.
If you care about that any more then you'll probably find something to enjoy.
Just watch out for the timers.
"
Some reviewers have praised the game for its introduction of new characters and return to the original style of gameplay.

== Discontinuation ==
After the release of Angry Birds Stella, a third, unnamed episode was teased at the end of the game's second episode, but the episode was cancelled, and the game was discontinued on September 8, 2015.
However, Stella's adventures continue in Angry Birds POP!
and the second and final season of the Angry Birds Stella series.
==
Other games ==
Stella and her friends also appeared in Angry Birds Stella POP!,
a bubble shooter tile matching game.

The game was soft launched for iOS in Canada on December 22, 2014 and released worldwide for iOS and Android on March 12, 2015.

A few months later, however, on July 6, 2015, the game was retitled Angry Birds Pop as classic Angry Birds characters crossed over into the game, making it the first and only one in the series to have both classic Angry Birds heroes and Stella's friends together.

Stella, Willow and Gale were also planned to appear in Angry Birds Holiday, an endless business management simulator where birds as they appear in The Angry Birds Movie would run a vacation resort and offer services to incoming pigs, but the game was cancelled by the end of 2016.

After Stella was added as a non-playable character to the 2018 game Angry Birds Dream Blast, her friends made a cameo appearance in the Christmas 2019 event "Holiday Gathering", where they were all invited by Mighty Eagle along with the entire original flock except Hal, Bubbles and Terence, to a banquet for a holiday celebration.

For a limited time, players were challenged to complete an increasing number of levels to invite each Bird to the banquet.

All of the Birds are depicted as younger versions of themselves as they appeared in the animated films.

== See also ==
List of Angry Birds Stella episodes


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Rovio Entertainment Oyj (formerly Relude Oy and Rovio Mobile Oy and doing business internationally as the Rovio Entertainment Corporation) is a Finnish video game developer based in Espoo.
Founded in 2003 by Helsinki University of Technology students Niklas Hed, Jarno Väkeväinen and Kim Dikert, the company is best known for the Angry Birds franchise.
The company currently operates studios in Espoo, Stockholm, Copenhagen and Montreal.

==
History ==
In 2003, three students from the Helsinki University of Technology, Niklas Hed, Jarno Väkeväinen and Kim Dikert, participated in a mobile game development competition at the Assembly demo party sponsored by Nokia and Hewlett-Packard.
A victory with a mobile game called King of the Cabbage World led the trio to set up their own company, Relude.
King of the Cabbage World was sold to Sumea, and renamed to Mole War, which became one of the first commercial real-time multiplayer mobile games.
In January 2005, Relude received its first round of investment from a business angel, and the company changed its name to Rovio Mobile, where "rovio" translates from Finnish as "pyre".
In 2009, Mikael Hed became the CEO.
In December 2009, Rovio released Angry Birds, its 52nd game, a puzzle game where a bird is flung at pigs using a slingshot for the iPhone; it reached No.
1 spot in the Apple App Store paid apps chart after six months, and remained charted for months after.
In March 2011, Rovio raised $42 million in venture capital funding from Accel Partners, Atomico and Felicis Ventures.
In July 2011, the company changed its name to Rovio Entertainment.
In June 2011, the company hired David Maisel to lead their Angry Birds movie production.
By October 2011, Rovio purchased Kombo, a Helsinki-based animation company.
The animation studio was acquired to produce a series of short videos released in 2012.
In March 2012, Rovio acquired Futuremark Game Studios, the game development division of benchmarking company Futuremark, for an undisclosed sum.
In May 2012, Rovio announced that its game series Angry Birds had reached its one billionth download.
In July 2012, Rovio announced a distribution partnership with Activision to bring the first three Angry Birds titles to video game consoles and handhelds, in a collection named Angry Birds Trilogy.
It was released in September 2012.
In November 2012, Rovio released Angry Birds Star Wars, an iteration of its popular game licensed from the Star Wars original trilogy, for mobile devices and PC.
Rovio partnered with Activision again to port the title to video game consoles and handhelds, with it being released on those platforms in October 2013.
A sequel, Angry Birds Star Wars II, based on the Star Wars prequel trilogy, was released in September 2013.

In March 2013, Rovio launched its multi-platform Toons.
TV channel starting with Angry Birds Toons.
As of 2013, Rovio became a video game publisher and is publishing third party games through its Rovio Stars program.
The channel was discontinued in 2017.

In January 2014, Rovio announced that its game series Angry Birds had reached its two billionth download.
In addition, it was revealed that their flagship series, Angry Birds, "leaked data" to third-party companies, possibly to surveillance agencies like the NSA.
In retaliation, anti-NSA hackers defaced Rovio's website.
In May 2014, Rovio launched a new publishing arm, Rovio LVL11, to release experimental games.
The first game published under Rovio LVL11 is Retry and the second is Selfie Slam.
As of June 2014, Rovio considers themselves an entertainment company, not just a game company.
This is reinforced by Rovio's merchandise and licensing business accounting for about half of their annual revenue of $216 million in 2013.In August 2014, Rovio announced that Mikael Hed would step down as CEO in January 2015 in favour of Pekka Rantala.
Hed remained on Rovio's board and became the chairman of Rovio Animation.
In December 2014, Rovio laid off 110 employees after net profits halved in 2013 due to its recent games,
Angry Birds Epic and Go!,
which have not been that successful as past games.
After this move, Rovio closed its Tampere studio, moving their operations to its Espoo location.
At the end of 2014, Rovio suffered from a 73% decrease in profit, earning only €10 million.
Pekka Rantala stated that the decrease is due to the poor sales of the licensed merchandise and the by-products of Angry Birds.
He also noted that "the company are unsatisfied over the result of our licensing business".
In August 2015, Rovio laid off 260 employees worldwide after Angry Birds toy and merchandise revenue fell by 43% during 2014.
In December 2015, Rantala announced that he would step down as the CEO and would be succeeded by Kati Levoranta, former chief legal officer of Rovio, in January 2016.On 16 January 2017, Rovio opened its new game studio in London to focus on massively multiplayer online games.
On 15 February 2017, Rovio announced that it will be cutting at least 35 jobs as it restructures the animation division.
In March 2017, Kaiken Entertainment, founded by former Rovio CEO Mikael Hed, acquired Rovio's animation division.
In March 2017, Rovio reported that it has returned to profitability with a gross revenue of US$201 million with the success of the Angry Birds Movie and its recent video games.
In June 2017, Kaj Hed resigned as chairman of Rovio and Mika Ihamuotila succeeded him as new chairman.
On 5 September 2017, Rovio announced its intention to become a publicly-traded company.
In October 2017, Rovio shares were sold at NASDAQ Helsinki and the company was valued at $1 billion.
On 2 March 2018, Rovio announced the closure of its London studio after disappointing results.
On 14 November 2018, Rovio announced that it appointed the former Gameloft executive Alexandre Pelletier-Normand as executive vice president of its game business unit.
He started his role on January 2, 2019.
On 30 November 2018, Rovio announced that they had fully acquired PlayRaven, the developer known for making strategy games such as Eve: War of Ascension.
On 3 June 2020, Rovio acquired Darkfire Games for an undisclosed sum.
The subsidiary will become Rovio Copenhagen.
On 21 December 2020
Rovio announced that Executive Vice President of games, Alexandre Pelletier-Normand, would take over as CEO.
The change went into effect on January 1 2021.

==
Games developed ==


=== 2003–2009 ===
Prior to creating Angry Birds, Rovio developed 51 games, a combination of work-for-hire projects, publishing contracts and independently released titles.

=== 2009–present ===
==
Television series ==
Angry Birds Toons (2013–2016)
Piggy Tales (2014–2019;
2014-2016 (Toons); 2016-2019
(Movie))
Angry Birds Stella (2014–2016)
Angry Birds Blues (2017)
Angry Birds BirLd Cup (2018)
Angry Birds
Zero Gravity (2018)
Angry Birds on the Run
(2018–2020)
Angry Birds MakerSpace (2019-2020)
Angry Birds Slingshot Stories
(2020)
Angry Birds Bubble Trouble (2020–2021)
Angry Birds:
Summer Madness (2021)


==
Feature films ==
The Angry Birds Movie (2016)
The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019)


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Official website
Star Wars Rebels is an American 3D animated science fiction television series produced by Lucasfilm Animation and set in the Star Wars galaxy five years before the original Star Wars film.
It takes place during the dark times, when the Galactic Empire is hunting down the last of the Jedi while a fledgling rebellion against the Empire is emerging.
The visual style of the series is inspired by the original Star Wars trilogy concept art by Ralph McQuarrie.
The series features new characters, along with some from the original trilogy and from the previous animated series, The Clone Wars.

The series premiered as a one-hour television film, Spark of Rebellion, on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channel prior to the premiere of the series on October 13 on Disney XD.
The second season premiered on June 20, 2015, with a one-hour television film, The Siege of Lothal.
The third season premiered on September 24, 2016, with the television film, Steps Into Shadow.
The fourth and final season premiered on October 16, 2017, with another one-hour television film, Heroes of Mandalore.
Its final episode aired on March 5, 2018.Dave Filoni, Simon Kinberg and Greg Weisman served as executive producers of the first season.
Weisman left the show after the first season.
Filoni was also the supervising director for the first two seasons, a role he relinquished after accepting a promotion that expanded his creative role into overseeing all Lucasfilm Animation projects; he chose Justin Ridge to succeed him for the third season.
Filoni assumed the role back for the fourth season.

The series has been generally well-received with several award wins and nominations.
Rebels garnered praise for its writing, characters, voice acting, score, and expansion of the franchise's mythology, although it received some criticism for its animation and perceived lack of depth.
The show was nominated for the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Animated Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Children's Program.
Rebels became the first recipient of the Saturn Award for Best Animated Series on Television, winning for its final two seasons.

A number of tie-in media have been released to expand upon the series' lore such as the comic book series Kanan, the novel A New Dawn, and the novel series Thrawn.
Characters, storylines, and elements introduced in the series would also appear in subsequent Star Wars media.

==
Premise ==
Fourteen years after the fall of the Galactic Republic and the Jedi Order and the rise of the Galactic Empire depicted in Revenge of the Sith, a motley group of rebels unite aboard a freighter starship called the Ghost and begin to conduct covert operations against the Imperial garrison on and around the planet Lothal and other planets that are menaced by the Empire.

== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Taylor Gray as Ezra Bridger, a teenage con artist who is taken in by Kanan to be trained as a Jedi.

Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus, formerly known as Jedi Padawan, Caleb Dume, who survived the events of Order 66.
He is Ezra's mentor and leader of the Ghost Crew.

Vanessa Marshall as Hera Syndulla, a Twi’lek pilot turned Rebel Commander and the daughter of Ryloth freedom fighter Cham Syndulla.

Tiya Sircar as Sabine Wren, a young Mandalorian warrior who's fixated on art.

Steven Blum as Garazeb "Zeb" Orrelios, a former Lasat honor guard member who wants the Empire to pay for enslaving his people.

Dave Filoni as Chopper (
credited as "Himself" prior to the series finale), Hera's astromech droid who can be a bit reckless.

David Oyelowo as Agent Kallus, a member of the Imperial ground team tasked with overviewing Imperial activities.

Dee Bradley Baker as Captain Rex (seasons 2–4), a former high ranking Clone trooper, who served under Anakin Skywalker in the Clone Wars.

Sam Witwer as Maul (seasons 2–3), a former Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who is attempting to hunt down Obi-Wan Kenobi.

Lars Mikkelsen as Grand Admiral Thrawn (seasons 3–4), a powerful high-ranking officer within the Galactic Empire.
===
Recurring ===
Jason Isaacs as Grand Inquisitor, a former Jedi Temple Guard who turned to the dark side and was tasked with hunting down surviving Jedi.

James Earl Jones as Darth Vader, an evil Sith Lord and apprentice to Palpatine who was once Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker.

Matt Lanter as Anakin Skywalker, a former Jedi Knight who became Darth Vader.

Ashley Eckstein as Ahsoka Tano, the former Padawan of Anakin Skywalker, who aids the rebellion with pivotal assets.

Stephen Stanton as Grand Moff Tarkin, an Imperial officer who oversees many of the Empire's activities.

Sam Witwer and Ian McDiarmid as Emperor Palpatine, the ruler of the galaxy and also known as Darth Sidious, Sith master of Darth Vader.

Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Governor Arihnda Pryce, a high-ranking officer of the Galactic Empire and Governor of the Lothal sector.

Forest Whitaker as Saw Gerrera, a Rebel extremist and a former freedom fighter.

Genevieve O'Reilly as Mon Mothma, the leader of the Rebel Alliance.
===
Guest appearances ===
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO, a protocol droid who assists allies in the rebellion.

James Arnold Taylor and Stephen Stanton as Obi-Wan Kenobi, a Jedi Knight in exile on Tatooine.

Frank Oz as Yoda, the wise and powerful Grand Master of the Jedi who is exiled on the planet Dagobah.

Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian, a smuggler in the underworld.

Nathan Kress as Wedge Antilles, a former Imperial TIE fighter pilot, who defects to the rebellion.

==
Episodes ==


==
Release ==


=== Broadcast ===
The first two episodes, titled Spark of Rebellion, premiered on October 3, 2014, on Disney Channels worldwide and on Family Channel in Canada.
In Australia, the series premiered on October 17 on Disney XD.
The Siege of Lothal premiered on June 28, 2015, and the second season debuted on October 18.
In Canada, the series premiered on October 19 on the DHX-owned Disney XD.
However, due to DHX Media losing the rights to Disney content, the show was later moved to Disney Channel.
The second season premiered on November 7, and it was moved to the Corus-owned Disney XD channel on December 1.In
the Middle East and Africa, Spark of Rebellion premiered on October 11 and the series debuted on October 18 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 10, followed the official season premiere on October 17.
In Southeast Asia, Spark of Rebellion premiered on Disney XD on October 4 and the series officially started on November 29.
Siege of Lothal premiered on October 3 on Disney XD and Disney Channel, and the second season was released on October 24.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series debuted on October 16 on Disney XD.
Siege of Lothal premiered on July 18, 2015, followed by the second-season debut on October 17.
===
Home media ===
Star Wars Rebels:
Spark of Rebellion was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD in the US at all retailers on October 14, 2014.
DVD bonus features include character shorts, a 3D model kit of the Ghost ship, and a preview of season 1.The
Complete Season
One of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 1, 2015, in America, and in Germany on September 10, 2015.
The Season 1 collection contains the expanded version of Spark of Rebellion with the Darth Vader/Grand Inquisitor prologue shown on ABC-TV.
The Complete Season Two of Star Wars Rebels was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on August 30, 2016, in North America.
The Complete Season Three of Star Wars Rebels was released on DVD and Blu-Ray on August 29, 2017.
The Complete Season Four is announced to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 15, 2018, in Germany, and July 31, 2018, in the United States.
The series is also available on the Disney+ streaming service, which launched on November 12, 2019.

== Reception ==


===
Ratings ===
In the United States, the one-hour special garnered 2.74 million viewers on Disney Channel and 2.40 million viewers on ABC.
Worldwide, it delivered a total of 6.5 million viewers.
On Disney Channel, the first and second episodes delivered 2.33 million and 1.92 million viewers, respectively.
The third and fourth episodes garnered 2.32 million and 1.84 million, respectively.
The fifth, sixth, and seventh episodes were watched by 1.43 million, 1.30 million, and 1.60 million viewers, respectively.
The eighth and ninth episodes got 1.92 and 1.44 million viewers, respectively.
In Canada, the second episode was watched by 274,500 viewers, making it the most-watched broadcast ever on the network.
In the United Kingdom, the film was the highest-rated broadcast that week, with 81,000 viewers.

===
Critical response ===
On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has received a 92% positive score, based on 12 reviews, and seasons 2, 3 and 4 have received a 100% score based on 6 reviews for season 2, 6 reviews for season 3, and 10 reviews for season 4, with an average rating of 8.17/10 for season 1, 7.38/10 for season 2, 9/10 for season 3, and 9.22/10 for season 4.
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 based on 4 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
IGN and Variety in particular had strong praise for the pilot film, Spark of Rebellion, with their only criticism being the appearance of the Wookiees in the film, being cited as not all that impressive compared to the rest of the animation.
SyFy Wire calls the series "Pure fun", further stating that it "captures the awe and joy of A New Hope" and is "thematically ambitious" with a "dramatic edge".

===
Accolades ===


==
Other media ==


===
Films ===
Chopper and the Ghost appear in the 2016 film Rogue One: A Star Wars Story.
Hera's surname is called on a loudspeaker at the Rebel base on Yavin IV, where Chopper can briefly be seen.
In addition, the Ghost takes part in the climactic battle over Scarif.
The Ghost also appears in the 2019 film Star Wars:
The Rise of Skywalker during the final battle over Exegol.
The voice of Freddie Prinze Jr. as Kanan Jarrus can also be heard in the film as one of the voices of Jedi past who provide Rey with encouragement to defeat Emperor Palpatine.

===
Novels ===
On September 2, 2014, Del Rey Books published Star Wars: A New Dawn, a prequel novel by John Jackson Miller telling the story of how Kanan and Hera met (set about six years before the series).
One of the first canon Star Wars novels to be released by Disney, it also introduces Imperial captain Rae Sloane, who is later a grand admiral in the Aftermath trilogy (2015–2017).
It includes a foreword by Dave Filoni.

In 2017, a new novel, entitled Thrawn, was released.
The book marked the entrance of Grand Admiral Thrawn into the current canon.
It was written by the character's original creator, Timothy Zahn.

A sequel to Thrawn, titled Thrawn: Alliances, was released on July 24, 2018.

It explored Thrawn's partnerships with Darth Vader and Anakin Skywalker.
Another Thrawn novel, Thrawn: Treason was released on July 23, 2019.
It takes place during the events of Rebels' fourth season.
Hera Syndulla would go on to appear in Alexander Freed's Star Wars:
Alphabet Squadron novel trilogy, as a general of the recently christened New Republic's eponymous starfighter squadron in the final days of the Galactic Civil War, hunting down the weakened Imperial forces after the battle of Endor and the death of Emperor Palpatine.

===
Comics ===
From April 1, 2015, through March 16, 2016, Marvel Comics published a 12-issue comic series, titled Kanan, and set during the events of the first season.
Written by former executive producer of the series Greg Weisman and illustrated by Pepe Larraz, Jacopo Camagni and Andrea Broccardo, the story is centered on Kanan having flashbacks to his days as a Padawan in the Jedi Temple and the Clone Wars.
The other members of the Ghost crew also appear.
In the summer of 2017, Marvel announced that a comic book miniseries adaptation of Zahn's Thrawn novel was being planned, scheduled to be released in early 2018.

The first issue was released on February 14, 2018, with new issues being released over the following five months.

A few days after the series finale was aired, IDW Publishing released the seventh issue of the long-running Star Wars Adventures multi-era comic book series, which contained the first of a two-part comic arc, set between the second and third season, in which the Spectres embark on a mission to save a rare endangered bird from Imperial custody.

The second part appeared in the next issue, which was released on March 28, 2018.

===
Video games ===
A side-scrolling run-and-gun game based on the show's first season, titled Star Wars Rebels: Recon Missions, was released by Disney Mobile on iOS, Android, and Windows Store in early 2015, before being discontinued on July 28, 2016, due to the limitations of the support team.
Ezra Bridger is the only playable character, with other characters available via in-app purchases, which also grant early access to most of the game's levels in the mobile versions and are required to play the full campaign in the Windows Store version.

Additionally, several of the characters from the series are playable in other games such as Disney Infinity 3.0, Angry Birds Star Wars II, Roblox (as virtual accessories and gears), Lego Star Wars:
The Force Awakens (as downloadable content only),
Star Wars:
Galactic Defense, Star Wars:
Force Arena and Star Wars: Galaxy of Heroes.

Vanessa Marshall reprises her role as Hera Syndulla for the 2020 video game Star Wars:
Squadrons, providing voice work and motion capture for the character.

==
Themes ==


===
Historical influences ===
Characters in Star Wars Rebels have taken influence from Biblical, Hebrew, and Greco-Roman mythological names.
Star Wars writers have often used biblical names for Jedi while giving galactic Imperial characters Roman names.
In 2015 an interview was conducted with Dave Filoni and Simon Kinberg where Kinsberg stated that they wanted to connect to the original films by using the biblical naming scheme seen in the films.

Both Caleb and Ezra are historically Hebrew names with Ezra translating to "Helper".
Characters with Roman names include Clone Captain Rex which translates to "King" in Latin along with Sabine Wren, Admiral Brom Titus and Admiral Kassius Konstantine.

==
References ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
See also ==
2015 in science fiction


==
External links ==
Official website
Star Wars Rebels at StarWars.com
Star Wars Rebels at IMDb
DK Publishing for Star Wars Rebels
Star Wars Rebels on Wookieepedia, a Star Wars wiki
