This is a list of weapons used by the United States Marine Corps:


==
Weapons used ==
The basic infantry weapon of the United States Marine Corps is the M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle.
Suppressive fire is provided by the M240B machine gun, at the squad and company levels respectively.
Marines at the rank of E4 and above rate the M17 semi-automatic pistol.
In addition, indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher in fireteams, M224a1 60 mm mortar in companies, and M252 81 mm mortar in battalions.
The M2 .50 caliber heavy machine gun and MK19 automatic grenade launcher (40 mm) are available for use by dismounted infantry, though they are more commonly vehicle-mounted.
Precision fire is provided by the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System and M40A3, A5, A6 bolt-action sniper rifle.
The Marine Corps uses a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an offensive and defensive anti-armor capability.
The SMAW and AT4 are unguided rockets that can destroy armor and fixed defenses (e.g. bunkers) at ranges up to 500 meters.
The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles; both can utilize top-attack profiles to avoid heavy frontal armor and are heavy missiles effective past 2,000 meters that give infantry an offensive capability against armor.
Marines are capable of deploying non-lethal weaponry as the situation dictates.
Part of a Marine Expeditionary Unit earning the Special Operations Capable designator requires a company-sized unit capable of riot control.

Some older weapons are used for ceremonial purposes, such as the Silent Drill Platoon's M1 Garands, or the use of the M101 howitzer for gun salutes.

==
Active use ==


===
Non-lethal weapons ===
CS gas
OC spray
Rubber, beanbag, & plastic bullet
Riot shield
Baton
M6/M7 series chemical grenade
M84 stun grenade
Sting grenade


===
Bladed weapons ===
OKC-3S bayonet
Ka-Bar
Combat Knife
Marine NCO sword
Marine Officers' Mameluke Sword
Original United States
Marine Corps Machete


===
Handguns ===
Beretta M9
Beretta M9A1
Glock 19M - Adopted in February 2015 for use by MARSOC
M45A1
CQBP - Modified M1911A1, for use by MEU(SOC) and MARSOC.
Still in use by Recon Battalions and Security and Emergency Services Battalions.

M17 - Standard issue pistol since 2019
M18 - Standard issue pistol since 2019


===
Automatic Rifles and Carbines ===
M16A2 - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M16A4 - select fire.
Safe, semi, burst.
Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle - Support weapon based on the Heckler & Koch HK416 (itself a piston-driven M4) using a free-floating barrel.

Initially issued as a replacement for the M249, in 2018 the decision was made to adopt the M27 as the standard USMC assault rifle in infantry battalions.

MK18 Mod 1 - Modified M4 with 10.3-inch barrel.
Used by MARSOC
M4 Carbine - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M4A1 Carbine - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

Mk 17 Mod 0 used by MARSOC
Mk 16 Mod 0 used by MARSOC


===
Designated Marksman Rifles ===
M39 Enhanced Marksman Rifle - Improved marksman version of the M14 rifle.

Mk 12
Mod 1 - Improved marksman version of the M16 rifle.

M38 Designated Marksman Rifle - Modified M27 IAR fielded as a marksman rifle


===
Sniper Rifles ===
Mk 13 mod 7 - .300 Winchester Magnum chambered sniper rifle built on Accuracy International Chassis System with Remington 700 long action.

Mk 11 Mod 0 - 7.62×51mm
sniper rifle based on the M16 direct impingement gas system.

M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System - Improved version of the Mk 11, replacing the M39 and Mk 11.

M40 rifle - M40A3, M40A5 and M40A6
variants in use as sniper rifles.

Barrett M82 - in use as the M82A3 and M107 variants.
The M82A3 being an upgraded M82A1A, and the M107 being a variant made in response to requirements issued for an anti-materiel rifle.

M21 - modified M14 rifle


===
Shotguns ===
Remington 870 - as the M870 and Modular Combat Shotgun.

M1014 - semi automatic 12-gauge shotgun.

Mossberg
590A1 12-gauge pump


===
Submachine Guns ===
Colt 9mm SMG - variant of the M16 chambered in 9×19mm Parabellum
Heckler & Koch
MP5


===
Machine Guns ===
M2HB - heavy machine gun chambered in .50 BMG used primarily as a secondary weapon on the M1 Abrams and other vehicles.

M240G - 7.62×51mm medium machine gun used by infantry and in the M1 Abrams, light vehicles, and helicopters.

Mk48
Mod 1 - 7.62×51mm light machine gun, uses by US MARSOC.

M249E4 - 5.56×45mm light machine gun, infantry support weapon.
Not replaced, but being supplanted by the  M27 IAR.

===
Hand Grenades ===
M67 Hand Grenade (Fragmentation)
AN-M14 Hand Grenade (Incendiary)
Mk
141 Mod 0 Hand Grenade "flash-bang"
AN-M18 Smoke grenade


===
Grenade Launchers ===
M203A1/A2 40 mm Rifle-Mounted Grenade Launcher
M320 Grenade Launcher Module
M32 MGL 40mm 6
shot Revolver type Grenade Launcher
MK19 40 mm
Automatic Grenade Launcher


===
Mortars ===
M224 60 mm Mortar
M252 81 mm Extended Range Mortar
M327
120 mm Expeditionary Fire Support System


===
Artillery ===
M777 155mm
Lightweight Howitzer
High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS)


===
Shoulder-fired Missile and Rocket Launchers ===
M72 LAW
M202 FLASH
M136 AT4 Anti-Tank Weapon
MK153 Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW II)
FGM-148 Javelin Anti-Tank missile
BGM-71 Tube Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire Guided (TOW) Missile Weapon System
FIM-92 Stinger anti-aircraft missile


===
Vehicle-mounted Weapons ===
M240G 7.62 mm Medium Machine Gun
M2 .50 Caliber Machine Gun
M48 Turret-type .50 Caliber Machine Gun
MK19 40 mm Grenade Machine Gun
BGM-71 Tube Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire Guided (TOW) Missile Weapon System
M242
Bushmaster 25mm
Autocannon
M256A1
120 mm smoothbore gun


===
Aircraft-mounted Weapons ===
GunsGAU-12/U 25 mm Gatling gun
GAU-16/A .50 Caliber Machine gun
GAU-17/
A
7.62 mm automatic gun
GAU-21/
A .50 Caliber Machine gun
GAU-8
/
A Avenger 30mm Gatling cannon
M61A1
20 mm automatic cannon
M197
20 mm automatic cannonBombsCBU-99
Cluster Bomb
GBU-10
2000 lb laser-guided bomb
GBU-12 500 lb laser-guided bomb
GBU-16 1000 lb laser-guided bomb
MK82 series 500 lb bomb
MK83 series 1000 lb bomb
MK84 series 2000 lb bomb
Mk 77 incendiary
bombMissilesAGM-65 Maverick
AGM-84 Harpoon
AGM-88 HARM
AGM-114 Hellfire
AGM-154
Joint Standoff Weapon
AIM-7
Sparrow
AIM-9 Sidewinder
AIM-120
AMRAAM
Hydra 70
M260 70 mm Rocket Launcher
Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System


===
Other ===
M18A1
Claymore anti-personnel mine
M15 anti-tank mine
M19 anti-tank mine
M21 anti-tank mine
M58
Mine Clearing Line Charge (MICLIC)
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP)


===
Accessories ===
Advanced Combat Optical Gunsight (ACOG), recently renamed Rifle Combat Optic (RCO)
ITL MARS reflex sight
AN/PSQ-18 day/night grenade launcher sight
AN/PVS-10 night vision sight
AN/PVS-14 night vision sight
AN/PVS-17 night vision sight
AN/PVS-21 night vision sight
AN/PAS-13 thermal sight
AN/PAQ-4 IR laser sight
AN
/PEQ-2 IR laser sight
various suppressors (MARSOC and Reconnaissance units only)
various tactical lights
M2 tripod for light and medium machine guns
M122 tripod for light and medium machine guns
M3 tripod for heavy machine guns


==
Testing/limited use ==
Marines with MARSOC, Force Reconnaissance, and MEU(SOC)s occasionally use specialized weapons that the rest of the fleet does not.
In addition, some weapons are tested and evaluated in select units before acceptance and large-scale adoption.
In a few cases, older weapons are brought out of retirement for limited use.

M45A1 Close Quarter Battle Pistol - issued to MEU (SOC) forces
High Standard HDM (.22 LR) (USMC Force Recon, limited issue of 10 per company)
Heckler & Koch MP5-N  - MARSOC, Force Reconnaissance and SRT only
Multi-shot Accessory Underbarrel Launcher - in evaluation
Mk 18 CQBR - subcompact variant of the M4 carbine which replaces burst fire with fully automatic capabilities - Force Recon
FN SCAR - MARSOC
only
Mk 12 Special Purpose Rifle - MARSOC
only
Glock 19 - MARSOC


==
Retired ==
Bladed Weapons
M9 Bayonet
M7 Bayonet
M6 Bayonet
M5
Bayonet
Raider Stiletto
M1 Bayonet
M1942 Bayonet
M1917 Bayonet
M1905 Bayonet
Pistols
M1911
S&W Model 10
S&W Model 66
M1905 Marine
1873 Colt Single Action
Colt M1861 Navy
Colt 1851 Navy Revolver
Harper's Ferry Model 1805Rifles, Carbines, & Muskets
United States Marine Corps Squad Advanced Marksman Rifle (SAM-R)
Designated Marksman Rifle (DMR)
M16A1
/
M16A2
M14 Rifle
M1 Garand
M1917 Enfield
M1903 Springfield
Springfield Model 1892-99
M1895 Lee Navy
Springfield Model 1882
Short Rifle
M1872 Springfield
Spencer repeating rifle
Springfield Model 1863
Springfield Model 1861
1853
Enfield musket
Springfield Model 1855
M1819 Hall Rifle
Model 1816
Musket
Springfield Model 1812 Musket
Model 1795 Musket
M1/M2/M3 carbine
M50 Reising
Colt Model 733Submachine guns
Model of 1921 Thompson
Model of 1928 and M1928A1 Thompson
M50 and M55 Reising
M1 and
M1A1 Thompson
M3 and M3A1
Heckler & Koch MP5 (some variants)Machine guns
M1895 Colt–Browning machine gun
Hotchkiss M1909 Benét–
Mercié machine gun
M1917 Browning machine gun
M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle
M1919 Browning machine gun
M60
machine gunExplosives & Launchers
M61 hand grenade
Mk2 hand grenade
FGM-172
Predator Short-Range Assault Weapon (SRAW)
M79 grenade launcher
XM148 grenade launcher
M75 grenade launcher
M29 mortar
M19 mortar
M1 mortar
M2 mortar
M101 Howitzer
M102 Howitzer
M114 155
MM Howitzer
M59 Field Gun
M116 Howitzer
M67 Recoilless Rifle
M20 Recoilless Rifle
M47 Dragon Anti-tank Missile System
Bazooka Series Rocket Launcher
FIM-43
Redeye Anti-aircraft Missile
MIM-23
Hawk Anti-aircraft Missile
M2
FlamethrowerAircraft/vehicle-mountedM2/M3 cannon
M85
Machine Gun
M73/M219 Machine
GunOtherLinear
Infighting Neural Override Engagement (LINE)
Combat System
AN
/PVS-4 Night Vision Sight
AN/TVS-5 Night Vision Sight


==
See also ==
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
List of crew-served weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
Lists of weapons
List of firearms
U.S. Helicopter Armament Subsystems
Rubber duck (military)


==
References ==
This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Marine Corps.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Weapons of the United States Marine Corps at Wikimedia Commons
This is a list of countries that gives the percent of households with guns.
It is further broken down by the percent of households with handguns.
Also, by the percent of adults living in armed households.
The data is from GunPolicy.org which is hosted by the Sydney Medical School, at the University of Sydney in Australia.
GunPolicy.org consolidates this data from various sources.
To avoid problems with vetting the data for hundreds of countries from hundreds of sources, the table below only uses data compiled by GunPolicy.org.
See also: Estimated number of civilian guns per capita by country.
It provides estimates of the total number of civilian guns in a country.
It then calculates the number per 100 persons.
This number for a country does not indicate the percentage of the population that possesses guns.
This is because individuals can possess more than one gun.

==
Table ==
Note:
This is a work in progress.
Feel free to add GunPolicy.org data for more countries.
See the top of the talk page for more editing notes.
Sources column links to the specific country pages at GunPolicy.org


==
See also ==
Gun politics
Small arms trade
Small Arms and Light Weapons
List of countries by firearm-related death rate
Index of gun politics articles
List of countries by intentional homicide rate
Overview of gun laws by nation
Long gun
Handgun
Category:
Firearms


=
= References ==
An assault rifle is a selective-fire rifle that uses an intermediate cartridge and a detachable magazine.
Assault rifles were first put into mass production and accepted into widespread service during World War II.
The first assault rifle to see major usage was the German StG 44, a development of the earlier Mkb 42.
Though other Western nations were slow to accept the assault rifle concept, by the end of the 20th century they had become the standard weapon in most of the world's armies, replacing full-powered rifles and sub-machine guns in most roles.
Besides the StG 44, examples of assault rifles include the AK-47 and the M16.

==
Origin of term ==
The term assault rifle is generally attributed to Adolf Hitler, who, for propaganda purposes, used the German word Sturmgewehr (which translates to "assault rifle") as the new name for the MP 43, subsequently known as the Sturmgewehr 44.
However, other sources dispute that Hitler had much to do with coining the new name besides signing the production order.
The StG 44 is generally considered the first selective fire military rifle to popularize the assault rifle concept.
Today, the term assault rifle is used to define firearms sharing the same basic characteristics as the StG 44.
==
Characteristics ==
The U.S. Army defines assault rifles as "short, compact, selective-fire weapons that fire a cartridge intermediate in power between submachine gun and rifle cartridges.
"
In this strict definition, a firearm must have at least the following characteristics to be considered an assault rifle:
It must be capable of selective fire.

It must have an intermediate-power cartridge: more power than a pistol
but less than a standard rifle or battle rifle, examples of intermediate cartridges are the 7.92×33mm Kurz, the 7.62x39mm and 5.56×45mm NATO.

Its ammunition must be supplied from a detachable box magazine.

It must have an effective range of at least 300 metres (330 yards).Rifles that meet most of these criteria, but not all, are technically not assault rifles.

The more political term assault weapon is often conflated with assault rifle and does not require all of the characteristics above – especially the selective fire capability which is functionally illegal in the USA for civilian use, and thus irrelevant to the political discussion.

For example:

Select-fire M2 Carbines are not assault rifles; their effective range is only 180 metres (200 yd).

Select-fire rifles such as the FN FAL, M14, and H&K G3 main battle rifles are not assault rifles; they fire full-powered rifle cartridges.

Semi-automatic-only rifles like the Colt
AR-15 are not assault rifles; they do not have select-fire capabilities.

Semi-automatic-only rifles with fixed magazines like the SKS are not assault rifles; they do not have detachable box magazines and are not capable of automatic fire.

==
History ==


===
Sturmgewehr 44 ===
The Germans were the first to pioneer the assault rifle concept during World War II, based upon research that showed that most firefights happen within 400 metres (1,300 ft) and that contemporary rifles were over-powered for most small arms combat.
They would soon develop a select-fire intermediate powered rifle combining the firepower of a submachine gun with the range and accuracy of a rifle.
The result was the Sturmgewehr 44, an improvement of the earlier Maschinenkarabiner 42(H), and approximately half a million Sturmgewehrs were produced by the war's end.
It fired a new and revolutionary intermediate powered cartridge, the 7.92×33mm Kurz.
This new cartridge was developed by shortening the standard 7.92×57mm Mauser round and giving it a lighter 125-grain bullet, that limited range but allowed for more controllable automatic fire.
A smaller, lighter cartridge also allowed soldiers to carry more ammunition "to support the higher consumption rate of automatic fire.
"The
Sturmgewehr 44 features an inexpensive, easy-to-make, stamped steel design and a 30-round detachable box magazine.
"
This weapon was the prototype of all successful automatic rifles.
Characteristically (and unlike previous rifles) it had a straight stock with the barrel under the gas cylinder to reduce the turning moment of recoil of the rifle in the shoulder and thus help reduce the tendency of shots to climb in automatic fire.
The barrel and overall length were shorter than a traditional rifle and it had a pistol grip to hold the weapon more securely in automatic fire.
“
The principle of this weapon—the reduction of muzzle impulse to get usable automatic fire within the actual ranges of combat—was probably the most important advance in small arms since the invention of smokeless powder."
===
AK-47 ===
Like the Germans, the Soviets were influenced by experience showing that most combat engagements occur within 400 metres (1,300 ft) and that their soldiers were consistently outgunned by heavily armed German troops, especially those armed with Sturmgewehr 44 assault rifles.
On July 15, 1943, a Sturmgewehr was demonstrated before the People's Commissariat of Arms of the USSR.
The Soviets were so impressed with the Sturmgewehr, that they immediately set about developing an intermediate caliber automatic rifle of their own, to replace the badly outdated Mosin–Nagant bolt-action rifles and PPSh-41 submachine guns that armed most of the Soviet Army.

The Soviets soon developed the 7.62×39mm M43 cartridge, which was first used in the semi-automatic SKS carbine and the RPD light machine gun.
Shortly after World War II, the Soviets developed the AK-47 assault rifle, which would quickly replace the SKS and Mosin in Soviet service.
The AK-47 was finalized, adopted and entered widespread service in the Soviet army in the early 1950s.
Its firepower, ease of use, low production costs, and reliability were perfectly suited for the Red Army's new mobile warfare doctrines.
In the 1960s, the Soviets introduced the RPK light machine gun, itself an AK-47 type weapon with a bipod, a stronger receiver, and a longer, heavier barrel that would eventually replace the RPD light machine gun.
The AK-47 has been continually worked upon, and improved.
The AKM, AK-74, and AK-12 have all been designed by Mikhail Kalashnikov, and have all been service rifles in the Soviet Union, and the later Russian federation.

The AK-47 was widely supplied or sold to nations allied with the USSR, and the blueprints were shared with several friendly nations (the People's Republic of China standing out among these with the Type 56).
As a result, more AK-type weapons have been produced than all other assault rifles combined.
As of 2004, "of the estimated 500 million firearms worldwide, approximately 100 million belong to the Kalashnikov family, three-quarters of which are AK-47s."

===
Battle rifles ===
The U.S. Army was influenced by combat experience with semi-automatic weapons such as the M1 Garand and M1 Carbine, which enjoyed a significant advantage over enemies armed primarily with bolt-action rifles.
Although U.S. Army studies of World War II combat accounts had very similar results to that of the Germans and Soviets, the U.S. Army failed to recognize the importance of the assault rifle concept, and instead maintained its traditional views and preference for high-powered semi-automatic rifles.
At the time, the U.S. Army believed that the Sturmgewehr 44 was "intended in a general way to serve the same purpose as the U.S. carbine" and was in many ways inferior to the M1 carbine, and was of "little importance".
After World War II, the United States military started looking for a single automatic rifle to replace the M1 Garand, M1/M2 Carbines, M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle, M3 "Grease Gun" and Thompson submachine gun.
Early experiments with select-fire versions of the M1 Garand proved disappointing.
During the Korean War, the select-fire M2 Carbine largely replaced the submachine gun in US service and became the most widely used Carbine variant.
Combat experience suggested that the .30 Carbine round was under-powered.
American weapons designers reached the same conclusion as the German and Soviet ones: an intermediate round was necessary, and recommended a small-caliber, high-velocity cartridge.

Senior American commanders had faced fanatical enemies and experienced major logistical problems during WWII and the Korean War, and insisted that a single powerful .30 caliber cartridge be developed, that could be used by the new automatic rifle, and also by the new general-purpose machine gun (GPMG) in concurrent development.
This culminated in the development of the 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge and the M14 rifle which was basically an improved select-fire M1 Garand with a 20-round magazine.
The U.S. also adopted the M60 GPMG, which replaced the M1919 Browning machine gun in major combat roles.
Its NATO partners adopted the FN FAL and Heckler & Koch G3 rifles, as well as the FN MAG and Rheinmetall MG3 GPMGs.

The FN FAL is a 7.62×51mm NATO, selective fire, automatic rifle produced by the Belgian armaments manufacturer Fabrique Nationale de Herstal (FN).
During the Cold War it was adopted by many North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries, most notably with the British Commonwealth as the semi-automatic L1A1.
It is one of the most widely used rifles in history, having been used by more than 90 countries.
The FAL was predominantly chambered for the 7.62mm NATO round, and because of its prevalence and widespread use among the armed forces of many western nations during the Cold War it was nicknamed "The right arm of the Free World".

The Heckler & Koch G3 is a 7.62×51mm NATO, selective fire, automatic rifle produced by the German armament manufacturer Heckler & Koch GmbH (H&K) in collaboration with the Spanish state-owned design and development agency CETME (Centro de Estudios Técnicos de Materiales Especiales).
The rifle proved successful in the export market, being adopted by the armed forces of over 60 countries.
After WWII, German technicians involved in developing the Sturmgewehr 45, continued their research in France at CEAM.
The StG45 mechanism was modified by Ludwig Vorgrimler and Theodor Löffler at the Mulhouse facility between 1946 and 1949.
Vorgrimler later went to work at CETME in Spain and developed the line of CETME automatic rifles based on his improved Stg45 design.
Germany eventually purchased the license for the CETME design and manufactured the Heckler & Koch G3 as well as an entire line of weapons built on the same system, one of the most famous being the MP5 SMG.
The G3 also served as the basis for the Heckler & Koch G36 assault rifle, which would become the Bundeswehr's service rifle, and a popular export.

===
M16 ===
The first confrontations between the AK-47 and the M14 ("assault rifle" vs "battle rifle") came in the early part of the Vietnam War.
Battlefield reports indicated that the M14 was uncontrollable in full-auto and that soldiers could not carry enough ammunition to maintain fire superiority over the AK-47.
And, while the M2 Carbine offered a high rate of fire, it was under-powered and ultimately outclassed by the AK-47.
A replacement was needed: A medium between the traditional preference for high-powered rifles such as the M14, and the lightweight firepower of the M2 Carbine.

As a result, the Army was forced to reconsider a 1957 request by General Willard G. Wyman, commander of the U.S. Continental Army Command (CONARC) to develop a .223 caliber (5.56 mm) select-fire rifle weighing 2.7 kg (6 lb) when loaded with a 20-round magazine.
The 5.56 mm round had to penetrate a standard U.S. helmet at 460 metres (500 yd) and retain a velocity in excess of the speed of sound, while matching or exceeding the wounding ability of the .30 Carbine cartridge.
This request ultimately resulted in the development of a scaled-down version of the ArmaLite AR-10, called ArmaLite AR-15 rifle.
However, despite overwhelming evidence that the AR-15 could bring more firepower to bear than the M14, the Army opposed the adoption of the new rifle.
In January 1963, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara concluded that the AR-15 was the superior weapon system and ordered a halt to M14 production.
At the time, the AR-15 was the only rifle available that could fulfill the requirement of a universal infantry weapon for issue to all services.

After modifications (most notably, the charging handle was re-located from under the carrying handle like it was on AR-10 to the rear of the receiver), the newly redesigned rifle was subsequently adopted as the M16 Rifle. "
(
The M16) was much lighter compared to the M14 it replaced, ultimately allowing soldiers to carry more ammunition.
The air-cooled, gas-operated, magazine-fed assault rifle was made of steel, aluminum alloy and composite plastics, truly cutting-edge for the time.
Designed with full and semi-automatic capabilities, the weapon initially did not respond well to wet and dirty conditions, sometimes even jamming in combat.
After a few minor modifications, the weapon gained in popularity among troops on the battlefield.
"Despite
its early failures, the M16 proved to be a revolutionary design and stands as the longest continuously serving rifle in American military history.
It has been adopted by many U.S. allies and the 5.56×45mm NATO cartridge has become not only the NATO standard, but "the standard assault-rifle cartridge in much of the world.
"
It also led to the development of small-caliber high-velocity service rifles by every major army in the world, including the USSR and People's Republic of China.
Today, many small arms experts consider the M16 the standard by which all other assault rifles are judged.

===
HK33 ===
During the 1960s other countries would follow the Americans' lead and begin to develop 5.56×45mm assault rifles, most notably Germany with the Heckler & Koch HK33.
The HK33 was essentially a smaller 5.56mm version of the 7.62×51mm Heckler & Koch G3 rifle.
As one of the first 5.56mm assault rifles on the market, it would go on to become one of the most widely distributed assault rifles.
The HK33 featured a modular design with a wide range of accessories (telescoping butt-stocks, optics, bi-pods, etc.)
that could be easily removed and arranged in a variety of configurations.

=== 5.56mm NATO ===
The adoption of the M16, the H&K33, and the 5.56×45mm cartridge inspired an international trend towards relatively small-sized, lightweight, high-velocity military service cartridges that allow a soldier to carry more ammunition for the same weight compared to the larger and heavier 7.62×51mm NATO cartridge.
The 5.56mm cartridge is also much easier to shoot.
In 1961 marksmanship testing, the U.S. Army found that 43% of ArmaLite AR-15 shooters achieved Expert, while only 22% of M-14 rifle shooters did so.
Also, a lower recoil impulse, allows for more controllable automatic weapons fire.
In March 1970, the U.S. recommended that all NATO forces adopt the 5.56×45mm cartridge.
This shift represented a change in the philosophy of the military's long-held position about caliber size.
By the middle of the 1970s, other armies were looking at assault rifle type weapons.
A NATO standardization effort soon started and tests of various rounds were carried out starting in 1977.
The U.S. offered the 5.56×45mm M193 round, but there were concerns about its penetration in the face of the wider introduction of body armor.
In the end the Belgian 5.56×45mm SS109 round was chosen (STANAG 4172) in October 1980.
The SS109 round was based on the U.S. cartridge but included a new stronger, heavier, 62 grain bullet design, with better long range performance and improved penetration (specifically, to consistently penetrate the side of a steel helmet at 600 metres or 2,000 feet).Also during the 1970s, Finland, Israel, South Africa and Sweden introduced AK type assault rifles in 5.56×45mm.
During the 1990s, Russia developed the AK-101 in 5.56×45mm NATO for the world export market.
In addition, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and Yugoslavia (i.e., Serbia) have also rechambered their locally produced assault rifles to 5.56mm NATO.

===
AK-74 ===
"The AK-74 assault rifle was a Soviet answer to the US M16.
"
The Soviet military realized that the M16 had better range and accuracy over the AKM, and that its lighter cartridge allowed soldiers to carry more ammunition.
Therefore, in 1967, the USSR issued an official requirement to replace the AKM and the 7.62×39mm cartridge.
They soon began to develop the AK-74 and the 5.45×39mm cartridge.
AK-74 production began in 1974,
and it was unveiled in 1977, when it was carried by Soviet parachute troops during the annual Red Square parade.
It would soon replace the AKM and become the standard Soviet infantry rifle.
In 1979, the AK-74 saw combat for the first time in Afghanistan, where the lethality of the 5.45mm rounds led to the Mujahadeen dubbing them "poison bullets.
"

The adoption of the 5.56mm NATO and the Russian 5.45×39mm cartridges cemented the worldwide trend toward small caliber, high velocity cartridges.
===
Compact assault rifles ===
Following the adoption of the M16 rifle, carbine variants were also adopted for close quarters operations.
The CAR-15 family of weapons served through the Vietnam War.
However, these Compact assault rifles had design issues, as "the barrel length was halved" to 10 inches which "upset the ballistics", reducing its range and accuracy and leading "to considerable muzzle flash and blast, so that a large flash suppressor had to be fitted".
"
Nevertheless, as a short-range weapon it is quite adequate and thus, [despite] its caliber, [the Colt Commando] is classed as a submachine gun.
"
Other compact assault rifles, such as the HK53, AKS-74U and the Daewoo K1, have been made and they have also been called submachine guns.

===
Bullpups ===
In 1977, Austria introduced the 5.56×45mm Steyr AUG bullpup rifle, often cited as the first successful bullpup rifle, finding service with the armed forces of over twenty countries.
It was highly advanced for the 1970s, combining in the same weapon the bullpup configuration, a polymer housing, dual vertical grips, an optical sight as standard, and a modular design.
Highly reliable, light, and accurate, the Steyr AUG showed clearly the potential of the bullpup layout.
In 1978, France introduced the 5.56×45mm FAMAS bullpup rifle.
In 1985, the British introduced the 5.56×45mm L85 bullpup rifle.
In the late 1990s, Israel introduced the 5.56mm NATO Tavor TAR-21.
In 1997, China adopted the QBZ-95
in the new 5.8×42mm cartridge, which they claim is superior to the both 5.56×45mm and the 5.45×39mm.
By the turn of the century, the bullpup assault rifle design had achieved worldwide acceptance.

===
Heckler & Koch G36 ===
The Heckler & Koch G36 is a 5.56×45mm assault rifle, designed in the early 1990s by Heckler & Koch in Germany as a replacement for the heavier 7.62mm G3 battle rifle.
It was accepted into service with the Bundeswehr in 1997, replacing the G3.
The G36 is gas-operated and feeds from a 30-round detachable box magazine or 100-round C-Mag drum magazine.
The G36 was made with the extensive use of lightweight, corrosion-resistant synthetic materials in its design; the receiver housing, stock, trigger group (including the fire control selector and firing mechanism parts), magazine well, handguard and carrying handle are all made of a carbon fiber-reinforced polyamide.
The receiver has an integrated steel barrel trunnion (with locking recesses) and a nylon 66 steel reinforced receiver.
The standard Bundeswehr versions of the G36 are equipped with a unique ZF 3×4° dual optical sight that combines a 3× magnified telescopic sight and an unmagnified reflex sight mounted on top of the telescopic sight.
Widely distributed, it has been adopted by over 40 countries and prompted other nations to develop similar composite designs, such as the FX-05 Xiuhcoatl.

==
Distinction from assault weapons ==
The term "assault rifle" is sometimes used interchangeably with the term "assault weapon".
According to the Associated Press Stylebook, "although the terms are often used interchangeably, some make the distinction that assault rifle is a military weapon with a selector switch for firing in either fully automatic or semi-automatic mode from
a detachable, 10- to 30-round magazine.
"
In the U.S., civilian ownership of machine guns, including selective-fire rifles, has been tightly regulated since 1934 under the National Firearms Act and since 1986 under the Firearm Owners Protection Act.

== See also ==
List of assault rifles
Comparison of the AK-47 and M16
Automatic rifle
Light machine gun


==
Citations ==


==
References ==
Rose, Alexander (2008).

American Rifle:
A Biography.

Bantam Dell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-553-80517-8.
==
Further reading ==
Crawford, S. (2003).
Twenty-First Century Small Arms.
MBI Publishing Company.
ISBN 0-7603-1503-5.

Cutshaw, C. (2006).
Tactical Small Arms of the 21st Century.
Gun Digest Books.
ISBN 0
-87349-914-X.
Halls, Chris (1974).
Guns in Australia.
Sydney:
Paul Hamlyn.
ISBN 0-600-07291-6.

Lewis, J. (2004).
Assault Weapons:
An In-Depth Look at the Hottest Weapons Around.
Krause Publications.
ISBN 0-87349-658-2.

Popenker, M., et al.
(
2004).
Assault Rifle:
The Development of the Modern Military Rifle and Its Ammunition.
Wiltshire:
The
Crowood Press Ltd. ISBN 1-86126-700-2.

Senich, P. (1987).
German Assault Rifle: 1935–1945.
Paladin Press.
ISBN
0-87364-400-X.


==
External links ==
Assault Rifles and their Ammunition: History and Prospects
Infantry Magazine on Assault Rifle Cartridges
Pre Sturmgewehr Assault Rifles
Assault weapons legislation in the United States refers to bills and laws (active, theoretical, expired, proposed or failed) that define and restrict or make illegal the manufacture, transfer, and possession of assault weapons.
How these firearms are defined and regulated varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.

The Federal Assault Weapons Ban enacted in 1994 expired in 2004.
Attempts to renew this ban have failed, as have attempts to pass a new ban, such as the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 (AWB 2013).
Seven U.S. states have assault weapons bans: three were enacted before the 1994 federal ban and four more passed before the federal ban expired.
The majority of states (43) have no assault weapons ban, although two, Minnesota, have training and background check requirements for purchasers of assault weapons that are stricter than those for ordinary firearms.
While there are no statewide assault weapon bans in Colorado and Illinois, local bans exist in certain cities or counties in each of these states.
In 2018, most Americans who were polled supported a ban on assault weapons.
The 1994 federal and 1989 state ban in California were prompted by the 1989 Cleveland Elementary School shooting in Stockton, California.
Existing and proposed weapon bans come under renewed interest in the wake of mass shootings, most recently after the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Connecticut.
In addition to state bans, Washington, D.C. and some U.S. counties and municipalities have assault weapons laws.

==
Federal assault weapons bans ==


===
Expired Assault weapons Ban of 1994 ===
In January 1989 34 children and a teacher were shot in Stockton California .
The gunman used a semi automatic AK-47 firearm; five children perished.
President George H.W. Bush banned all imports of semi automatic rifles in March 1989, and made the ban permanent in July 1989.
The assault weapons ban tried to address public concern about mass shootings while limiting the impact on recreational firearms use.
In November 1993 the ban passed the United States Senate.
The author of the ban, Dianne Feinstein D-CA, and other advocates said that it was a weakened version of the original proposal.
In January 1994 Josh Sugarmann, executive director of the Violence Policy Center, said handguns and assault weapons should be banned.
In May of that year former presidents Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and Ronald Reagan wrote to the United States House of Representatives in support of banning "semi-automatic assault guns."
They cited a 1993 CNN/USA Today/Gallup Poll that found 77 percent of Americans supported a ban on the manufacture, sale, and possession of such weapons.
Rep. Jack Brooks, D-TX, then chair of the House Judiciary Committee, tried to remove the ban from the crime bill but failed.
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act, commonly called the federal Assault Weapons Ban (AWB and AWB 1994), was enacted in September 1994.
The ban, including a ban on high-capacity magazines, became defunct (expired) in September 2004 per a 10-year sunset provision.

==
Proposed federal assault weapons bans ==


===
Proposed Assault Weapons Ban of 2015 ===
The proposed bill H.R.4269, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2015, was introduced on December 16 of 2015 to the 114th United States Congress, sponsored by Representative David N. Cicilline of Rhode Island along with 123 original co-sponsors.
It currently has 149 co-sponsors.
This legislation states that its purpose is "To regulate assault weapons, to ensure that the right to keep and bear arms is not unlimited, and for other purposes.
"The proposed legislation targets various firearm accessories, including the barrel shroud (a safety covering for the barrel of the firearm to prevent the operator from burning his or her hands as the barrel becomes heated after the firing of multiple rounds), pistol grip, and certain types of firearm stocks such as telescoping or collapsing stocks.
Also included are lists of various classes and models of firearms, including semi-automatic firearms, AR-15 style rifles, assault weapons, semi-automatic pistols, semi-automatic shotguns, and others, some of which have already been banned or restricted under existing legislation including grenade launchers.
The legislation also proscribes high-capacity magazines.

==
State assault weapon bans ==
Three U.S. states passed assault weapons bans before Congress passed the federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994:
California in 1989, New Jersey in 1990, and Connecticut in 1993.
Four others passed assault weapons bans before AWB 1994 expired in 2004:
Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts and New York.
===
California ===
California restricts the possession, sale, transfer or import of defined assault weapons to those individuals who possess a Dangerous Weapons Permit issued by the California Department of Justice.
In practice, very few Dangerous Weapons Permits are issued, and only under a very limited set of circumstances defined in state DOJ regulations.

==== 1989
====
In May 1989, California became the first state in the U.S. to pass an assault weapons law, after the January 1989 Cleveland Elementary School shooting in Stockton.
The Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989, or AWCA, restricted semi-automatic firearms that it classified as assault weapons: over 50 specific brands and models of rifles, pistols, and shotguns to those who were issued a Dangerous Weapons Permit by the California Department of Justice.
Since the Department of Justice generally does not give Dangerous Weapons Permits to ordinary citizens, the Roberti-Roos Act amounts to an effective ban on defined assault weapons in California.
It also banned magazines that it classified as large capacity (those able to hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition).
Guns and magazines legally owned at the time the law was passed were grandfathered in if registered with the California Department of Justice.

==== 1999
====
In March 1999, State Senator Don Perata introduced Senate Bill 23 (SB 23).
The bill had three provisions: to make illegal the manufacture, importation, sale or offer, or to give or lend any large-capacity magazine as defined as having the capacity to accept more than ten rounds; the addition of a "generic" definition list to the existing Roberti-Roos legislation; and the exemption to allow on and off duty and retired peace officers the use of assault weapons.
They are defined in Penal Code §12276.1 and §30515.
The bill was passed and went into effect on January 1, 2000.

===
Connecticut ===
In June 1993, Connecticut became the third U.S. state, after California and New Jersey, to pass an assault weapons ban.
In April 2013, four months after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, the Connecticut General Assembly passed new restrictions to the state's existing assault weapons ban.
The law was challenged, but a federal judge upheld it and ruled it constitutional.
Gun owners said they would appeal.
Connecticut prohibits any person from possessing an assault weapon unless the weapon was possessed prior to July 1, 1994, and the possessor:

Was eligible to apply for a certificate of possession for the assault weapon by July 1, 1994;
Lawfully possessed the assault weapon prior to October 1, 1993, or inherited a defined assault weapon that was lawfully possessed prior to the aforementioned date; and
Is not in violation of Connecticut General Statutes §§ 53-202a to 53-202k (assault weapon regulations), and Connecticut General Statutes § 53-202o
(affirmative defense in prosecution for possession of specified assault weapon).
It also prohibits any person from distributing, transporting, importing into the state, keeping, offering or exposing for sale, or giving an assault weapon to any person.
Connecticut defines an "assault weapon" as:

Any "selective-fire" firearm capable of fully automatic, semi-automatic or "burst fire" at the option of the user;
Any semi-automatic centerfire rifle, regardless of the date produced, that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at least one of the following features:  1)
A folding or telescoping stock; 2) Any grip of the weapon, including a pistol grip, thumbhole stock, or other stock that would allow an individual to grip the weapon, resulting in any finger on the trigger hand in addition to the trigger finger being directly below any portion of the action of the weapon when firing; 3) A forward pistol grip; 4) A flash suppressor; or 5) A grenade or flare launcher;
A semi-automatic pistol that has an ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at least one of the following features:  1)
The ability to accept a detachable ammunition magazine that attaches at some location outside the pistol grip; 2) A threaded barrel capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward pistol grip or silencer; 3) A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel and that permits the shooter to hold the firearm without being burned (except a slide that encloses the barrel); or 4) A second hand grip;
A semi-automatic shotgun that has both of the following features:  1)
A folding or telescoping stock; or 2)
Any grip of the weapon, including a pistol grip, a thumbhole stock, or any other stock, the use of which would allow an individual to grip the weapon, resulting in any finger on the trigger hand in addition to the trigger finger being directly below any portion of the action of the weapon when firing;
A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has:  1)
a fixed magazine that can accept more than 10 rounds of ammunition; or 2) an overall length of less than 30 inches;
A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the ability to accept more than 10 rounds of ammunition;
A semiautomatic shotgun that can accept a detachable magazine; or
A shotgun with a revolving cylinder.
Connecticut also bans listed makes and models of semiautomatic firearms and copies of those firearms.
Grandfather clauses and other exceptions apply, depending.
===
Florida ===
See also:
Gun laws in Florida
It has been noted that the state of Florida had attempted to pass Assault weapon legislation at one point
When the state addressed this issue, it was unconventional in nature.
This was done because the legislature did not want lobbies such as the National Rifle Association influencing local laws as a result.
Because of this they used control groups instead of having lobbyist speak.
As a result, they were able to consult with Florida citizens over any future legislation.

===
Hawaii ===
Hawaiian law bans the manufacture, possession, sale or other transfer of what it defines as assault pistols.
Hawaii defines an "assault pistol" as a semiautomatic handgun that accepts a detachable magazine and that has two or more of:
An ammunition magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of the pistol grip;
A threaded barrel capable of accepting a barrel extender, flash suppressor, forward hand grip, or silencer;
A shroud that is attached to or partially or completely encircles the barrel and that permits the shooter to hold the firearm with the second hand without being burned;
A manufactured weight of 50 ounces or more when the pistol is unloaded;
A centerfire pistol with an overall length of 12 inches or more; or
A semiautomatic version of an automatic firearm.
In tandem with the assault pistol ban is a law that bans the manufacture, possession, sale or other transfer of detachable ammunition magazines with capacities greater than 10 rounds that are capable of use with a pistol.

===
Maryland ===
Maryland law prohibits the possession, sale, transfer, purchase, receipt, or transportation into the state of assault weapons defined as assault pistols and assault long guns.
Maryland's definition of an "assault long gun" includes a list of 45 specific firearms or their copies, with certain variations.
Maryland's definition of an "assault pistol" includes a list of 15 specific firearms or their copies, with certain variations.
Maryland also defines an assault weapon "copycat weapon" as:

A semiautomatic centerfire rifle that can accept a detachable magazine and has any two of the following: a folding stock; a grenade or flare launcher; or a flash suppressor;
A semiauto centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds;
A semiauto centerfire rifle that has an overall length of less than 29 inches;
A semiauto pistol with a fixed magazine that can accept more than 10 rounds;
A semiauto shotgun that has a folding stock; or
A shotgun with a revolving cylinder.
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the manufacture, sale or other transfer of detachable magazines with capacities greater than 20 rounds.
The United States Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to the Maryland ban in November 2017.
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the 4th Circuit in Richmond had upheld the ban, stating that: "[A]ssault weapons and large-capacity magazines are not protected by the Second Amendment."
Attorneys general in 21 states and the NRA had asked the Supreme Court to hear the case.

===
Massachusetts ===
Massachusetts law bans the sale, transfer, or possession of assault weapons not otherwise lawfully possessed on September 13, 1994.
Massachusetts defines "assault weapon" by the definition of "semiautomatic assault weapon" in the federal assault weapons ban of 1994.
That definition included:

A list of firearms by name and copies of those firearms;
Semi-automatic rifles and pistols capable of accepting a detachable magazine and having at least two specified characteristics; and
Semi-automatic shotguns having at least two specified characteristics.
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the sale, transfer, or possession of a large capacity feeding device unless such device was lawfully possessed on September 13, 1994.
The definition of "large capacity feeding device" included: a fixed or detachable magazine, box, drum, feed strip or similar device capable of accepting, or that can be readily converted to accept, more than 10 rounds of ammunition or more than 5 shotgun shells; or a large capacity ammunition feeding device as defined in the federal assault weapons ban of 1994.
===
New Jersey ===
In May 1990, New Jersey became the second state in the U.S. to pass an assault weapons ban, after California.
At the time, it was the most restrictive assault weapons ban in the nation.
AR-15 semi-automatic rifles are illegal in New Jersey, and owning and publicly carrying other guns require separate licensing processes.
Although it is commonly referred to as an assault weapons ban, New Jersey's law actually uses the term "assault firearm" to define banned and regulated guns.
Among the list of firearms identified as 'assault firearms' are the Colt AR-15, AK variants and all 'M1 Carbine Type' variants.
Some New Jersey gun advocates have called its laws "draconian."
Attorney Evan Nappen, author of several books on New Jersey gun laws, says the term is "misapplied and carries with it a pejorative meaning."
===
New York ===
New York law bans the manufacture, transport, disposal or possession of an assault weapon in the state.
It defines an "assault weapon" as:

A semi-automatic rifle or pistol able to accept a detachable magazine and that has at least one from a list of characteristics;
A semi-automatic shotgun that has at least one from a list of characteristics; or
A revolving cylinder shotgun.
In tandem with the assault weapons ban is a law that bans the manufacture, transport, disposal or possession of a "large capacity ammunition feeding device," defined as: "a magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or similar device that: 1) has a capacity of, or that can be readily restored or converted to accept, more than ten rounds of ammunition; 2) contains more than seven rounds of ammunition; or 3) is obtained after January 15, 2013 and has a capacity of, or can be readily restored or converted to accept more than seven rounds of ammunition.
"In
January 2016
the New York State Rifle and Pistol Association sued and a Federal Judge ruled that "the seven round limit is arbitrary and unenforceable," because of this, the limit in NY is now 10 rounds.

==
Local assault weapons bans ==
Some local governments have laws that ban or restrict the possession of assault weapons.

===
District of Columbia ===
A Washington, D.C. law banning the possession of assault weapons was upheld by a federal appeals court in 2011.
===
Illinois ===
The law that set up Illinois' concealed carry system in 2013 also established state preemption for certain areas of gun law, including restrictions on assault weapons.
Laws passed before July 20, 2013 are grandfathered in, and a number of local governments in the Chicago area have laws that either prohibit or regulate the possession of firearms that they define as assault weapons.
These include the city of Chicago and Cook County.
On December 7, 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States refused to grant a writ of certiorari to take up a challenge brought against a decision by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit which had upheld a local law banning assault weapons and large-capacity magazines in the Chicago suburb of Highland Park, Illinois.
In refusing to hear the case, the Supreme Court allowed the ruling to stand and the ban to remain in place.

===
Indiana ===
In March 1989 the Northwest Indiana cities of Gary and East Chicago city councils passed ordinances prohibiting both sale and possession of assault weapons.
Gary City Councilman Vernon G. Smith (D-4th) sponsored the ordinance making it a crime to possess or sell assault-type weapons.

Both of these ordinances were invalidated under statewide pre-emption legislation enacted by the Indiana General Assembly and signed into law by Governor Mitch Daniels in 2011.

===
Massachusetts ===
Boston has a law prohibiting the possession or transfer of assault weapons without a license from the Boston Police Commissioner.

==
Public opinion ==
Shortly after the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting, a CBS News poll found that a majority of Americans (57%) supported a ban on assault weapons.
Gallup noted a similarly high percentage of Americans thought that a ban would be an effective response to terrorism after the 2015 San Bernardino attack (55%), and in 2013 when the question was put in a referendum format ("Would you vote for or against a law that would reinstate and strengthen the ban on assault weapons that was in place from 1994 to 2004?") (
56% support).
But it noted that "Support for stricter gun control laws often rises after high-profile shooting incidents and then often subsides again," and that support for stricter gun controls, although still a majority view, had declined since the early 1990s.
By October 2016, support for an assault weapons ban had fallen to a historical low of 36%.In 2017 68% of American adults supported banning assault weapons, including 48% of gun owners and 77% of non-gun owners, and 38% of Republicans who own guns and 66% of Democrats who own guns, according to a Pew Research Center survey with an error attributable to sampling of +/-
2.8% at the 95% level of confidence.

==
References ==
During the First Indochina War (1946 –1954), Vietnam War (1955–1975), Cambodian–Vietnamese War (1977–1989), Sino-Vietnamese War (1979) and the Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979– 1991 (1979–1991), the Vietnam People's Ground Force relied almost entirely on Soviet-derived weapons and equipment systems.
With the end of the Cold War in 1992 Soviet military equipment subsidies ended and Vietnam began the use of hard currency and barter to buy weapons and equipment.

Vietnam prioritises economic development and growth while maintaining defense spending.
The government does not conduct procurement phases or major upgrades of weapons.
From the end of the 1990s the Government of Vietnam has announced the acquisition of a number of strategic systems equipped with modern weapons.
Accordingly, Vietnam has been slow to develop naval and air forces to control shallow waters and its exclusive economic zone (EEZ).
Currently most defence procurement programs focus on remedying this priority.
For example, Vietnam has purchased a number of combat aircraft and warships with the capability to operate in high seas.
Vietnam also plans to develop its defence industry, with priority placed on the Navy, combined with assistance from its former communist allies, India, and Japan.
Since 2015, Vietnam has begun exploring purchases of U.S. and European weapons while facing numerous political, historical, and financial barriers, as they cannot continue to rely on Soviet and Chinese weapons especially due to the increasing tensions in the South China Sea dispute.

==
Uniform equipment ==


==
Infantry weapons ==


==
Vehicles
==
==
Procurement ==
In 2006, Israel reported to the United Nations Register Organisation of Conventional Arms (UNROCA)
that two of its light armoured vehicles had been sold to Vietnam.
A number of Israeli companies won a bid to modernise and upgrade T-54/55 tanks as well as establishing factories in the country.
Israel's program includes upgrading armour, night vision system and a fire control system upgrade (produced in Poland).
In May 2002, Vietnam and Ukraine reached an agreement of military technical co-operation which extended to 2005.
Accordingly, Ukraine will support Vietnam primarily to upgrade its armour and artillery, and improve weapons co-production and repair facilities.
In February 2005, the Ministry of Defence of Finland ceded to Vietnam about 70 T-54 and T-55 tanks from the Soviet era.
In early March 2005, Poland signed a contract to sell to Vietnam 150 T-72 tanks which would have been used to support training, ammunition, equipment maintenance, and repair, but this contract was cancelled in 2006 because Vietnam wanted to focus more on its Navy and Air Force.
In addition to upgrading tanks, the Ministry of Defence of Vietnam signed a military co-operation agreement with Russia.
The Vietnamese have also developed the capacity to produce their own equipment and repair existing equipment.

==
References ==
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to applied science:
Applied science – the branch of science that applies existing scientific knowledge to develop more practical applications, including inventions and other technological advancements.
Science itself is the  systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.

==
Branches of applied science ==
Applied science – application of scientific knowledge transferred into a physical environment.

Agronomy – science and technology of producing and using plants for food, fuel, feed, fiber, and reclamation.

Animal husbandry – agricultural practice of breeding and raising livestock.

Aquaculture – also known as aquafarming, is the farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, molluscs and aquatic plants.
Algaculture – form of aquaculture involving the farming of species of algae.

Mariculture – cultivation of marine organisms for food and other products in the open ocean, an enclosed section of the ocean, or in tanks, ponds or raceways which are filled with seawater.

Agriculture – science of farming
Cuniculture – also known as rabbit farming, is the breeding and raising domestic rabbits, usually for their meat or fur.

Fungiculture –  process of producing food, medicine, and other products by the cultivation of mushrooms and other fungi.

Heliciculture – also called snail farming, is the process of farming or raising land snails specifically for human consumption, and more recently, to obtain snail slime for cosmetics use.

Olericulture – science of vegetable growing, dealing with the culture of non-woody (herbaceous) plants for food.

Sericulture – also called silk farming, is the rearing of silkworms for the production of silk.
Although there are several commercial species of silkworms, Bombyx mori is the most widely used and intensively studied.

Food science – study concerned with all technical aspects of foods, beginning with harvesting or slaughtering, and ending with its cooking and consumption, an ideology commonly referred to as "from field to fork".
It is the discipline in which the engineering, biological, and physical sciences are used to study the nature of foods, the causes of deterioration, the principles underlying food processing, and the improvement of foods for the consuming public.

Forestry – art and science of managing forests, tree plantations, and related natural resources.

Arboriculture – cultivation, management, and study of individual trees, shrubs, vines, and other perennial woody plants.

Silviculture – practice of controlling the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.
It includes regenerating, tending and harvesting techniques.

Horticulture – art, science, technology and business of intensive plant cultivation for human use
Floriculture – discipline of horticulture concerned with the cultivation of flowering and ornamental plants for gardens and for floristry, comprising the floral industry.

Hydroculture – growing of plants in a soilless medium, or an aquatic based environment.
Plant nutrients are distributed via water.
Hydroculture is aquatic horticulture.

Hydroponics – subset of hydroculture and is a method of growing plants using mineral nutrient solutions, in water, without soil.

Permaculture – branch of ecological design and ecological engineering, which develop sustainable human settlements and self-maintained agricultural systems modeled from natural ecosystems.

Architecture – process and product of planning, designing and construction.
Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art.

Architectural engineering – application of engineering principles and technology to building design and construction.

Building science – collection of scientific knowledge that focuses on the analysis and control of the physical phenomena affecting buildings.

Computing technology (outline) – computer hardware and software, and computing methods.

Education – any act or experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual.
In its technical sense, education is the process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another.

Electronics – branch of physics, engineering and technology dealing with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.

Energy technology (outline) – interdisciplinary engineering science having to do with the efficient, safe, environmentally friendly and economical extraction, conversion, transportation, storage and use of energy, targeted towards yielding high efficiency whilst skirting side effects on humans, nature and the environment.

Energy storage (outline) – accomplished by devices or physical media that store some form of energy to perform some useful operation at a later time.
A device that stores energy is sometimes called an accumulator.

Engineering (outline) –
discipline, art, skill and profession of acquiring and applying scientific, mathematical, economic, social, and practical knowledge, in order to design and build structures, machines, devices, systems, materials and processes that safely realize improvements to the lives of people.

Aerospace engineering –
Aerospace engineering is the primary branch of engineering concerned with the design, construction, and science of aircraft and spacecraft.
It is divided into two major and overlapping branches: aeronautical engineering and astronautical engineering.
The former deals with craft that stay within Earth's atmosphere, and the latter with craft that operate outside it.

Agricultural engineering – engineering discipline that applies engineering science and technology to agricultural production and processing.

Agricultural science – broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.

Applied engineering – field concerned with the application of management, design, and technical skills for the design and integration of systems,
the execution of new product designs, the improvement of manufacturing processes, and the management and direction of physical and/or technical functions of a firm or organization.

Biomedical engineering – application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology.

Bioengineering – application of concepts and methods of biology (and secondarily of physics, chemistry, mathematics, and computer science) to solve real-world problems related to the life sciences and/or the application thereof, using engineering's own analytical and synthetic methodologies and also its traditional sensitivity to the cost and practicality of the solution(s) arrived at.

Chemical engineering – application of physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.

Civil engineering – deals with the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including works like roads, bridges, canals, dams, and buildings.
Civil engineering has many sub-disciplines.

Computer engineering – design and development of computer systems
Artificial intelligence (outline) – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Electrical engineering – field of engineering that generally deals with the study and application of electricity, electronics and electromagnetism.

Engineering technology (outline) –
development and implementation of existing technology within a field of engineering.

Environmental engineering science – multidisciplinary field of engineering science that combines the biological, chemical and physical sciences with the field of engineering.

Industrial engineering – branch of engineering dealing with the optimization of complex processes or systems
Control engineering – engineering discipline that applies control theory to design systems with desired behaviors.

Manufacturing engineering - engineering discipline of creating quality products from raw materials in the most efficient way possible.

Ceramic engineering – science and technology of creating objects from inorganic, non-metallic materials.

Language engineering – deliberate effort to influence the function, structure, or acquisition of languages or language variety within a speech community.

Marine engineering – engineering of boats, ships, oil rigs and any other marine vessel
Materials science and engineering – interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.
This scientific field investigates the relationship between the structure of materials at atomic or molecular scales and their macroscopic properties.

Mechanical engineering – discipline of engineering that applies the principles of physics and materials science for analysis, design, manufacturing, and maintenance of mechanical systems.

Mining engineering – engineering discipline that involves the practice, the theory, the science, the technology, and application of extracting and processing minerals from a naturally occurring environment.

Nuclear engineering – branch of engineering concerned with the application of the breakdown (fission) as well as the fusion of atomic nuclei and/or the application of other sub-atomic physics, based on the principles of nuclear physics.

Polymer engineering – subfield of materials science concerned with polymers, primarily synthetic polymers such as plastics.

Engineering physics – study of the combined disciplines of physics, engineering and mathematics in order to develop an understanding of the interrelationships of these three disciplines.

Security engineering – focuses on the security aspects in the design of systems that need to be able to deal robustly with possible sources of disruption, ranging from natural disasters to malicious acts.

Software engineering (outline) –
application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software, and the study of these approaches; that is, the application of engineering to software.

Systems engineering – interdisciplinary field of engineering focusing on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed over their life cycles.

Environmental science – multidisciplinary academic field that integrates physical, biological and information sciences to the study of the environment, and the solution of environmental problems.

Environmental technology – application of one or more of environmental science, green chemistry, environmental monitoring and electronic devices to monitor, model and conserve the natural environment and resources, and to curb the negative impacts of human involvement.

Fisheries science – academic discipline of managing and understanding fisheries.
It is a multidisciplinary science, which draws on the disciplines of limnology, oceanography, freshwater biology, marine biology, conservation, ecology, population dynamics, economics and management to attempt to provide an integrated picture of fisheries.

Forensic science (outline) – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health science – application of science, technology, engineering or mathematics to the delivery of healthcare
Conservation medicine – emerging, interdisciplinary field that studies the relationship between human and animal health, and environmental conditions.

Dentistry – branch of medicine that is involved in the study, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases, disorders and conditions of the oral cavity, maxillofacial area and the adjacent and associated structures and their impact on the human body.

Optometry – health care profession concerned with the health of the eyes and related structures, as well as vision, visual systems, and vision information processing in humans.

Medicine – science of healing.
To elaborate, it is the applied science of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease.
It encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness in human beings.

Anatomy – branch of biology and medicine that is the consideration of the structure of living things.

Human anatomy – scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.

Dermatology – branch of medicine dealing with the skin and its diseases, a unique specialty with both medical and surgical aspects.

Cardiology – medical specialty dealing with disorders of the heart (specifically the human heart).

Endocrinology - medical specialty dealing with the endocrine system, its diseases, and its specific secretions (hormones), and the interactions of these with all aspects of bodily functioning
Gastroenterology – branch of medicine whereby the digestive system and its disorders are studied.

Gynecology – medical practice dealing with the health of the female reproductive system (uterus, vagina, and ovaries).

Immunology – study of the immune system.

Internal medicine – medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases.

Neurology – medical specialty dealing with disorders of the nervous system.

Ophthalmology – branch of medicine that deals with the anatomy, physiology and diseases of the eye.

Pathology – precise study and diagnosis of disease.

Pathophysiology – study of the changes of normal mechanical, physiological, and biochemical functions, either caused by a disease, or resulting from an abnormal syndrome.

Pediatrics – branch of medicine that deals with the medical care of infants, children, and adolescents.

Pharmacy –
health profession that links the health sciences with the chemical sciences and it is charged with ensuring the safe and effective use of pharmaceutical drugs.

Physiology – science of the function of living systems.

Psychiatry – medical specialty devoted to the study and treatment of mental disorders.

Radiology – medical specialty that employs the use of imaging to both diagnose and treat disease visualised within the human body.

Toxicology – branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

Urology – medical and surgical specialty that focuses on the urinary tracts of males and females, and on the reproductive system of males.

Nutrition – studies the relationship between diet and states of health and disease.

Nursing – Nursing is a healthcare profession focused on the care of individuals, families, and communities
so they may attain, maintain, or recover optimal health and quality of life.

Pharmacology – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action
Physical therapy –
Military Physical Therapists working with patients on balance problems, orthopedic/musculoskeletal injuries, amputee, compression wrapping to control edema,
and during evaluation/assessment of strength, flexibility, and joint range of motion, massages, etc. .

Veterinary medicine – branch of science that deals with the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disease, disorder and injury in non-human animals.

Applied linguistics – interdisciplinary field of study that identifies, investigates, and offers solutions to language-related real-life problems.

Management – getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Accounting – process of communicating financial information about a business entity to users such as shareholders and managers.

Outline of management – getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Business Strategy – field that deals with the major intended and emergent initiatives taken by general managers on behalf of owners, involving utilization of resources, to enhance the performance of firms in their external environments.

Finance –  addresses the ways in which individuals, businesses and organizations raise, allocate and use monetary resources over time, taking into account the risks entailed in their projects.

Marketing – social and managerial processes by which products, services and value are exchanged in order to fulfil individuals' or group's needs and wants.
These processes include, but are not limited to, advertising, promotion, distribution, and sales.

Organizational Behavior – field of study that investigates the impact that individuals, groups and structures have on behavior within an organization.

Operations – those ongoing recurring (cyclic) activities involved in the running of a business for the purpose of producing value for the stakeholders.

Applied mathematics – branch of mathematics concerned with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry.
Thus, "applied mathematics" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge.

Microtechnology – technology with features near one micrometre (one millionth of a metre, or 10−6 metre, or 1μm).

Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Military Organization – structuring of the armed forces of a state so as to offer military capability required by the national defence policy.

Military Education and Training –
Recruit training, more commonly known as Basic Training and colloquially called Boot Camp, is the initial indoctrination and instruction given to new military personnel, enlisted and officer.

Military history
– humanities discipline within the scope of general historical recording of armed conflict in the history of humanity, and its impact on the societies, their cultures, economies and changing intra and international relationships.

Military engineering – the art and practice of designing and building military works and maintaining lines of military transport and communications.

Military Strategy and Tactics – set of ideas implemented by military organizations to pursue desired strategic goals
Applied physics – physics intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge between "pure" physics and engineering.

Optics – branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.

Nanotechnology (outline) –
study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with developing materials, devices, or other structures possessing at least one dimension sized from 1 to 100 nanometres.
Quantum mechanical effects are important at this quantum-realm scale.

Nuclear technology (outline) – technology that involves the reactions of atomic nuclei.
Among the notable nuclear technologies are nuclear power, nuclear medicine, and nuclear weapons.
It has found applications from smoke detectors to nuclear reactors, and from gun sights to nuclear weapons.

Space Science – discipline encompassing the fields of study that involve space exploration and the study of natural phenomena occurring in outer space.

Astronautics – science of spacefaring and spaceflight.

Astronomy – the study of natural objects and phenomena.

Space Exploration – the discovery and exploration of celestial structures in outer space by developing space technology.

Spatial science – academic discipline incorporating fields such as surveying, geographic information systems, hydrography and cartography.
Spatial science is typically concerned with the measurement, management, analysis and display of spatial information describing the Earth, its physical features and the built environment.

GIS – geographic information system is a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present all types of geographical data.

Remote sensing – acquisition of information about an object or phenomenon, without making physical contact with the object.

Photogrammetry – practice of determining the geometric properties of objects from photographic images.

==
History of applied science ==
History of applied linguistics
History of applied mathematics
History of applied physics
History of artificial intelligence
Timeline of artificial intelligence
History of ceramic engineering
History of computing technology
History of computing
History of computing hardware
History of electronics
Early electronic components
History of electronic engineering
History of energy
History of energy storage
History of environmental engineering
History of forensic science
History of forestry
History of materials science
History of medicine
History of nanotechnology
History of nuclear technology
History of optics
History of software engineering


==
Applied science education ==
Fachhochschule
Institute of technology –


==
=
Degrees and certificates ===
Bachelor of Applied Science – undergraduate degree awarded for a course of study that generally lasts three to four years in the United Kingdom and Australia, and four to six years in Canada, the Netherlands and the United States.

Applied Science Technician
Applied
Science Technologist
===
Applied science schools ===
University of applied sciences (Finland)


==
Applied science organizations ==
Fraunhofer Society
Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists & Technicians


==
Applied science publications ==
American Journal of Applied Sciences
Foresight:
The International Journal of Applied Forecasting
Intégral:
The Journal of Applied Musical Thought
International Journal of Applied Management and Technology
International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
International Journal of Applied Philosophy
ITL – International Journal of Applied Linguistics
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis
Journal of Applied Biomechanics
Journal of Applied Biomedicine
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology
Journal of Applied Ecology
Journal of Applied Econometrics
Journal of Applied Economics
Journal of Applied Electrochemistry
Journal of Applied Gerontology
Journal of Applied Horticulture
Journal of Applied Ichthyology
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology
Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics
Journal of Applied Philosophy
Journal of Applied Physics
Journal of Applied Physiology
Journal of Applied Polymer Science
Journal of Applied Psychology
Journal of Applied Social Psychology
Journal of Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
Journal of Applied Social Science
Journal of Applied Toxicology
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science
Outline of technology


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Free Federal Resources for Educational Excellence – Applied sciences
Robbery is the crime of taking or attempting to take anything of value by force, threat of force, or by putting the victim in fear.
According to common law, robbery is defined as taking the property of another, with the intent to permanently deprive the person of that property, by means of force or fear; that is, it is a larceny or theft accomplished by an assault.
Precise definitions of the offence may vary between jurisdictions.
Robbery is differentiated from other forms of theft (such as burglary, shoplifting, pickpocketing, or car theft) by its inherently violent nature (a violent crime); whereas many lesser forms of theft are punished as misdemeanors, robbery is always a felony in jurisdictions that distinguish between the two.
Under English law, most forms of theft are triable either way, whereas robbery is triable only on indictment.
The word "rob" came via French from Late Latin words (e.g., deraubare) of Germanic origin, from Common Germanic raub "theft".

Among the types of robbery are armed robbery, which involves the use of a weapon, and aggravated robbery, when someone brings with them a deadly weapon or something that appears to be a deadly weapon.
Highway robbery or mugging takes place outside or in a public place such as a sidewalk, street, or parking lot.
Carjacking is the act of stealing a car from a victim by force.
Extortion is the threat to do something illegal, or the offer to not do something illegal, in the event that goods are not given, primarily using words instead of actions.

Criminal slang for robbery includes "blagging" (armed robbery, usually of a bank) or "stick-up" (derived from the verbal command to robbery targets to raise their hands in the air), and "steaming" (organized robbery on underground train systems).

==
Canada ==
In Canada, the Criminal Code makes robbery an indictable offence, subject to a maximum penalty of life imprisonment.

If the accused uses a restricted or prohibited firearm to  commit robbery, there is a mandatory minimum sentence of five years for the first offence, and seven years for subsequent offences.

==
Republic of Ireland ==
Robbery is a statutory offence in the Republic of Ireland.
It is created by section 14(1) of the Criminal Justice (Theft and Fraud Offences) Act, 2001, which provides:
A person is guilty of robbery if he or she steals, and immediately before or at the time of doing so, and in order to do so, uses force on any person or puts or seeks to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force.

==
United Kingdom ==


===
England and Wales ===
Robbery is a statutory offence in England and Wales.
It is created by section 8(1) of the Theft Act 1968 which reads:
A person is guilty of robbery if he steals, and immediately before or at the time of doing so, and in order to do so, he uses force on any person or puts or seeks to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force.
====
Aggravated theft ====
Robbery is the only offence of aggravated theft.

====
Aggravated robbery ====
There are no offences of aggravated robbery.

==== "Steals" ====
This requires evidence to show a theft as set out in section 1(1) of the Theft Act 1968.
In R v Robinson the defendant threatened the victim with a knife in order to recover money which he was actually owed.
His conviction for robbery was quashed on the basis that Robinson had an honest, although unreasonable, belief (under Section 2(1)(a) of the Act) in his legal right to the money.
See also R v Skivington [1968] 1 QB 166, [1967] 2 WLR 655, 131 JP 265, 111 SJ 72, [1967] 1
All ER 483, 51 Cr App R 167, CA.

In R v Hale (1978)
the application of force and the stealing took place in different locations, and it was not possible to establish the timing; it was held that the appropriation necessary to prove theft was a continuing act, and the jury could correctly convict of robbery.
This approach was followed in R v Lockley (1995) when the force was applied to a shopkeeper after property had been taken.
It was argued that the theft should be regarded as complete by this time, and R v Gomez (1993), should apply; the court disagreed, preferring to follow R v Hale.

====
Actual or threatened force against a person ====
The threat or use of force must take place immediately before or at the time of the theft.
Force used after the theft is complete will not turn the theft into a robbery.

The words "or immediately after" that appeared in section 23(1)(b) of the Larceny Act 1916 were deliberately omitted from section 8(1).The book Archbold said that the facts in R v Harman, which did not amount to robbery in 1620, would not amount to robbery now.
It was held in R v Dawson and James (1978) that "force" is an ordinary English word and its meaning should be left to the jury.
This approach was confirmed in  R v Clouden (1985) and Corcoran v Anderton (1980), both handbag-snatching cases.
Stealing may involve a young child who is not aware that taking other persons' property is not in order.

====
Threat ====
The victim must be placed in apprehension or fear that force would be used immediately before or at the time of the taking of the property.
A threat is not immediate if the wrongdoer threatens to use force of violence some future time.

Robbery occurs if an aggressor forcibly snatched a mobile phone or if they used a knife to make an implied threat of violence to the holder and then took the phone.
The person being threatened does not need to be the owner of the property.
It is not necessary that the victim was actually frightened, but the defendant must have put or sought to put the victim or some other person in fear of immediate force.
The force or threat may be directed against a third party, for example a customer in a jeweller's shop.
Theft accompanied by a threat to damage property will not constitute robbery, but it may disclose an offence of blackmail.

Dishonestly dealing with property stolen during a robbery will constitute an offence of handling.

====
Mode of trial ====
Robbery is an indictable-only offence.

====
Sentence ====
Under current sentencing guidelines, the punishment for robbery is affected by a variety of aggravating and mitigating factors.
Particularly important is how much harm was caused to the victim and how much culpability the offender had (e.g. carrying a weapon or leading a group effort implies high culpability).
Robbery is divided into three categories which are, in increasing order of seriousness: street or less sophisticated commercial; dwelling; and professionally planned commercial.
Robbery generally results in a custodial sentence.
Only a low-harm, low-culpability robbery with other mitigating factors would result in an alternative punishment, in the form of a high level community order.
The maximum legal punishment is imprisonment for life.
It is also subject to the mandatory sentencing regime under the Criminal Justice Act 2003.
Current sentencing guidelines advise that the sentence should be no longer than 20 years, for a high-harm, high-culpability robbery with other aggravating factors.

The "starting point" sentences are:

Low-harm, low-culpability street robbery:
1 year
Medium-harm, medium-culpability street robbery: 4 years
Medium-harm, medium-culpability professionally planned robbery: 5 years
High-harm, high-culpability street robbery: 8 years
High-harm, high-culpability professionally planned robbery
: 16 yearsAn offender may also serve a longer sentence if they are convicted of other offences alongside the robbery, such as assault and grievous bodily harm.

====
History ====


=====
Common law =====
Robbery was an offence under the common law of England.
Matthew Hale provided the following definition:
Robbery is the felonious and violent taking of any money or goods from the person of another, putting him in fear, be the value thereof above or under one shilling.

See the statutes 23
Hen 8 c 1 and 5 & 6 Edw 6 c 9
as to benefit of clergy.
And also 25 Hen 8 c 3 and 1 Edw 6 c 12.
And also 29 Eliz c 15 and 3 & 4 W & M c 9.

The common law offence of robbery was abolished for all purposes not relating to offences committed before 1 January 1969 by section 32(1)(a) of the Theft Act 1968.

=====
Statute =====
See sections 40 to 43 of the Larceny Act 1861.

Section 23 of the Larceny Act 1916
read:
23.-(1)
Every person who -
(a) being armed with any offensive weapon or instrument, or being together with one other person or more, robs, or assaults with intent to rob, any person;
(b) robs any person and, at the time of or immediately before or immediately after such robbery, uses any personal violence to any person;shall be guilty of felony and on conviction thereof liable to penal servitude for life, and, in addition, if a male, to be once privately whipped.

(2)
Every person who robs any person shall be guilty of felony and on conviction thereof liable to penal servitude for any term not exceeding fourteen years.

(3)
Every person who assaults any person with intent to rob shall be guilty of felony and on conviction thereof liable to penal servitude for any term not exceeding five years.

This section provided maximum penalties for a number of offences of robbery and aggravated robbery.
The following cases relate to the use of force:
R v Lapier (1784)
1
Leach 320
R v Moore (1784)
1
Leach 335
R v Davies (1803) 2 East PC 709
R v Mason (1820) R & R 419
R v Gnosil (1824) 1 C & P 304
R v Walls and Hughes (1845) 2 C &
K 214
==== Assault with intent to rob ====
If a robbery is foiled before it can be completed, an alternative offence (with the same penalty, given by section 8(2) of the 1968 Act) is assault; any act which intentionally or recklessly causes another to fear the immediate and unlawful use of force, with an intent to rob, will suffice.

The following cases are relevant:
R v Trusty and Howard (1783) 1 East PC 418
R v Sharwin (1785) 1
East PC 421


====
=
Mode of trial and sentence =====
Assault with intent to rob is an indictable-only offence.
It is punishable with imprisonment for life or for any shorter term.
Assault with intent to rob is also subject to the mandatory sentencing regime under the Criminal Justice Act 2003.

===
Northern Ireland ===
Robbery is a statutory offence in Northern Ireland.
It is created by section 8 of the Theft Act (Northern Ireland) 1969.

==
United States ==
In the United States, robbery is generally treated as an aggravated form of common law larceny.
Specific elements and definitions differ from state to state.
The common elements of robbery are:

a trespassory
taking and
carrying away
of the personal property
of another
with the intent to steal
from the person or presence of the victim
by force or threat of force.
The first six elements are the same as common law larceny.
It is the last two elements that aggravate the crime to common law robbery.

from the person or presence of the victim – robbery requires that the property be taken directly from the person of the victim or from their presence.
This is different from larceny which simply requires that property be taken from the victim's possession, actual or constructive.
Property is "on the victim's person" if the victim is actually holding the property, or the property is contained within clothing the victim is wearing or is attached to a victim's body such as a watch or earrings.
Property is in a person's presence when it is within the area of their immediate control.
The property has to be close enough to the victim's person that the victim could have prevented its taking if he/
she had not been placed in fear or intimidation.by force or threat of force – the use of force or threat of force is the defining element of robbery.
For there to be robbery there must be "force or fear" in perpetrating the theft.
Questions concerning the degree of force necessary for robbery have been the subject of much litigation.
Merely snatching the property from the victim's person is not sufficient force unless the victim resists or one of the items is attached or carried in such a way that a significant amount of force must be used to free the item from the victim's person.
For robbery the victim must be placed in "fear" of immediate harm by threat or intimidation.
The threat need not be directed at the victim personally.
Threats to third parties are sufficient.
The threat must be one of present rather than future personal harm.
Fear does not mean "fright", it means apprehension – an awareness of the danger of immediate bodily harm.

===
California ===
The maximum sentence for robbery in California is 9 years, according to Penal Code section 213(a)(1)(A).The threat or use of force does not have to take place immediately before or at the time of the theft.
Force used after the theft will turn the theft into a robbery unless the theft is complete.
The theft is considered completed when the perpetrator reaches a place of temporary safety with the property.

==
Robbery statistics ==


===
Robberies by country ===
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime notes "that when using the figures, any cross-national comparisons should be conducted with caution because of the differences that exist between the legal definitions of offences in countries, or the different methods of offence counting and recording".
Also not every single crime is reported, meaning two things; (1) robbery rates are going to appear lower than they actually are and; (2) the percentage of crime that is not reported is going to be higher in some countries
then others, for example – in one country 86% of the robberies were reported, whereas in another country only 67% of the robberies were reported.
The last thing to note is that crime will vary by certain neighborhoods or areas in each country, so, just because a nationwide rate is a specified rate, does not mean that everywhere in that country retains the same amount of danger or safety.

===
Homicides during a robbery, by country ===


==
In popular culture ==
Robberies have been depicted, sometimes graphically, in various forms of media, and several robbers have become pop icons, such as Bonnie and Clyde and John Dillinger.
Examples of media works focused on robberies include:


===
In film ===
The Killing (1956), by Stanley Kubrick, depicts a graphic robbery.

Wake Up and Die (1966) is an Italian crime drama film directed by Carlo Lizzani, based on the real life of Luciano Lutring ("il solista del mitra", translation: "the submachine soloist"), who kept his weapon in a violin case.

Take the Money and Run (1969), by Woody Allen, depicts an unconventional view of a robbery by an incompetent robber.

Le Gitan (1975), directed by José Giovanni, is loosely based on Luciano Lutring's autobiography.
Lutring is played by Alain Delon.

Dog Day Afternoon (1975) depicts a bank robbery which escalates to a hostage situation.

Reservoir Dogs (1992), by Quentin Tarantino, shows the aftermath of a robbery, with an abundance of lurid details.

===
In literature ===
Luciano Lutring (30 December 1937 – 13 May 2013), known as "the submachine gun soloist" because he kept the weapon in a violin case, used that moniker as the title of his memoir Il solista del mitra.
He  was an Italian criminal, author, and painter who, when committing robberies, worked alone (which is rather rare for a robber).

Lionel White's Bloodhound mysteries novel, No.116, Clean Break (1955) was the basis for Stanley Kubrik's film The Killing (1956).

===
In video games ===
Video games
Payday:
The Heist and Payday 2 are both games by Overkill Software where one of the main objectives is to steal items of monetary value at places such as banks, art galleries, armored trucks, and more.

== See also ==


==
References ==
Matthew Hale.
Historia Placitorum Coronae.
1736.
1800 Edition.
Volume 1.
Chapter XLVI.
Pages 532 to 538.

==
Further reading ==
Allen, Michael.
(
2005).
Textbook on Criminal Law.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 0-19-927918-7.

Criminal Law Revision Committee.
8th Report.
Theft and Related Offences.
Cmnd.
2977
Griew, Edward.
Theft Acts 1968 & 1978.
London: Sweet & Maxwell.
London: LexisNexis.
ISBN 0-406-89545-7


==
External links ==
Firearms Act is a stock short title used for legislation in Canada, Hong Kong, Jamaica, and the United Kingdom.
This list includes not only Firearms Acts as such, but legislation of different names governing firearms and also other weapons.

==
List ==


===
Canada ===
Firearms Act


===
Finland ===
The Firearms Act 1998


===
Hong Kong ===
The Firearms and Ammunition Ordinance 1981


===
Jamaica ===
Firearms Act (Jamaica)


===
United Kingdom ===
Many laws governing possession and use of firearms have been passed over the years in the UK and the countries comprising the union; there is a historical discussion at Gun politics in the United Kingdom#Gun control legislation in the United Kingdom
The English Assizes of Arms of 1181 and 1252 governed arms, but predated firearms
The 1508 act forbidding the use of guns or crossbows without Royal Letters Patent
The 1515 "Acte Avoidyng Shoting in Crossebowes and Gonnes"
The 1542 Act introducing hunting licenses
The 1549 Act forbidding the shooting of birdshot
The Bill of Rights 1689, England
The Disarming Acts of 1716 and 1725
, Great Britain Act applicable explicitly to the Highlands of Scotland
The Act of Proscription 1746, essentially a restatement with harsher penalties of the Disarming Acts
The Vagrancy Act 1824 providing power to arrest "...
armed with any Gun, Pistol, Hanger, Cutlass, Bludgeon, or other offensive Weapon, or having upon him or her any Instrument, with Intent to commit any felonious Act;"
The Night Poaching Act 1828
The Game Act 1831
The Night Poaching Act 1844
The Poaching Prevention Act 1862
The Gun Licence Act (1870)
The Pistols Act 1903
The Firearms Act 1920 (10 & 11 Geo 5 c 43)
The Firearms and Imitation Firearms (Criminal Use)
Act 1933 (23 & 24 Geo 5 c 50)
The Firearms Act 1934 (24 & 25 Geo 5 c 16)
The Firearms (Amendment)
Act 1936 (26 Geo 5 & 1 Edw 8 c 39)
The Firearms Act 1937 (1 Edw 8 & 1 Geo 6 c 12)
The Firearms Act 1965 (c 44)
The Firearms Act 1968
The Firearms Act 1969
The Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons) Rules 1969
The Firearms Act 1982
The Crossbows Act 1987
The Criminal Justice (Firearms)(Northern Ireland) Order 1988
The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988
The Firearms Rules 1989
The Firearms Act (Amendment) Regulations 1992
The Firearms (Amendment)
Act 1992
The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1993
The Firearms (Dangerous Air Weapons)
(Amendment)
Rules 1993
The Firearms (Amendment)
Act 1994
The Firearms (Amendment) Act 1997
The Firearms (Amendment) (No.
2)
Act 1997
The Firearms (Museums) Order 1997
The Firearms Rules 1998
Criminal Justice Act 2003
The Firearms (Northern Ireland)
Commencement Order 2004
Firearms (Appeals and Applications) Regulations (Northern Ireland)
2005
The Firearms (Amendment) (Northern Ireland)
Order 2005
The Firearms (Amendment) Rules 2005
The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006
Part 2
The Firearms (Amendment) Regulations 2010
The Firearms (Amendment) (No.
2)
Rules 2013
The Firearms (Amendment) Rules 2013
The Firearms Regulations 2015The
Firearms Acts 1937 and 1965 was the collective title of the Firearms Act 1937 and the Firearms Act 1965.

== See also ==
The Weapons Act 1990, Queensland, Australia
German Weapons Act
The Arms Act 1959, India
The Arms Act 1983, New Zealand
The Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989, California,
USA
Gun laws in the Czech Republic


==
References ==
List of short titles
The AT4 (also AT-4) is an 84-mm unguided, portable, single-shot recoilless smoothbore anti-tank weapon built in Sweden by Saab Bofors Dynamics (previously Bofors Anti-Armour Systems).
Saab has had considerable sales success with the AT4, making it one of the most common light anti-tank weapons in the world.

The AT4 is intended to give infantry units a means to destroy or disable armoured vehicles and fortifications, although it is generally ineffective against current modern main battle tanks (MBT).
The launcher and projectile are manufactured prepacked and issued as a single unit of ammunition, with the launcher discarded after a single use.

==
Development ==
The AT4 is a development of the 74-mm Pansarskott m/68 (Miniman), adopted by the Swedish Army in the late 1960s.
Like the m/68, the AT4 was designed by Förenade Fabriksverken (FFV) and manufactured at their facility at Zakrisdal, Karlstad, Sweden.
FFV began research in a replacement for the m/68 in 1976, deliberately designing an individual anti-armor weapon that would not be able to defeat the heavy armour protection of MBTs (main battle tanks) in frontal engagements, believing that to be counterproductive.
The AT4 was designed as a weapon to engage medium to light armoured vehicles from any direction, MBTs from the sides or rear, and as an assault weapon against buildings and fortifications.
FFV also had the design goal of a weapon that was simple to use, rugged, and far more accurate than previous individual antiarmor weapons against moving targets.
Another key requirement was that the AT4 not only be able to penetrate armour, but also have a devastating beyond-armour effect after penetration.
FFV and the Swedish Army began the first evaluation firings of the prototype AT4s in the spring of 1981 with 100 tested by early 1982.Even before the AT4 had been adopted by Sweden, it was entered into a US Army competition for a new anti-tank weapon mandated by Congress in 1982 when the FGR-17 Viper failed as a replacement for the M72 LAW.
Six weapons were tested in 1983 by the US Army: the British LAW 80, the German Armbrust, the French APILAS, the Norwegian M72E4 (an upgraded M72 LAW), the US Viper (for baseline comparison purposes) and the Swedish AT4.
The US Army reported to Congress in November 1983 that the FFV AT4 came the closest to meeting all the major requirements established to replace the M72 LAW, with the Armbrust coming in second.
Though very impressed with the simplicity and durability of the tested version of the AT4, the US Army saw some room for improvement, specifically the addition of rear and front bumpers on the launch tube and changes to the sights and slings.
After these changes, the AT4 was adopted by the US Army as the Lightweight Multipurpose Weapon M136.
The Swedish Army also recognized these improvements and subsequently adopted the Americanized version of the AT4 as the Pansarskott
m/86 (Pskott m/86), with the addition of a forward folding hand grip to help steady the AT4 when being aimed and fired.
The forward folding grip is the only difference between the AT4 adopted by Sweden and the US Army version.

Due to the urban combat conditions that US military forces faced regularly during the Iraq War, the US Army Close Combat Systems manager in charge of purchases of the AT4 suspended orders for the standard version of the AT4 and US military forces are now only ordering the AT4 CS (Confined Space) version.

==
Operation ==
The AT4 may be considered a disposable, low-cost alternative to a Carl Gustaf 8.4cm recoilless rifle.
The AT4 took many of its design features from the Carl Gustaf, which operates on the principle of a recoilless weapon, where the forward inertia of the projectile is balanced by the inertia of propellant gases ejecting from the rear of the barrel.
But unlike the Carl Gustaf, which uses a heavier and more expensive steel tube with rifling, the disposable AT4 design greatly reduces manufacturing costs by using a reinforced smoothbore fiberglass outer tube.
Being a disposable gun also allows for lighter and cheaper construction.
In a single-use disposable gun, the barrel only needs to be able to contain a single pressure spike when firing, when it can be disposed of, even if it is ruined, burnt-out and strained, unlike traditional guns which are required to survive many pressure spikes without failure and thus need to be strongly overbuilt and made of heat-proof materials.
Pressures are also kept quite low compared to many traditional guns.
This lightweight and thin barrel and low pressure, combined with the almost complete lack of recoil, means that relatively large projectiles (comparable to those found in mortars and artillery systems) can be utilised, which would otherwise be impossible in a man-portable weapon.

In the system originally developed by FFV for the Carl Gustaf, a plastic blowout plug is placed at the center rear of the shell casing containing the projectile and propellant, which itself is enclosed in the AT4 outer tube.
When the gases build up to the correct pressure level, the blowout plug disintegrates, allowing the proper amount of gases to be vented to the rear, balancing the propellant gases pushing the projectile forward.

The AT4 uses a unique method developed earlier by FFV and adopted for the AT4: the spring-loaded firing rod is located down the side of the outer tube, with the firing pin at the rear of the tube.
When released, the firing pin strikes a primer located in the side of the casing's rim.

The disadvantage of the recoilless design is that it creates a large back blast area behind the weapon, which can cause severe burns and overpressure injuries to friendly personnel in the vicinity of the user and sometimes even to the users themselves, especially in confined spaces.
The back blast may also reveal the user's position to the enemy.
The problem of back blast was solved with the AT4-CS (Confined Space) version, specially designed for urban warfare.
This version uses a saltwater countermass in the rear of the launcher to absorb the back blast; the resulting spray captures and dramatically slows down the pressure wave, allowing troops to fire from enclosed areas.
The AT4-CS version also reduced its muzzle velocity from the original 290 m/s to 220 m/s as part of its effort to be user-safe in a confined space, making the AT4-CS version more difficult to use as the drop is more pronounced.
The effectiveness of the HEAT warhead is not dependent on speed.
To fire, the gunner first removes the safety pin located at the rear of the tube, which unblocks the firing rod.
He then takes a firing position ensuring that no one is present in the back blast area.
If firing from the prone position, he must also place his legs well to the side to avoid burning himself.
Then the gunner moves back the front and rear sight covers, allowing the sights to pop up into their firing positions.
The AT4 has iron sights that were originally developed for the cancelled Viper, and are similar in concept and use to those on assault rifles.
He then removes the first of two safeties by moving the firing rod cocking lever (located on the left side) forward and then over the top to the right side.
The gunner takes aim, while at the same time holding down the red safety lever located in front of the cocking lever, and then fires by pressing forward the red firing button with his right thumb.
Both the red safety lever and the firing button must be pressed down at the same time to fire the AT4.
The red firing button has a similar resistance to the trigger pull of a rifle, so the gunner does not have to jab at the firing button, which could throw his aim off.

After firing, the AT4 is discarded.
Unlike the heavier Carl Gustaf, the AT4 outer tube is built to take the stress of just one firing; it is not reusable and cannot be reloaded.

The AT4 can mount an optical night sight on a removable fixture.
In US military use, the launcher can be fitted with the AN/PAQ-4C, AN/PEQ-2, or the AN/PAS-13 night sights.

The AT4 requires little training and is quite simple to use, making it suitable for general issue.
However, as the cost of each launcher makes regular live-fire training very expensive, practice versions exist that are identical in operation but fire reloadable 9×19mm or 20mm tracer ammunition.
Both practice cartridges are unique to their respective weapons, with their trajectory matched to that of the live round.
The 20mm version also has a recoilless weapon effect with the same high noise and back blast as the AT4 firing and is favoured by the Swedish army because of the added realism of the back blast as compared to the "plonk" sound of the 9mm round (similar to the sound of a finger tapping on an empty can).

==
Specifications ==
Length: 101.6 cm (40 in.)

Weight: 6.7 kg (14.77 pounds)
Bore
diameter:
84 mm
Maximum effective range: 300 metres (328 yards), although it has been used in excess of 500 meters (547 yards) for area fire.

Penetration: 420 mm (15.7 inches) of rolled homogeneous armour (RHA; also see below)
Time of flight (to 250 metres, or 273 yards): less than 1 second
Muzzle velocity: 290 metres (950 ft) per second
Operating temperature: −40 to +60 °C (−40 to +140 °F)
Ammunition: fin-stabilized projectile with HEAT warhead


==
Projectiles ==
There are several different projectiles for the AT4.
Note that because the AT4 is a one-shot weapon, projectiles are preloaded into the launcher tubes.

HEAT (High Explosive Anti-Tank)
The HEAT projectile can penetrate up to 420 mm (16.5 inches) of RHA with beyond-armour effect.
HEDP 502
(High Explosive Dual Purpose)
For use against bunkers, buildings, enemy personnel in the open and light armour.
The projectile can be set to detonate on impact or with a slightly delayed detonation.
The heavier nose cap allows for the HEDP projectile to either penetrate light walls or windows and then explode, or be "skipped" off the ground for an airburst.
For use against light armour, there is a smaller cone HEAT warhead with 150 mm (5.9 inches) of penetration against RHA.HP (High Penetration)
Extra high penetration ability (up to 500 mm to 600 mm (19.7 inches to 23.6 inches) of RHA.)AST
(Anti Structure Tandem-warheads)
Designed for urban warfare where a projectile heavier than the HEDP AT4 is needed.
This projectile combines a HEAT warhead with a shallow cone, which results in low penetration but produces a wide hole, with a follow-through high-blast warhead.
It has two settings: one for destroying bunkers and one for mouse-holing a building wall for combat entry.

ER
(Extended Range)
Anti-armor version with HEAT warhead that extends range from 300 m to 600 m.
HE (High Explosive)
High explosive anti-personnel weapon that can be set for impact or airburst detonation, with an effective range of up to 1,000 m.


==
Variants ==
M136 AT4
American version with modified launch tube bumpers, sights and slings.
AT8 (Bunker-Busting)
A version of the AT4 where the standard HEAT projectile is replaced with the bunker-busting warhead developed for the SMAW.
No orders were ever placed.
AT12-T
In the early 1990s, there were tests of a tandem charge 120-mm version (
Bofors AT 12-T) that would be able to penetrate the front armour of any modern main battle tank.
However, the project was cancelled due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the subsequent cuts in Western defence budgets.

==
Operators ==
Albania
Argentina:
Argentine Army and Argentine Marines.

Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Brazil
Canada:
JTF2
 Chile:
Chilean Marine Corps, Chilean Army
 Colombia
Croatia
Denmark:
Designated PVV M/95
(Panserværnsvåben Model 1995).

Dominican Republic
France: Designated ABL (Anti Blindé Lourd) by the French Army.

Georgia
Greece:
Used by Hellenic Navy Seals
Indonesia
Iraq:
The Iraqi Army was supplied with the AT4.

Ireland: Called the SRAAW
(Short Range Anti Armour Weapon) by the Irish Defence Forces.

Jaysh al-Islam (Captured from the Syrian Democratic Forces)
Latvia
 Lebanon: Roughly 1,000 pieces purchased.

Lithuania: Lithuanian Armed Forces.

Malaysia:
In Service with the Grup Gerak Khas.

Netherlands (Replaced by Pzf-3)
 Poland (limited use in Special Operations Forces and Air Mobile Forces)
 Sweden: Designated Pansarskott m/86.
Syrian Democratic Forces
Taiwan (Republic of China)
United Kingdom:
Small quantities of AT4 and HP projectiles purchased.

United States: Designated M136 AT4 in USMC and United States Army service, beginning in early 1987.
The AT4 was used in the US invasion of Panama, the War in Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf War, and the Iraq War.
Over 300,000 have been built locally, under license by ATK.

Venezuela:
The AT4 has been in the Venezuelan arsenal since the 1980s.
In 2009, it was reported that AT4s sold to Venezuela had been captured from FARC insurgents in Colombia, leading Colombia to accuse Venezuela of selling the weapons to the insurgents, and Venezuela reporting that they were stolen by a rebel attack on a Venezuelan position in 1995, thus heightening tensions between the two countries.

== See also ==
ALAC (Arma Leve Anticarro)
Alcotan-100
APILAS
B-300
Carl Gustaf 8.4cm recoilless rifle
there is some crossover with warhead types between the two systems.
Both are 84mm
DZJ-08
LAW 80
MARA (anti-tank weapon)
MATADOR
Panzerfaust 3
RPG-76
Komar
RPG-75
Urban Assault Weapon
M141 Bunker Defeat Munition
Kestrel


== References and notes ==


==
External links ==
Official site for the AT4, covering the different versions of AT4
Saab AT4 PDF Archived 19 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine
AT4 – Saab Bofors Dynamics video of various AT4 versions
AT4 Information Page – Modern Firearms
Swedish article on AT4 translated to English
M136 AT4 –
Global Security
U.S. Army field manual 3–23.25
Brazilian newspaper recorded a AT-4
at Rocinha slum (translated to English)
This is a list of equipment used by the Croatian Army.

==
Small arms ==


===
Handguns ===


===
Submachine guns ===


===
Assault rifles ===


===
Sniper rifles ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


==
Machine guns ==


==
Vehicles ==


===
Tanks ===


===
Tracked vehicles ===


===
Wheeled armoured personnel vehicles ===
===
Combat engineering vehicles ===


===
Anti-aircraft warfare ===
Although Croatia acquired the S-300 long-range surface-to-air missile system in 1994, and demonstrated some of its parts on the 1995 military parade, it is believed that the system was never fully completed and operational although the training of crews was sought as late as 1998.
Some sources claim that the weapon was subsequently handed-over to the United States or Israel in 2002–2004.
However, officials still claim that the system is stored somewhere in Croatia.

=== Anti-tank weapons ===


===
Artillery ===


====
Mortars ====


====
Towed howitzers ====


====
Self-propelled howitzers ====


====
Rocket artillery ====


===
Unmanned aerial vehicle ===


===
Trucks and multiuse vehicles ===


====
Military jeeps ====


===
Multiuse vehicles ===


==
Withdrawn from service or in storage ==
FN FAL – 7.62×51mm, 5,000 stored to be sold off.

Zastava M84 – 7.62×54mmR
, totally phased out and replaced by western systems.

Zastava M76 – 7.92×57mm sniper rifle, phased out entirely.
Replaced by Remington and SAKO in service with the Army.

M80 "Zolja" RPG – Phased out due to dwindling stock, replaced by
AT4
RPG-7 – System retired but some might be used by army reserve and for training purposes only.

RPG-22 – System replaced by AT4 and other RPGs currently in use with the Army.

BRDM-2
BTR-60 – 2 in the local army museum, scrap heap.

M60P/M60SAN – Yugoslav-made APCs, scrap heap and two in the local army museum.

MT-LB – 2 in local museum,
rest scrapped and replaced by Patria AMV.

M-47 Patton – 2 in the local army museum and rest are used for target practice.

T-55A – Withdrawal of over 280 units started in 2006 with a dozen or so tanks used for training until late 2009, but even that is no longer the case due to shortage of funds and all units have now been withdrawn and awaiting disposal.

M-63
Plamen – 128mm towed MRL, retired due to lack of ammunition and costly upkeep, no spare parts for the system.

M-94 'Plamen S –
128mm MRL, no longer fit for purpose, retired and awaiting disposal.

M-87
Orkan – 260mm MRL, captured during Battle of the Barracks in 1991.
Systems were kept in reserve status due to lack of proper ammunition.

M-84
Nora A
ZSU-57-2 – Used for target practice.

M53/59 Praga – 2 in the local army museum, scrap
heap.\


== References ==
Roman military personal equipment was produced in small numbers to established patterns, and it was used in an established manner.
These standard patterns and uses were called the res militaris or disciplina.
Its regular practice during the Roman Republic and Roman Empire led to military excellence and victory.
The equipment gave the Romans a very distinct advantage over their barbarian enemies, especially so in the case of armour.
This does not mean that every Roman soldier had better equipment than the richer men among his opponents.
According to Edward Luttwak, Roman equipment was not of a better quality than that used by the majority of Rome's adversaries.
Other historians and writers have stated that the Roman army's need for large quantities of "mass produced" equipment after the Marian Reforms and subsequent civil wars led to a decline in the quality of Roman equipment compared to the earlier Republican era: 

"The production of these kinds of helmets of Italic tradition decreased in quality because of the demands of equipping huge armies, especially during civil wars...
The bad quality of these helmets is recorded by the sources describing how sometimes they were covered by wicker protections (viminea tegimenta), like those of Pompeius' soldiers during the siege of Dyrrachium in 48 BC, which were seriously damaged by the missiles of Caesar's slingers and archers."

"It would appear that armour quality suffered at times when mass production methods were being used to meet the increased demand (from the Civil and Social Wars, and following the Marian and Augustan reforms)..." and "...
the reduced size curiasses would also have been quicker and cheaper to produce, which may have been a deciding factor at times of financial crisis, or where large bodies of men were required to be mobilized at short notice, possibly reflected in the poor-quality, mass produced iron helmets of Imperial Italic type C, as found, for example, in the River Po at Cremona, associated with the Civil Wars of AD 69 AD; Russel-Robinson, 1975, 67" 
"Up until then, the quality of helmets had been fairly consistent and the bowls well decorated and finished.
However, after the Marian Reforms, with their resultant influx of the poorest citizens into the army, there must inevitably have been a massive demand for cheaper equipment, a situation which can only have been exacerbated by the Civil Wars..."
Initially, they used weapons based on Greek and Etruscan models.
On encountering the Celts, they based new varieties on Celtic equipment.
To defeat the Carthaginians, they constructed an entire fleet de novo based on the Carthaginian model.
Once a weapon was adopted, it became standard.
The standard weapons varied somewhat during Rome's long history, but the equipment and its use were never individual.

==
Personal weapons of a roman legionary ==


===
Pugio ===
A pugio was a dagger used by Roman soldiers, likely as a sidearm.
Like other items of legionary equipment, the dagger underwent some changes during the 1st century.
Generally, it had a large, leaf-shaped blade 18 to 28 cm long and 5 cm or more in width.
A raised midrib ran the length of each side, either simply standing out from the face or defined by grooves on either side.
It was changed by making the blade a little thinner, about 3 mm, and the handle was also made out of metal.
The tang was wide and flat initially, and the grip was riveted through it, as well as through the shoulders of the blade.

Around 50 AD, a rod tang was introduced, and the hilt was no longer riveted through the shoulders of the blade.
This in itself caused no great change to the pugio's appearance, but some of these later blades were narrower (under 3.5 cm wide), and/or had little or no waisting, and/or had reduced or vestigial midribs.

Throughout the period, the outline of the hilt remained approximately the same.
It was made with two layers of horn, wood or bone sandwiching the tang, each overlaid with a thin metal plate.
Often the hilt was decorated with inlaid silver.
The hilt was 10–12 cm long overall and the grip was quite narrow; which produced a very secure grip.
An expansion or lump in the middle of the handle made the user's grip even more secure.

===
Gladius ===
Gladius is the general Latin word for "sword".
In the Roman Republic, the term gladius Hispaniensis (Spanish sword) referred (and still refers) specifically to the short sword, 60 cm (24 inches)
long, used by Roman legionaries from the 3rd century BC.
Several different better-known designs followed; among collectors and historical reenactors, the two primary kinds of swords are known as the Mainz gladius, and the Pompeii gladius which follows the Mainz type, which had itself followed the 'Hispaniensis'
(these names refer to where or how the canonical example was found).
More recent archaeological finds have confirmed the appearance of the earlier version, the gladius Hispaniensis.
The legionaries wore their gladii on their right hips.

===
Spatha ===
A spatha could be any sword (in late Latin), but most often one of the longer swords characteristic of the middle and late Roman Empire.
In the 1st century, Roman cavalry started using these longer swords, and in the late 2nd or early 3rd century, Roman infantry also switched to longer swords, as well as mostly changing from carrying javelins to carrying spears.
Shorter weapons (short swords and possibly sometimes daggers) were known as semispathae or half-swords.
A large 3rd-century hoard from Künzing included one triangular-bladed short sword and several narrow-bladed short swords (with 23–39 cm blades).
Bishop and Coulston suggest that some or all were made from broken spathae.

===
Spears and javelins (hastae) ===


====
Hasta ====
Hasta is a Latin word meaning a thrusting spear.
Hastae were carried by early Roman legionaries (camillan); in particular, they were carried by and gave their name to those Roman soldiers known as hastati.
However, during republican times, the hastati were re-armed with pila and gladii, and only the triarii still used hastae.

A hasta was about 1.8 meters (six feet) in length.
The shaft was generally made from ash while the head was usually of iron, although early republican hastae also had a tip made of bronze.

====
Javelin ====
Although Romans often used the word pila to refer to all thrown javelins, the term pilum also means specifically the heavy Roman throwing javelin of the legions.
Lighter, shorter javelins existed, such as those used by the velites and the early legions, called Verutum.
Other types of javelins would be adopted by the late Roman army, such as the Lancea and the Spiculum, which were heavily influenced by the weapons of Germanic warriors.

====
Pilum ====
The pilum (plural pila) was a heavy javelin commonly used by the Roman army in ancient times.
It was generally somewhat less than two metres (6 ft 7 in)
long overall, consisting of a wooden shaft from which projected an iron shank about 7 mm (0.28 inches) in diameter and 60 cm (23.6 in) long with a pyramidal head.
The iron shank was socketed or, more usually, widened to a flat tang.
A pilum usually weighed between two and four kilograms (4.4 and 8.8 lb), with the versions produced during the empire era being somewhat lighter.

Pila were designed to penetrate both shield and armour, wounding the wearer; but, if they simply stuck in a shield, they could not easily be removed.
Some believed that the iron shank would bend upon impact, weighing down the enemy's shield and also preventing the pilum from being immediately re-used.
Some versions of the shaft may have fallen off on impact, leaving the enemy with a bent shank in their shield.
However, recent evidence suggests that many types of pilum did not bend at all, but reduced the effectiveness of enemy shields by simply getting stuck due to the shape of its larger head and thin shank.
In fact, there were many cases where the whole shank was hardened, making the pilum more suitable as a close quarters melee weapon, while also rendering it usable by enemy soldiers.
Newer work by M. C. Bishop states that the pilum is "unlikely to bend under their own weight when thrown and striking a target or ground" - rather, it is human intervention [e.g., improper removal of a pilum stuck in a target]
that is responsible in some way, and that Caesar's writings should be interpreted as the pilum bent when soldiers tried to remove them.
A sturdy pilum that does not bend upon impact would be in line with the numerous historical Roman writings that state the pilum was often used as a weapon in melee combat:
For example, in "The Gallic Wars" Caesar writes that at Alesia his troops used the pila as spears or pikes.
In the "Life of Pompey" and "Life of Antony", Plutarch describes Caesar's men at Pharsalus jabbing upwards at the faces of Pompey's cavalry with their javelins and Marc Antony's men stabbing at Parthian cavalry with theirs.
In Arrian in Array against the Alans, Arrian writes that the first four ranks of the formation should use their pila like spearmen, while the rest should use them like javelins.

===
Projectile weapons ===


====
Bow ====
The sagittarius was armed with a composite bow (arcus), shooting an arrow (sagitta), made of horn, wood, and sinew held together with hide glue.
However, Vegetius recommended training recruits "arcubus ligneis", with wooden bows.
The reinforcing laths for the composite bows were found throughout the empire, even in the western provinces where wooden bows were traditional.

====
Crossbow ====
The cheiroballistra, also known as the manuballista, was a crossbow that was occasionally used by the Romans.
The ancient world knew a variety of mechanical hand-held weapons similar to the later medieval crossbow.
The exact terminology is a subject of continuing scholarly debate.
Roman authors like Vegetius (fl.
4th century) note repeatedly the use of arrow shooting weapons such as arcuballista and manuballista respectively cheiroballista.
While most scholars agree that one or more of these terms refer to handheld mechanical weapons, there is disagreement whether these were flexion bows or torsion powered like the recent Xanten find.
The Roman commander Arrian (c. 86 – after 146) records in his Tactica Roman cavalry training for shooting some mechanical handheld weapon from horseback.

Sculptural reliefs from Roman Gaul depict the use of crossbows in hunting scenes.
These are remarkably similar to the later medieval crossbow.

====
Plumbatae ====
Late infantrymen often carried half-dozen lead-weighted throwing-darts called plumbatae (from plumbum, meaning "lead"), with an effective range of c. 30 m, well beyond that of a javelin.
The darts were carried clipped to the back of the shield.

==
Entrenching tools ==
Ancient writers, including Julius Caesar, documented the use of spades and other digging implements as important tools of war.
A Roman legion when on the march would dig a ditch and rampart around their camps every night where established camps were not available.
They were also useful as improvised weapons.

===
Dolabra ===
The dolabra was an Italian pickaxe used as an entrenching tool.

===
Ligo ===


===
Falx ===
The falx was a curved blade that was sharp on the inside edge such as a sickle or a scythe.
It was used to clear overgrowth.

==
Torso armor ==
Not all troops wore torso armor.
Light infantry, especially in the early republic, wore little or no armor.
This was both to allow swifter movement for light troops and also as a matter of cost.

Legionary soldiers of the 1st and 2nd centuries used a variety of armour types.
Some wore mail shirts, while others wore scale armor or lorica segmentata or laminated-strip cuirass.
This last type was a complex piece of armor which in certain circumstances provided superior protection to the other types of Roman armour, mail armour (lorica hamata) and scale armour (lorica squamata).
The testing of modern replicas has demonstrated that this kind of armour was impenetrable to most direct hits and missile strikes.
It was, however, uncomfortable without padding: re-enactors have confirmed that wearing a padded undergarment known as a subarmalis relieves the wearer from bruising both from prolonged wear and from shock produced by weapon blows against the armour.
It was also expensive to produce and difficult to maintain.
In the 3rd century, the segmentata appears to have been dropped and troops are depicted wearing mail armour (mainly) or scale, the standard armour of the 2nd-century auxilia.
The artistic record shows that most late soldiers wore metal armour, despite Vegetius' statement to the contrary.
For example, illustrations in the Notitia show that the army's fabricae (arms factories) were producing mail armour at the end of the 4th century.
Actual examples of both scale armour and quite large sections of mail have been recovered, at Trier and Weiler-La-Tour respectively, within 4th-century contexts.
Officers generally seem to have worn bronze or iron cuirasses, as in the days of the principate, together with traditional pteruges.

===
Lorica segmentata ===
Lorica segmentata was a type of body armour primarily used in the early Roman Empire, but the Latin name was first used in the 16th century (the ancient form is unknown).
The armour itself consisted of broad ferrous strips ('girth hoops') fastened to internal leather straps.
The strips were arranged horizontally on the body, overlapping downwards, and they surrounded the torso in two halves, being fastened at the front and back by means of brass hooks, which were joined by leather laces.
The upper body and shoulders were protected by additional strips ('shoulder guards') and breast- and backplates.
The form of the armour allowed it to be stored very compactly, since it was possible to separate it into four sections.
During the time of its use, it was modified several times, the currently recognised types being the Kalkriese (c. 20 BC to 50), Corbridge (c. 40 to 120), and Newstead (c. 120 to possibly the early 4th century) types.
There is also a little-known fourth type, known only from a statue found at Alba Julia in Romania, where there appears to have been a hybrid form, the shoulders being protected by scale armour and the torso hoops being fewer in number and deeper.

The earliest evidence of the lorica segmentata being worn is around 9 BC (Dangstetten), and the armour was evidently quite common in service until the 2nd century AD, judging from the number of finds throughout this period (over 100 sites are known, many of them in Britain).
However, even during the 2nd century AD, the segmentata never replaced the lorica hamata - thus the hamata mail was still standard issue for both heavy infantry and auxiliaries alike.
The last recorded use of this armour seems to have been for the last quarter of the 3rd century AD (Leon, Spain).

There are two opinions as to who used this form of armour.
One is that only legionaries (heavy infantry of the Roman legions) and praetorians were issued lorica segmentata.
Auxiliary forces would more commonly wear the lorica hamata, or lorica squamata.
The second viewpoint is that both legionaries and auxiliary soldiers used the segmentata armour and this latter view is supported, to some degree, by archaeological findings.
The lorica segmentata offered greater protection than the lorica hamata for about half of the weight, but was also more difficult to produce and repair.
The expenses attributed to the segmentata may account for the reversion to ring-mail after the 3rd to 4th century.
Alternatively, all forms of armour may have fallen into disuse as the need for heavy infantry waned in favour of the speed of mounted troops.

===
Lorica hamata ===
Lorica hamata was a type of mail armour used during the Roman Republic continuing throughout the Roman Empire as a standard-issue armour for the primary heavy infantry legionaries and secondary troops (auxilia).
They were mostly manufactured out of iron, though sometimes bronze was used instead.
The rings were linked together, alternating closed washer-like rings with riveted rings.
This produced a very flexible, reliable and strong armour.
Each ring had an inside diameter of between 5 and 7 mm, and an outside diameter of 7 to 9 mm.
The shoulders of the lorica hamata had flaps that were similar to those of the Greek linothorax; they ran from about mid-back to the front of the torso, and were connected by brass or iron hooks which connected to studs riveted through the ends of the flaps.
Several thousand rings would have gone into one lorica hamata.

Although labour-intensive to manufacture, it is thought that, with good maintenance, they could be continually used for several decades.
Its utility was such that the later appearance of the famous lorica segmentata—which afforded greater protection for a third of the weight—never led to the disappearance of the ubiquitous mail, and, in fact, the army of the late empire reverted to the lorica hamata once the segmentata had fallen out of fashion.

===
Lorica squamata ===
Lorica squamata was a type of scale armour used during the Roman Republic and at later periods.
It was made from small metal scales sewn to a fabric backing.
It is typically seen on depictions of standard bearers, musicians, centurions, cavalry troops, and even auxiliary infantry, but could be worn by regular legionaries as well.
A shirt of scale armour was shaped in the same way as a lorica hamata, mid-thigh length with the shoulder doublings or cape.
The individual scales (squamae) were either iron or bronze, or even alternating metals on the same shirt.
They could be tinned as well,
one surviving fragment showing bronze scales that were alternately tinned and plain.
The metal was generally not very thick, 0.5 mm to 0.8 mm (0.02 to 0.032 in) perhaps being a common range.
Since the scales overlapped in every direction, however, the multiple layers gave good protection.
The size ranged from as small as 6 mm (0.25 in) wide by 1.2 cm tall up to about 5 cm (2 in) wide by 8 cm (3 in) tall, with the most common sizes being roughly 1.25 by 2.5 cm (0.5 by 1 in).
Many had rounded bottoms, while others were pointed or had flat bottoms with the corners clipped off at an angle.
The scales could be flat, slightly domed, or have a raised midrib or edge.
All the scales in a shirt were generally of the same size; however, scales from different shirts varied significantly.

The scales were wired together in horizontal rows that were then laced or sewn to the backing.
Therefore, each scale had from four to 12 holes: two or more at each side for wiring to the next in the row, one or two at the top for fastening to the backing, and sometimes one or two at the bottom to secure the scales to the backing or to each other.
It is possible that the shirt could be opened either at the back or down one side so that it was easier to put on, the opening being closed by ties.
Much has been written about scale armour's supposed vulnerability to an upward thrust, but this is probably exaggerated.
No examples of an entire lorica squamata have been found, but there have been several archaeological finds of fragments of such shirts and individual scales are quite common finds—even in non-military contexts.

==
Shields ==


===
Scutum ===


===
Parma ===
The parma was a circular shield, three Roman feet across.
It was smaller than most shields, but was strongly made and regarded as effective protection.
This may have been due to the use of iron in its frame.
It had a handle and a shield boss (umbo).

The parma was used in the Roman army of the mid-Republic, by the lowest class division of the army — the velites.
The velites' equipment consisted of a parma, javelin, sword and helmet.
Later, the parma was replaced by the scutum.

===
Caetra ===
A light shield of wood and leather, the name from Greek (καίτρεα, Hesych.).
Used by tribesmen from Hispania, Mauretania, and Britannia.

==
Helmets ==
Roman helmets, galea or cassis, varied greatly in form.
One of the earliest types was the Montefortino helmet used by the Republic armies up to the 1st century BC.
This was replaced directly by the Coolus helmet, which "raised the neck peak to eye level and set a sturdy frontal peak to the brow of the helmet".
The Galea was used from the late 1st century BC to the late 2nd century AD and it drew influence from the Gallic tribes to the north, hence its name.
Roman helmets usually featured a bowl protecting the head, an extension at the back with a neck guard, a ridge above the forehead for additional impact protection and decoration, and hinged cheek guards which left the ears exposed for better hearing in the battlefield.
They would be eventually be replaced by the ridge helmet and the Spangenhelm during the late imperial period.

==
Limb armour ==


===
Manica ===
From early imperial times to after the fall of the Western Empire, some troops wore segmented armour on one or both arms.
The Manica was first used by gladiators and it was made either from padded cloth or overlapping metal sheets.
Roman legionaries are depicted wearing Manicas in engravings of the Dacian Wars.

===
Greave ===
Greaves, sheet metal protecting the legs, were widely used in the early republic, and by some troops in the imperial army.
Early Roman legionaries would wear a single greave on the left leg which was more exposed under the shield, as it was fashion in Italic cultures.

==
Clothing ==
Tunic: a basic garment worn under the armour by all soldiers in the republic and early empire.
Normally made of wool.
Tunics originally consisted simply of a piece of rectangular cloth sewed to an identical piece, with holes for the arms and head left unsewn.
Later, it became fashionable for tunics to be produced with sleeves, and worn with braccae.

Subarmalis:
A padded jacket made out of linen or leather, worn underneath armors such as the lorica hamata or lorica segmentata to provide impact protection as well as better weight distribution and comfort.

Focale: a scarf worn by legionaries to protect the neck from chafing caused by constant contact with the soldier's armour (typically lorica hamata or lorica segmentata) and helmet
Balteus: a sword belt
Cingulum militare: a type of decorated belt denoting rank
Braccae:
woollen trousers
Subligaria: underpants.
Their existence was confirmed by one of the Vindolanda tablets.

Cloak: two types of cloaks were used, the sagum and the paenula.
Both were made from wool, which insulated and also contained natural oil to repel water.
They were fastened with a fibula.
The paenula was hooded in colder climates.
Since every common soldier slept in the open, it was important that he have a warm full-length wrap, but necessary that he carry it with him each day regardless of his activities.

This was accomplished by a cloak of more than body length, double-folded so that it did not fall beneath the knees when worn.
An excellent illustration of this is the statue of Caesar Augustus atop the theater in the Roman city of Orange, in what is now France.

Caligae: military boots worn by legionaries and auxiliaries throughout the history of the Roman Republic and Empire.
The boots were made from leather and laced up the center of the foot and onto the top of the ankle.
Iron hobnails were hammered into the sole for added strength.
Similar to the modern cleat.

Pteruges: leather or fabric strips that formed a skirt or sleeves to protect limbs while maintaining mobility and ventilation.
They were usually part of a padding coat worn under the armor, such as the subarmalis.
Pteruges could be fitted with small metal studs and plates to provide additional protection.

== Sarcina ==
A military pack carried by legionaries.
The pack included a number of items suspended from a furca or carrying pole.
Items carried in the pack included:
Loculus: a leather satchel
Waterskin: Roman camps would typically be built near water sources, but each soldier would have to carry his water for the day's march in a waterskin.

Food: each legionary would carry some of his food.
Although a Roman army on the move would typically have a baggage train of mules or similar to carry supplies such as food, after the Marian reforms legionaries were required to carry about 15 days worth of basic food supplies with them.

Cooking equipment: including a patera, cooking pot and skewer.

Entrenching tools:
Carried by legionaries to construct fortifications and dig latrines etc.
Each legionary would typically carry either a shovel (batillum) or dolabra (mattock) for digging, a turf cutting tool or a wicker basket for hauling earth.

Sudis: stakes for construction of camps


==
Other ==


===
Ballista ===
The ballista was a powerful catapult, consisting of a beam with a frame at the end, mounting two rigid arms powered by torsion in bundles of sinew at each side, which would pull a bowstring between them propelling the projectile.
It launched heavy darts called bolts, or spherical stone projectiles of various sizes.
Ballistas were fit with grappling hooks to seize enemy vessels during the Roman civil wars.
The Romans would develop an improved version with inward facing arms in the 3rd century, the remains of such were found in the town of Hatra in Iraq.

===
Scorpio ===
The scorpio was a torsion-powered catapult-type weapon, similar to a smaller ballista, which fired bolts capable of piercing enemy shields and armour.
The Roman army supplied 60 to each legion and they were used both offensively during sieges and defensively as part of the Romans' field camp defenses.
They were also mounted on ships and carriages to provide support to infantry.

===
Onager ===
The Onager was a torsion-powered siege engine in which a sinew or horse hair spring mounted on a wooden frame swung an arm vertically against a stop, hurling projectiles in a high arc.
It launched stones from a cup or sling, and it was named after a species of Asiatic Ass due to its kick.

=== Buccina ===
A brass instrument used in the ancient Roman army.
It was originally designed as a tube measuring some 11 to 12 feet in length, of narrow cylindrical bore, and played by means of a cup-shaped mouthpiece.
The tube was bent around upon itself from the mouthpiece to the bell in the shape of a broad C and was strengthened by means of a bar across the curve, which the performer grasped while playing, in order to steady the instrument; the curves over his head or shoulder.

The buccina was used for the announcement of night watches and various other announcements in the camp.

The instrument is the ancestor of both the trumpet and the trombone.
The German word for trombone, Posaune, is derived from buccina.
===
Tribulus ===
A tribulus (caltrop) was a weapon made up of four sharp nails or spines arranged in such a manner that one of them always pointed upward from a stable base (for example, a tetrahedron).
Caltrops served to slow down the advance of horses, war elephants, and human troops.
It was said to be particularly effective against the soft feet of camels.
The late-Roman writer Vegetius, in his work De Re Militari, wrote:

The scythed chariots used in war by Antiochus and Mithridates at first terrified the Romans, but they afterwards made a jest of them.
As a chariot of this sort does not always meet with plain and level ground, the least obstruction stops it.
And if one of the horses be either killed or wounded, it falls into the enemy's hands.
The Roman soldiers rendered them useless chiefly by the following contrivance: at the instant the engagement began, they strewed the field of battle with caltrops, and the horses that drew the chariots, running full speed on them, were infallibly destroyed.
A caltrop is a machine composed of four spikes or points arranged so that in whatever manner it is thrown on the ground, it rests on three and presents the fourth upright.

== See also ==
Roman siege machines
Military of ancient Rome
Technological history of the Roman military


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
Ammianus Marcellinus, Roman History (late 4th century)
Goldsworthy, Adrian (2003).
Complete Roman Army.

D’Amato, Raffaele (2009).
Arms and Armour of the Imperial Roman Soldier From Marius to Commodus, 112 BC–AD 192.

Travis, Hilary; Travis, John (2014).
Roman Helmets.
ISBN 978-1445638423.

Bishop, M.C. (1985).
The Production and Distribution of Roman Military Equipment Proceedings of the Second Roman Military Equipment Research Seminar.
==
External links ==
Roman military equipment in the British Museum, Hunterian Museum and National Museum of Scotland
For images of authentic Roman military equipment see
http://www.romancoins.info/MilitaryEquipment.html
Military Institute of Technology (MILIT), Pune is an inter-services institution of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of India.
MILIT is considered as soul of earstwhile Institute of Armament Studies (IAT), Girinagar established in year 1952.
It conducts prestigious Defence Services Technical Staff Course and trains officers of the three Services of Indian Armed Forces and officers from friendly foreign countries for command and staff appointments.

==
History ==
The fore-runner of MILIT is the Institute of Armament Studies established within the campus of College of Military Engineering (CME), Dapodi, Pune in 1952.
The Institute then was conducting only the Technical Staff Officers' Course for the Army.
In the ensuing years, several courses were added to the Institute curriculum based on the needs of the three Services, Defence Research and Development Organisation, DGQA, DAQA and Defence PSUs etc.

In 1967, the institute was renamed as "Institute of Armament Technology" (IAT), which moved into the picturesque location of Girinagar, on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake; its present location.
The institute is spread over 496 acres (201 ha) in scenic beautiful location, overlooking Khadakwasla dam, in Sahyadri hills.
From the relatively narrow scope of Armament Studies alone in the Fifties, the role of the institute was considerably enlarged by the Defence R&D Council in 1964 and further in 1981.

On the basis of accreditation by the All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), Pune University recognised eight courses for the award of ME degree in 1982.
The institute acquired the status of a Deemed University in 1999.
It became autonomous w.e.f.
1 April 2006 and was rechristened as Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), a Deemed to be University (DU).
At the same time, thoughts about bifurcating Military Training Wing started mushrooming and same was implemented om 19 Jan 2012.

To have an Institute completely dedicated to the needs of the three Services, a case was initiated to bifurcate MILIT from DIAT (DU).

The major Milestones leading to final formation of MILIT are given subsequently.
==
Campus ==
The institute is located on Pune-Sinhagad-Panshet road on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake at Girinagar, a scenicbeautiful place.
There is an all-weather road between NDA and MILIT.
MILIT Campus is serviced by Pune Municipal Transport bus services route
No 49, 50, 51 and 52.

The campus is spread over 496 acres, divided into Technical Complex and Residential Complex.

The Technical Complex is spread over 100 acres and houses the Academic Block, Administrative Headquarters, 51 Laboratories, library, etc.
of DIAT (DU) and MILIT, Pune.

Residential Complex is spread over 396 acres and has accommodation for 200 staff and student officers with the ancillaries like Officers' Mess, Officers' Institute, JCOs' Mess, MI Room, Sports Complex, CSD Canteen, Helipad, Gole Market with Bank, Post Office,
Gas Agency etc.
KV, Girinagar and MILIT Tiny Tots Primary School are also located in the campus.
Climate – Situated at a height of about 650 meters above mean sea level
, Girinagar has a pleasant and temperate climate.
However, the possibility of chilly nights cannot be ruled out from Nov to Jan.
The temperature varies from 8–40 Celsius during the year.
Summer, Monsoon and Winter seasons extend from Mar–Jun, Jul–Oct and Nov–Feb respectively.

==
Courses ==
In order to meet the specific and futuristic training requirements of Armed Forces, DIAT (DU) was bifurcated to form Military Institute of Training (MILIT), Pune.

MILIT is mandated to conduct 23 courses of varying durations from three days to 48 weeks for the Officers of the three services.

First Technical Staff Course was conducted in Yr 1953–54, later the name of the course was changed to Technical Staff Officer's Course (TSOC)
TSOC-01 was conducted in Yr 1975–76.

On 01 Jul 2018, TSOC-44 course was redesignated as Defence Services Technical Staff Course (DSTSC-01).
The  DSTSC-01 is the pioneer course of all Arms and Inter -Services mid seniority bracket of Officers whose Non Tech and Tech phase commenced from 4 June 18 and 2 July 18 respectively.
The student officers are being equipped, trained and nurtured by exposing them to cutting-edge technologies, latest procurement procedures and concrete military training so as to mould the course to face, handle and emerge victorious in all future challenges.

== See also ==
Indian National Defence University
Military Academies in
India
Sainik school


==
References ==
https://ids.nic.in/milit.php

Pune military institute of technology adopts Donje village, Indian Express
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/First-batch-of-tech-staff-officers-pass-out-of-Military-Institute-of-Technology/articleshow/13424150.cms
https://www.robolab.in/clients/military-institute-of-technology-pune/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/events/pune/military-institute-of-technology-at-defexpo-2018/articleshow/63882547.cms?utm_source=whatsapp&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=TOIMobile
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/seminar-on-challenges-of-self-reliance-in-defence-requirements-organised-5175747/
https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/128-officers-pass-out-from-military-institute-of-technology-2802674/
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village-5120085/
https://www.nyoooz.com/news/pune/1072795/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village/
https://www.punekarnews.in/valedictory-function-at-milit/
http://www.punekarnews.in/148-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/
http://www.uniindia.com/~/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/States/news/1234974.html
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-milit-city-18347
http://www.dainikprabhat.com/%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%95%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b7%e0%a4%ae-%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%88%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%af-%e0%a4%a6%e0%a4%b2%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a0%e0%a5%80-%e0%a4%86%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%9f/
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/milit-organises-workshop-ai-25090
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-over-22-officers-from-three-services-take-part-in-the-sixth-chapter-of-capstar-5365619/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/military-officials-deliberate-digitisation-of-terrorism-social-media-misuse/articleshow/65903393.cms?utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=iOSapp&utm_source=WhatsApp.com
https://twitter.com/HQ_IDS_India/status/1033041483644002305https://www.punekarnews.in/milit-handle-bar-cycling-club-to-organise-a-farewell-ride-for-avm-vivek-rajhans-tomorrow/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-military-institute-of-technology-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.mypunepulse.com/milit-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-maj-gen-hari-singh-is-the-new-commandant-of-military-institute-of-technology/


==
External links ==
https://www.ids.nic.in/
https://www.nda.nic.in/
http://www.unipune.ac.in/
A squad automatic weapon (SAW), also known as a section automatic weapon or light support weapon (LSW), is a fully automatic firearm used to give infantry squads or sections a man-portable source of fully automatic firepower.
Weapons used in this role are often selective-fire rifles, usually fitted with a bipod and heavier barrel to perform as light machine guns or 
general-purpose machine guns.
Squad automatic weapons usually fire the same cartridge as the assault rifles or battle rifles carried by other members of the unit.
This reduces logistical requirements by making it only necessary to supply one type of ammunition to a unit.
Squad automatic weapons are light enough to be operated by one person, as opposed to heavy machine guns such as the M2 Browning, which fire more powerful cartridges but require a crew to operate at full effectiveness.

==
Overview ==
One of the first weapons used in this role was the Madsen machine gun.
Although limited in today's terms, the Madsen was introduced in an era when the standard infantry rifle was a bolt-action repeater with fixed magazines reloaded with single rounds or chargers; sustained rapid fire with these weapons could be maintained only for very short periods of time.
The Madsen was capable of fully automatic fire; despite having only limited magazine capacity, this was still more than that of the infantry rifle, and it was of the quick change detachable box magazine type.
Though over 100 years old, the Madsen is still in limited use today.
The standard machine guns of this era were of the Maxim type.
Used by the British, Germans, and the Russians, these weapons were bulky, heavy, tripod-based, and water-cooled, they required a team of four men and, although excellent in the defence, were not suited to manoeuvre warfare.

Another pioneering weapon in this role was the Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR).
Introduced late in World War I, it remained in front-line service into the Vietnam War.
Intended originally as an automatic rifle capable of delivering suppressing "walking fire" in the advance, the BAR came to be used in the light machine gun role.
During World War II, as the importance of having a source of mobile automatic fire increased, the number of BARs in a unit also increased, until in some units it represented 1 in 4 of the weapons present in a squad.
During its long service in the US military, it was pivotal in the evolution of U.S. fireteam tactics and doctrine that continues to the present day.

Modern squad automatic weapons (such as the RPK and L86) are modified assault rifles or battle rifles (e.g. FN FAL 50.41 and
M14A1)
that may have increased ammunition capacity and heavier barrels to withstand continued fire and will almost always have a bipod.
In the case of some assault rifles, such as the H&K G36 or Steyr AUG, the SAW is simply the standard rifle with a few parts replaced.
However, the Austrian Army, though issuing the Steyr AUG rifle, does not issue the HBAR (heavy barrel) variant.
Instead, the 7.62mm caliber MG74, a derivative of WW2-era German MG 42, is issued.

Light machine guns, either belt-fed or magazine-fed, may be used as squad automatic weapons, as may be general-purpose machine guns; for example, during most of the Cold War period, the standard squad automatic weapon in the British Army was the FN Mag-derived L7.
The most common squad automatic weapons in use today are derived from two basic patterns: the Kalashnikov-based RPK or the purpose-designed FN Minimi.

===
Belgium ===
FN Minimi
FN SCAR


===
China ===
QBB-95
QJY-88


===
Germany ===
West Germany's original plan in the late 1980s was to adopt the new 5.56mm Heckler & Koch G41 assault rifle (a variant of the HK33) to replace the 7.62mm Heckler & Koch G3 battle rifle and the 4.7mm Heckler & Koch G11 carbine to replace the 9mm IMI MP2 Uzi and Heckler & Koch MP5.
The end of the Cold War and the reunification of Germany in 1990 forced everyone to scramble for a cheap alternative.
The G36 family was created from a proof-of-concept prototype rechambered to fire the 5.56mm NATO cartridge.
It is composed of an assault rifle (G36), light machine gun (MG36), assault carbine (G36K), and PDW (G36C).
MG4 is standard platoon-level support weapon of the German Army, adopted in 2005.
MG5 is general-purpose machine gun of the German Army, adopted in 2015.

HK MG36
HK MG4
HK
MG5


===
Italy ===
In the 1980s the Italian military considered the idea of adopting a heavy-barrelled magazine-fed 5.56mm automatic rifle.
It was to accompany the 5.56mm Beretta AR70/90 assault rifle and supplement the 7.62mm MG 42/59 general purpose machine gun.
A rethinking of the concept led to their adoption of the belt-fed FN Minimi instead.

===
Netherlands ===
The Netherlands Marine Corps is the only part of the Dutch military to use the LOAWNLD (an updated version of the Colt Canada Light Support Weapon) as their squad automatic weapon.
All other branches use the FN Minimi for this role.
===
Soviet Union/Russian Federation ===
The Russian support weapon concept was designed around providing one standard cartridge that could be used by the clip-fed rifle (SKS), magazine-fed assault rifle (AK-47) and belt-fed light machine gun (RPD).
The SKS and RPD were dropped as being less effective than hoped.
The RPK, with its magazine and parts commonality with the base AK-47, was more effective.
It replaced the RPD as soon as manufacturing techniques allowed it to be mass-produced.

RPK
RPKS
RPK-74
RPK-74M/
RPK-201/
RPK-203
RPK-16:
The RPK-16 squad automatic weapon is a new light support weapon which is expected to take over the role of its predecessor, the RPK-74, in the Russian Armed Forces.

RPL-20
===
United Kingdom ===
The SA80 program was designed to create a family of light assault weapons that had a commonality of parts, could use the same ammunition and magazines, and would replace the UK military's collection of submachine guns, rifles, and light machine guns.
Originally designed around a lighter experimental 4.85mm cartridge, they were forced to redesign the weapon to take the 5.56mm NATO cartridge.
The L85 IW (Individual Weapon) was the rifle version and was designed to replace the 9mm L2 Sterling SMG and 7.62mm L1A1 SLR Rifle.
The L86 LSW (Light Support Weapon) was the automatic rifle version and was intended to replace the L4 BREN gun and supplement the FN MAG general-purpose machine gun, replacing it at section level.
Teething problems, low quality parts, poor ergonomic design and an inability to be wielded left-handed made the SA80 suite unpopular.
The magazine-fed L86 was found to not be as capable of sustained fire as a belt-fed system so it was initially supplemented by the L110A1 FN Minimi and then replaced by it.
The L86's role was then changed to that of a Designated Marksman Rifle.

===
United States ===
In United States usage, the M249 light machine gun is commonly referred to as the Squad Automatic Weapon (SAW).In the 1970s the United States began realizing that they might have to fight a conflict in the deserts and mountains of the Middle East or Near East rather than the jungles of Asia or forests of Europe and Eurasia.
The Squad Automatic Weapon program was designed to create an intermediate weapon between the M16 rifle and M60 machine gun.
It would have to fire tracer ammunition out to a visible range of 800 meters or more, be capable of accurate high-volume sustained fire, and be lighter and more reliable than the M60.
Initially the contenders were built around a new intermediate cartridge, but the problems with approval for a new third American-backed standard NATO cartridge forced its abandonment.
The program then selected between the control group weapons: the FN Minimi (XM249) and Heckler & Koch HK 23 (XM262) chambered for the improved 5.56mm SS109 round.
The FN Minimi was adopted as the M249 because it could optionally fire from magazines from an integral magazine port rather than requiring an exchange of parts in the field like the HK23.

The Infantry Automatic Rifle program was launched by the United States Marine Corps in 2005.
Its task was to find a replacement for the heavy and cumbersome M249 SAW that was serving as the Squad Automatic weapon in a fireteam at the time.
Two of the weapons in the competition were the FN SCAR HAMR and a slightly modified HK416.
The weapon chosen to replace the M249 was the modified HK416, later designated the M27 IAR.
The M249 SAW is still in use as a squad automatic weapon by the US Army.

M249
M27 IARIn
2019 US Army launched Next Generation Squad Weapon - Automatic Rifle program to find replacement for M249 SAW and replacement for 5.56×45mm NATO round.
There are three competitors:
Sig Sauer MG-6.8 with 6.8 Sig hybrid round
General Dynamics RM277-AR with .277
TVCM plymer
cased round manufactured by True Velocity
AAI and Textron AR with 6.8mm CT cased telescoped round manufactured by Olin Winchester


==
See also ==
Crew-served weapon
Heavy machine gun
Heavy weapons platoon
Medium machine gun


=
= References ==
List of modern equipment of the Syrian Arab Army.
The vast majority of Syrian military equipment was Soviet manufactured but the organization and military doctrine of the armed forces 
followed a mix of French and Western influences as the Soviet Union closely guarded its operational principles and never shared them with client states.
The accuracy of the data is difficult to assess due to the ongoing Syrian Civil War, as weapons and vehicles are acquired and lost during battles.

==
Small arms ==


===
Pistols ===


===
Carbines ===


===
Assault rifles ===


===
Rifles ===


===
Light machine guns ===
===
Medium machine guns ===


===
Heavy machine guns ===


===
General-purpose machine guns ===


===
Grenades ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


===
Mines ===


===
Anti-tank ===


===
MANPADS ===
Combined total of 5,000+ launchers.

== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Infantry fighting vehicles ===


===
Armoured personnel carriers ===


===
Military engineering ===


===
Logistics and utility vehicles ===


==
Artillery ==
===
Mortars ===


===
Field artillery ===


===
Self-propelled field artillery ===


===
Multiple launch rocket systems ===


==
Anti-air guns and systems ==


===
Towed anti-aircraft artillery ===


===
Towed air defence ===


===
Self-propelled air defence ===


==
Ballistic missiles ==


===
Tactical ballistic missiles ===


==
Command posts ==


===
Higher level command posts ===


==
Unmanned aerial vehicles ==


===
Non-combat unmanned air vehicles ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Syria Land Forces military equipment and vehicles Syrian Army
Army Equipment
theglobalscout.com
amored vehicles airpower Syrian civil war
Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), also known as manual metal arc welding (MMA or MMAW),
flux shielded arc welding or informally as stick welding, is a manual arc welding process that uses a consumable electrode covered with a flux to lay the weld.

An electric current, in the form of either alternating current or direct current from a welding power supply, is used to form an electric arc between the electrode and the metals to be joined.
The workpiece and the electrode melts forming a pool of molten metal (weld pool)
that cools to form a joint.
As the weld is laid, the flux coating of the electrode disintegrates, giving off vapors that serve as a shielding gas and providing a layer of slag, both of which protect the weld area from atmospheric contamination.

Because of the versatility of the process and the simplicity of its equipment and operation, shielded metal arc welding is one of the world's first and most popular welding processes.
It dominates other welding processes in the maintenance and repair industry, and though flux-cored arc welding is growing in popularity, SMAW continues to be used extensively in the construction of heavy steel structures and in industrial fabrication.
The process is used primarily to weld iron and steels (including stainless steel) but aluminium, nickel and copper alloys can also be welded with this method.
==
Development ==
After the discovery of the short pulsed electric arc in 1800 by Humphry Davy and of the continuous electric arc in 1802 by Vasily Petrov, there was little development in electrical welding until Auguste de Méritens developed a carbon arc torch that was patented in 1881.In 1885, Nikolay Benardos and Stanisław Olszewski developed carbon arc welding, obtaining American patents from 1887 showing a rudimentary electrode holder.
In 1888, the consumable metal electrode was invented by Nikolay Slavyanov.
Later in 1890, C. L. Coffin received U.S. Patent 428,459 for his arc welding method that utilized a metal electrode.
The process, like SMAW, deposited melted electrode metal into the weld as filler.
Around 1900, Arthur Percy Strohmenger and Oscar Kjellberg released the first coated electrodes.
Strohmenger used clay and lime coating to stabilize the arc, while Kjellberg dipped iron wire into mixtures of carbonates and silicates to coat the electrode.
In 1912, Strohmenger released a heavily coated electrode, but high cost and complex production methods prevented these early electrodes from gaining popularity.
In 1927, the development of an extrusion process reduced the cost of coating electrodes while allowing manufacturers to produce more complex coating mixtures designed for specific applications.
In the 1950s, manufacturers introduced iron powder into the flux coating, making it possible to increase the welding speed.
In 1945 Karl Kristian Masden described an automated variation of SMAW, now known as gravity welding.
It briefly gained popularity in the 1960s after receiving publicity for its use in Japanese shipyards though today its applications are limited.
Another little used variation of the process, known as firecracker welding, was developed around the same time by George Hafergut in Austria.
In 1964 laser welding was developed in Bell Laboratory with the intention of using this technology as a communication tool.
Due to the large force of energy coupled with the small area of focus, this laser became a powerful heat source for cutting and tooling.

==
Operation ==
To strike the electric arc, the electrode is brought into contact with the workpiece by a very light touch of the electrode to the base metal.
The electrode is then pulled back slightly.
This initiates the arc and thus the melting of the workpiece and the consumable electrode, and causes droplets of the electrode to be passed from the electrode to the weld pool.
Striking an arc, which varies widely based upon electrode and workpiece composition, can be the hardest skill for beginners.
The orientation of the electrode to workpiece is where most stumble, if the electrode is held at a perpendicular angle to the workpiece the tip will likely stick to the metal which will fuse the electrode to the workpiece which will cause it to heat up very rapidly.
The tip of the electrode needs to be at a lower angle to the workpiece, which allows the weld pool to flow out of the arc.

As the electrode melts, the flux covering disintegrates, giving off shielding gases that protect the weld area from oxygen and other atmospheric gases.
In addition, the flux provides molten slag which covers the filler as it travels from electrode to the weld pool.
Once part of the weld pool, the slag floats to the surface and protects the weld from contamination as it solidifies.
Once hardened, it must be chipped away to reveal the finished weld.
As welding progresses and the electrode melts, the welder must periodically stop welding to remove the remaining electrode stub and insert a new electrode into the electrode holder.
This activity, combined with chipping away the slag, reduces the amount of time that the welder can spend laying the weld, making SMAW one of the least efficient welding processes.
In general, the operator factor, or the percentage of operator's time spent laying weld, is approximately 25%.The actual welding technique utilized depends on the electrode,
the composition of the workpiece, and the position of the joint being welded.
The choice of electrode and welding position also determine the welding speed.
Flat welds require the least operator skill, and can be done with electrodes that melt quickly but solidify slowly.
This permits higher welding speeds.
Sloped, vertical or upside-down welding requires more operator skill, and often necessitates the use of an electrode that solidifies quickly to prevent the molten metal from flowing out of the weld pool.
However, this generally means that the electrode melts less quickly, thus increasing the time required to lay the weld.

===
Quality ===
The most common quality problems associated with SMAW include weld spatter, porosity, poor fusion, shallow penetration, and cracking.
Weld spatter, while not affecting the integrity of the weld, damages its appearance and increases cleaning costs.
Secondary finishing services are often required due to the aesthetic appearance caused by the occurrence of molten splatter.
It can be caused by excessively high current, a long arc, or arc blow, a condition associated with direct current characterized by the electric arc being deflected away from the weld pool by magnetic forces.
Arc blow can also cause porosity in the weld, as can joint contamination, high welding speed, and a long welding arc, especially when low-hydrogen electrodes are used.
Porosity, often not visible without the use of advanced nondestructive testing methods, is a serious concern because it can potentially weaken the weld.
Porosity is caused when the gaseous shield did not sufficiently shield the molten weld metal while the bead is laid or while it is cooling.
What happens is that the weld bead is overexposed to and absorbs; nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen from the atmosphere.
When a porous weld cools, the newly absorbed gaseous molecules are released and the welder is left with a porous weld bead.
Another defect affecting the strength of the weld is poor fusion, though it is often easily visible.
It is caused by low current, contaminated joint surfaces, or the use of an improper electrode.
Shallow penetration, another detriment to weld strength, can be addressed by decreasing welding speed, increasing the current or using a smaller electrode.
Any of these weld-strength-related defects can make the weld prone to cracking, but other factors are involved as well.
High carbon, alloy or sulfur content in the base material can lead to cracking, especially if low-hydrogen electrodes and preheating are not employed.
Furthermore, the workpieces should not be excessively restrained, as this introduces residual stresses into the weld and can cause cracking as the weld cools and contracts.

=== Safety ===

SMAW welding, like other welding methods, can be a dangerous and unhealthy practice if proper precautions are not taken.
The process uses an open electric arc, which presents a risk of burns which are prevented by personal protective equipment in the form of heavy leather gloves and long sleeve jackets.
Additionally, the brightness of the weld area can lead to a condition called arc eye, in which ultraviolet light causes inflammation of the cornea and can burn the retinas of the eyes.
Welding helmets with dark face plates are worn to prevent this exposure, and in recent years, new helmet models have been produced that feature a face plate that self-darkens upon exposure to high amounts of UV light.
To protect bystanders, especially in industrial environments, translucent welding curtains often surround the welding area.
These curtains, made of a polyvinyl chloride plastic film, shield nearby workers from exposure to the UV light from the electric arc, but should not be used to replace the filter glass used in helmets.
In addition, the vaporizing metal and flux materials expose welders to dangerous gases and particulate matter.
The smoke produced contains particles of various types of oxides.
The size of the particles in question tends to influence the toxicity of the fumes, with smaller particles presenting a greater danger.
Additionally, gases like carbon dioxide and ozone can form, which can prove dangerous if ventilation is inadequate.
Some of the latest welding masks are fitted with an electric powered fan to help disperse harmful fumes.

=== Application and materials ===
Shielded metal arc welding is one of the world's most popular welding processes, accounting for over half of all welding in some countries.
Because of its versatility and simplicity, it is particularly dominant in the maintenance and repair industry, and is heavily used in the construction of steel structures and in industrial fabrication.
In recent years its use has declined as flux-cored arc welding has expanded in the construction industry and gas metal arc welding has become more popular in industrial environments.
However, because of the low equipment cost and wide applicability, the process will likely remain popular, especially among amateurs and small businesses where specialized welding processes are uneconomical and unnecessary.
SMAW is often used to weld carbon steel, low and high alloy steel, stainless steel, cast iron, and ductile iron.
While less popular for non-ferrous materials, it can be used on nickel and copper and their alloys and, in rare cases, on aluminium.
The thickness of the material being welded is bounded on the low end primarily by the skill of the welder, but rarely does it drop below 1.5 mm (0.06 in).
No upper bound exists: with proper joint preparation and use of multiple passes, materials of virtually unlimited thicknesses can be joined.
Furthermore, depending on the electrode used and the skill of the welder, SMAW can be used in any position.

== Equipment ==
Shielded metal arc welding equipment typically consists of a constant current welding power supply and an electrode, with an electrode holder, a ground clamp, and welding cables (also known as welding leads) connecting the two.

===
Power supply ===
The power supply used in SMAW has constant current output, ensuring that the current (and thus the heat) remains relatively constant, even if the arc distance and voltage change.
This is important because most applications of SMAW are manual, requiring that an operator hold the torch.
Maintaining a suitably steady arc distance is difficult if a constant voltage power source is used instead, since it can cause dramatic heat variations and make welding more difficult.
However, because the current is not maintained absolutely constant, skilled welders performing complicated welds can vary the arc length to cause minor fluctuations in the current.

The preferred polarity of the SMAW system depends primarily upon the electrode being used and the desired properties of the weld.
Direct current with a negatively charged electrode (DCEN) causes heat to build up on the electrode, increasing the electrode melting rate and decreasing the depth of the weld.
Reversing the polarity so that the electrode is positively charged (DCEP) and the workpiece is negatively charged increases the weld penetration.
With alternating current the polarity changes over 100 times per second, creating an even heat distribution and providing a balance between electrode melting rate and penetration.
Typically, the equipment used for SMAW consists of a step-down transformer and for direct current models a rectifier, which converts alternating current into direct current.
Because the power normally supplied to the welding machine is high-voltage alternating current, the welding transformer is used to reduce the voltage and increase the current.
As a result, instead of 220 V at 50 A, for example, the power supplied by the transformer is around 17–45 V at currents up to 600 A.
A number of different types of transformers can be used to produce this effect, including multiple coil and inverter machines, with each using a different method to manipulate the welding current.
The multiple coil type adjusts the current by either varying the number of turns in the coil (in tap-type transformers) or by varying the distance between the primary and secondary coils (in movable coil or movable core transformers).
Inverters, which are smaller and thus more portable, use electronic components to change the current characteristics.
Electrical generators and alternators are frequently used as portable welding power supplies, but because of lower efficiency and greater costs, they are less frequently used in industry.
Maintenance also tends to be more difficult, because of the complexities of using a combustion engine as a power source.
However, in one sense they are simpler: the use of a separate rectifier is unnecessary because they can provide either AC or DC.
However, the engine driven units are most practical in field work where the welding often must be done out of doors and in locations where transformer type welders are not usable because there is no power source available to be transformed.

In some units the alternator is essentially the same as that used in portable generating sets used to supply mains power, modified to produce a higher current at a lower voltage but still at the 50 or 60 Hz grid frequency.
In higher-quality units an alternator with more poles is used and supplies current at a higher frequency, such as 400 Hz.
The smaller amount of time the high-frequency waveform spends near zero makes it much easier to strike and maintain a stable arc than with the cheaper grid-frequency sets or grid-frequency mains-powered units.

===
Electrode ===
The choice of electrode for SMAW depends on a number of factors, including the weld material, welding position and the desired weld properties.
The electrode is coated in a metal mixture called flux, which gives off gases as it decomposes to prevent weld contamination, introduces deoxidizers to purify the weld, causes weld-protecting slag to form, improves the arc stability, and provides alloying elements to improve the weld quality.
Electrodes can be divided into three groups—
those designed to melt quickly are called "fast-fill" electrodes, those designed to solidify quickly are called "fast-freeze" electrodes, and intermediate electrodes go by the name "fill-freeze" or "fast-follow" electrodes.
Fast-fill electrodes are designed to melt quickly so that the welding speed can be maximized, while fast-freeze electrodes supply filler metal that solidifies quickly, making welding in a variety of positions possible by preventing the weld pool from shifting significantly before solidifying.
The composition of the electrode core is generally similar and sometimes identical to that of the base material.
But even though a number of feasible options exist, a slight difference in alloy composition can strongly impact the properties of the resulting weld.
This is especially true of alloy steels such as HSLA steels.
Likewise, electrodes of compositions similar to those of the base materials are often used for welding nonferrous materials like aluminium and copper.
However, sometimes it is desirable to use electrodes with core materials significantly different from the base material.
For example, stainless steel electrodes are sometimes used to weld two pieces of carbon steel, and are often utilized to weld stainless steel workpieces with carbon steel workpieces.
Electrode coatings can consist of a number of different compounds, including rutile, calcium fluoride, cellulose, and iron powder.
Rutile electrodes, coated with 25%–45% TiO2, are characterized by ease of use and good appearance of the resulting weld.
However, they create welds with high hydrogen content, encouraging embrittlement and cracking.
Electrodes containing calcium fluoride (CaF2), sometimes known as basic or low-hydrogen electrodes, are hygroscopic and must be stored in dry conditions.
They produce strong welds, but with a coarse and convex-shaped joint surface.
Electrodes coated with cellulose, especially when combined with rutile, provide deep weld penetration, but because of their high moisture content, special procedures must be used to prevent excessive risk of cracking.
Finally, iron powder is a common coating additive that increases the rate at which the electrode fills the weld joint, up to twice as fast.
To identify different electrodes, the American Welding Society established a system that assigns electrodes with a four- or five-digit number.
Covered electrodes made of mild or low alloy steel carry the prefix E, followed by their number.
The first two or three digits of the number specify the tensile strength of the weld metal, in thousand pounds per square inch (ksi).
The penultimate digit generally identifies the welding positions permissible with the electrode, typically using the values 1 (normally fast-freeze electrodes, implying all position welding) and 2 (normally fast-fill electrodes, implying horizontal welding only).
The welding current and type of electrode covering are specified by the last two digits together.
When applicable, a suffix is used to denote the alloying element being contributed by the electrode.
Common electrodes include the E6010, a fast-freeze, all-position electrode with a minimum tensile strength of 60 ksi (410 MPa) which is operated using DCEP, and provides deep weld penetration with a forceful arc capable of burning through light rust or oxides on the workpiece.
E6011 is similar except its flux coating allows it to be used with alternating current in addition to DCEP.
E7024 is a fast-fill electrode, used primarily to make flat or horizontal fillet welds using AC, DCEN, or DCEP.
Examples of fill-freeze electrodes are the E6012, E6013, and E7014, all of which provide a compromise between fast welding speeds and all-position welding.

=== Process variations ===
Though SMAW is almost exclusively a manual arc welding process, one notable process variation exists, known as gravity welding or gravity arc welding.
It serves as an automated version of the traditional shielded metal arc welding process, employing an electrode holder attached to an inclined bar along the length of the weld.
Once started, the process continues until the electrode is spent, allowing the operator to manage multiple gravity welding systems.
The electrodes employed (often E6027 or E7024) are coated heavily in flux, and are typically 71 cm (28 in) in length and about 6.35 mm (0.25 in) thick.
As in manual SMAW, a constant current welding power supply is used, with either negative polarity direct current or alternating current.
Due to a rise in the use of semiautomatic welding processes such as flux-cored arc welding, the popularity of gravity welding has fallen as its economic advantage over such methods is often minimal.
Other SMAW-related methods that are even less frequently used include firecracker welding, an automatic method for making butt and fillet welds, and massive electrode welding, a process for welding large components or structures that can deposit up to 27 kg (60 lb) of weld metal per hour.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
Cary, Howard B.; Helzer, Scott C. (2005), Modern Welding Technology, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:
Pearson Education, ISBN 978-0-13-113029-6
Jeffus, Larry (1999), Welding:
Principles and Applications
(4th ed.),
Albany, New York:
Thomson Delmar, ISBN 978-0-8273-8240-4
Lincoln Electric (1994), The Procedure Handbook of Arc Welding, Cleveland, Ohio:
Lincoln Electric, ISBN 978-99949-25-82-7
Miller Electric Mfg Co (2013).
Guidelines For Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) (PDF).
Appleton, Wisconsin:
Miller Electric Mfg Co. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-12-08.

Weman, Klas (2003), Welding processes handbook, New York: CRC Press, ISBN 978-0-8493-1773-6


==
External links ==
Guidelines for Shielded Metal Arc Welding (.pdf)
\This is a list of the equipment currently used by the Algerian People's National Army.

== Vehicles ==


==
Artillery ==


==
Small arms ==


==
Command and control ==


==
References ==
The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, (Russian: Вооружённые силы Российской Федерации) commonly known as the Russian Armed Forces, are the military forces of the Russian Federation.
It is divided into the Ground Forces, Navy, and Aerospace Forces.
There are also two independent arms of service: Strategic Missile Troops and the Airborne Troops.
Under the federal law of Russia, the Russian Armed Forces, along with the Federal Security Service (FSB)'s Border Troops, the National Guard, the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), the Federal Protective Service (FSO), the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), the Main Directorate of the General Staff (GRU) and the Ministry of Emergency Situations (EMERCOM)
's
civil defence form Russia's military services; and are under direct control of the Security Council of Russia.

The Russian Armed Forces are one of the largest military forces in the world.
As of 2019, the military comprised almost one million active duty personnel, the fourth-largest in the world.
Additionally, there are over 2.5 million reservists, with the total number of reserve troops possibly being as high as 20 million.
It is mandatory for all male citizens aged 18–27 to be drafted for a year of service in Armed Forces.
The Russian Armed Forces are the world's second-most powerful military, owning the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons in the world.
The military budget of the Russian Federation was $65.1 billion in 2019, the fourth-highest in the world.
It possesses the second-largest fleet of ballistic missile submarines, and is one of the only three nations operating strategic bombers, with the world's most powerful ground force, the second-most powerful air force, and the third-most powerful naval fleet.

==
Service branches ==
Armed forces under the Ministry of Defence are divided into:

the three "branches of Armed Forces" (вида вооружённых сил): the Ground Forces, Aerospace Forces, and Navy
the two "separate troop branches" (Отдельные рода войск): the Strategic Missile Forces and Airborne Forces
the "special forces of Armed Forces" (Спецназ вооружённых сил): the Special Operations Forces
the Logistical Support, which has a separate status of its ownThere are additionally two further "separate troop branches", the National Guard and the Border Service.
These retain the legal status of "Armed Forces", while falling outside of the jurisdiction of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The National Guard is formed on the basis of the former Internal Troops of Russia.
The new structure has been detached from the Ministry of Internal Affairs into a separate agency, directly subordinated to the President of Russia.
The Border Service is a paramilitary organization of the Federal Security Service - the country's main internal intelligence agency.
Both organizations have significant wartime tasks in addition to their main peacetime activities and operate their own land, air and maritime units.

The number of personnel is specified by decree of the President of Russia.
On 1 January 2008, a number of 2,019,629 units, including military of 1,134,800 units, was set.
In 2010 the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) estimated that the Russian Armed Forces numbered about 1,027,000 active troops and in the region of 2,035,000 reserves (largely ex-conscripts).
As opposed to personnel specified by decree, actual personnel numbers on the payroll was reported by the Audit Chamber of Russia as 766,000 in October 2013.
As of December 2016, the armed forces are at 93 percent of the required manpower, up from 82 percent reported in December 2013.According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, between 2005-2009 and 2010–2014, Russian exports of major weapons increased by 37 percent; Russia spent $66.4 billion on arms in 2015, then $69.2 billion in 2016, having taken 3rd place (after the U.S. and China).

According to the Russian Defence Ministry, share of modern weapons in the Armed Forces reached from 26 to 48 percent among different kinds of troops in December 2014.
This was raised to 30.5–70.7% as of July 2015.
The average was 70.1 per cent over the end of 2020.

==
History ==
The Soviet Union officially dissolved on 25 December 1991, leaving the Soviet military in limbo.
For the next year and a half various attempts to keep its unity and to transform it into the military of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) failed.
Over time, some units stationed in the newly independent republics swore loyalty to their new national governments, while a series of treaties between the newly independent states divided up the military's assets.
Apart from assuming control of the bulk of the former Soviet Internal Troops and the KGB Border Troops, seemingly the only independent defence move the new Russian government made before March 1992 involved announcing the establishment of a National Guard.
Until 1995, it was planned to form at least 11 brigades numbering 3,000 to 5,000 each, with a total of no more than 100,000.
National Guard military units were to be deployed in 10 regions, including in Moscow (three brigades), (two brigades), and a number of other important cities and regions.
By the end of September 1991 in Moscow the National Guard was about 15,000 strong, mostly consisting of former Soviet Armed Forces servicemen.
In the end, President Yeltsin tabled a decree "On the temporary position of the Russian Guard", but it was not put into practice.
After signing the Belavezha Accords on 21 December 1991, the countries of the newly formed CIS signed a protocol on the temporary appointment of Marshal of Aviation Yevgeny Shaposhnikov as Minister of Defence and commander of the armed forces in their territory, including strategic nuclear forces.
On 14 February 1992 Shaposhnikov formally became Supreme Commander of the CIS Armed Forces.
On 16 March 1992 a decree by Boris Yeltsin created The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation the operational control of Allied High Command and the Ministry of Defence, which was headed by President.
Finally, on 7 May 1992, Yeltsin signed a decree establishing the armed forces and Yeltsin assumed the duties of the Supreme Commander.
In May 1992, General Colonel Pavel Grachev became the Minister of Defence, and was made Russia's first Army General on assuming the post.
By August or December 1993
CIS military structures had become CIS military cooperation structures with all real influence lost.
In the next few years, Russian forces withdrew from central and eastern Europe, as well as from some newly independent post-Soviet republics.

While in most places the withdrawal took place without any problems, the Russian Armed Forces remained in some disputed areas such as the Sevastopol naval base in the Crimea as well as in Abkhazia, South Ossetia and in Transnistria.
The Armed Forces have several bases in foreign countries, especially on territory of the former Soviet Republics.

A new military doctrine, promulgated in November 1993, implicitly acknowledged the contraction of the old Soviet military into a regional military power without global ambitions.
In keeping with its emphasis on the threat of regional conflicts, the doctrine called for a smaller, lighter, and more mobile Russian military, with a higher degree of professionalism and with greater rapid-deployment capability.
Such change proved extremely difficult to achieve.
Under Pavel Grachev (Defence Minister from 1992 to 1996)
little military reform took place, though there was a plan to create more deployable mobile forces.
Later Defence Minister Rodionov (in office 1996-1997) had good qualifications but did not manage to institute lasting change.
Only under Defence Minister Igor Sergeyev (in office 1997-2001) did a certain amount of limited reform begin, though attention focused upon the Strategic Rocket Forces.

=== 2008 military reform ===
In response to poor and unsatisfactory performance of Russian forces overall in the Russo-Georgian War in August 2008, significant reforms were announced in late 2008 by Defence Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov and major structural reorganisation began in 2009.
Key elements of the reforms announced in October 2008 included reducing the armed forces to a strength of one million by 2012 (planned end-date was 2016); reducing the number of officers; centralising officer training from 65 military schools into 10 "systemic" military training centres; reducing the size of the central command; introducing more civilian logistics and auxiliary staff; elimination of cadre-strength formations; reorganising the reserves; reorganising the army into a brigade system; and reorganising air forces into an air-base system instead of regiments.
On 17 October 2012 the head of the State Duma's Defence Committee told RIA Novosti that Russia planned to boost annual defense spending by 59 percent to almost 3 trillion rubles ($83.3 billion) in 2015 up from $61 billion in 2012. "
Targeted national defence spending as a percentage of GDP will amount to 3.2 percent in 2013, 3.4 percent in 2014 and 3.7 percent in 2015", Defence Committee chairman Vladimir Komoedov is quoted as saying in the committee's conclusion on the draft budget for 2013–2015.The number of military units is to be reduced in accordance with the table:
An essential part of the military reform involves downsizing.
At the beginning of the reform the Russian Army had about 1,200,000 active personnel.
Largely, the reductions fall among the officers.
Personnel are to be reduced according to the table:
The schedule envisaged reducing the total numbers in the officer corps from 335 thousand to 150 thousand, but in early February 2011 Defence Minister Anatoly Serdyukov announced the decision to increase officers by 70,000 - to 220 thousand to counteract this.
==
Structure ==
The Defence Ministry of the Russian Federation serves as the administrative body of the Armed Forces.
Since Soviet times, the General Staff has acted as the main commanding and supervising body of the Russian armed forces: U.S. expert William Odom said in 1998, that 'the Soviet General Staff without the MoD is conceivable, but the MoD without the General Staff is not.'
However, currently the General Staff's role is being reduced to that of the Ministry's department of strategic planning, the Minister himself, currently Sergey Shoygu may now be gaining further executive authority over the troops.
Other departments include the personnel directorate as well as the Rear of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, Railway Troops, Signal Troops and Construction Troops.
The Chief of the General Staff is currently General of the Army Valery Gerasimov.

The Russian military is divided into three services: the Russian Ground Forces, the Russian Navy, and the Russian Aerospace Forces.
In addition there are two independent arms of service: the Strategic Missile Troops and the Russian Airborne Troops.

The Armed Forces as a whole are traditionally referred to as the Army (armiya), except in some cases, the Navy is specifically singled out.

===
Military districts ===
Since late 2010 the Ground Forces as well as the Aerospace Forces and Navy are distributed among four military districts: Western Military District, Southern Military District, Central Military District, and the Eastern Military District which also constitute four Joint Strategic Commands — West, South, Central, and East.
Previously from 1992 to 2010, the Ground Forces were divided into six military districts: Moscow, Leningrad, North Caucausian, Privolzhsk-Ural, Siberian and Far Eastern, with the seventh military district: Kaliningrad formed in 1997; in service until 2010.
Russia's four naval fleets and one flotilla were organizations on par with the Ground Forces' Military Districts.
These seven MDs were merged into the four new MDs, which now also incorporate the aerospace forces and naval forces.
There is one remaining Russian military base, the 102nd Military Base, in Armenia left of the former Transcaucasus Group of Forces and is incorporated into the Southern Military District.

In mid-2010 a reorganisation was announced which consolidated military districts and the navy's fleets into four Joint Strategic Commands (OSC).

In 2014 the Northern Fleet was reorganized in separate Joint Strategic Command.

Geographically divided, the five commands are:

Joint Strategic Command West - Western Military District (HQ in St. Petersburg), includes the Baltic Fleet;
Joint Strategic Command North - Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command (HQ in Severomorsk), includes the Northern Fleet;
Joint Strategic Command South - Southern Military District (HQ in Rostov-on-Don) includes the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla;
Joint Strategic Command Center - Central Military District (HQ in Yekaterinburg);
Joint Strategic Command East - Eastern Military District (HQ in Khabarovsk), includes the Pacific Fleet.
The plan was put in place on 1 December 2010 and mirrors a proposed reorganisation by former Chief of the General Staff Army General Yuri Baluyevsky for a Regional Command East which was not implemented.
The four commands were set up by a decree of President Medvedev on 14 July 2010.
In July 2011, an Operational-Strategic Command of Missile-Space Defence has also been established on the basis of the former Special Purpose Command of the Russian Air Force.
A Presidential decree of January 2011 named commanders for several of the new organisational structures.
Russian military command posts, according to globalsecurity.org, include Chekhov/Sharapovo about 80 kilometres (50 mi)
south of Moscow, for the General Staff and President, Chaadayevka near Penza, Voronovo in Moscow, and a facility at Lipetsk all for the national leadership, Yamantau in the Urals, and command posts for the Strategic Rocket Forces at Kuntsevo in Moscow (primary) and Kosvinsky Mountain in the Urals (alternate).
It is speculated that many of the Moscow bunkers are linked by the special underground Moscow Metro 2 line.

Russian security bodies not under the control of the Ministry of Defence include the Internal Troops of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (now the National Guard of Russia's National Guard Forces Command), the Border Guard Service of Russia (part of the Federal Security Service), the Kremlin Regiment and the rest of the Federal Protective Service, and the Ministry of Emergency Situations, the country's civil defence service since 1995 and successor to earlier civil defence units.

===
Naval fleets ===
The Navy consists of four fleets and one flotilla:
Northern Fleet (HQ at Severomorsk) forms own Joint Strategic Command.

Baltic Fleet (HQ at Kaliningrad in the exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command West.

Black Sea Fleet (HQ at Sevastopol, disputed region of Crimea) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South.

Pacific Fleet (HQ at Vladivostok) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command East.

Caspian Flotilla (HQ at Astrakhan) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South.
The Kaliningrad Special Region, under the command of the Commander Baltic Fleet, comprises Ground & Coastal Forces, formerly the 11th Guards Army and now the 11th Army Corps with a motor rifle division HQ (formed in 2021) and subordinate units, as well as naval aviation regiments employing Sukhoi Su-27 'Flankers' and other combat aircraft.
As noted, both the Baltic Fleet and the 11th Army Corps in Kaliningrad are subordinate to Strategic Command West.

Similarly, the Northeast Group of Troops and Forces, headquartered at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, comprises all Russian Armed Forces components in the Kamchatka Krai and the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug [district] and is subordinate to the Commander Pacific Fleet headquartered in Vladivostok.

==
Personnel ==
Conscription is still used in Russia; the term of service being 12 months; and eligible age is between 18 and 33 years old.
Deferments are provided to undergraduate and graduate students, men solely the impact supporting disabled relatives, parents of at least two children and — upon Presidential proclamation — to some employees of military-oriented enterprises.
Men holding a Ph.D., as well as sons and brothers of servicemen killed or disabled during their military service, are released from conscription.

There were widespread problems with hazing in the Army, known as dedovshchina, where first-year draftees are bullied by second-year draftees, a practice that appeared in its current form after the change to a two-year service term in 1967.
According to Anna Politkovskaya, in 2002, "a complete battalion, more than five hundred men, had been killed not by enemy fire but by beatings".
To combat this problem, a new decree was signed in March 2007, which cut the conscription service term from 24 to 18 months.
The term was cut further to one year on 1 January 2008.Thirty percent of Russian Armed Forces' personnel were contract servicemen at the end of 2005.
For the foreseeable future, the Armed Forces will be a mixed contract/conscript force.
The Russian Armed Forces need to maintain a mobilization reserve to have manning resources capable of reinforcing the permanent readiness forces if the permanent readiness forces cannot deter or suppress an armed conflict on their own.
Professional soldiers now outnumber their conscript counterparts in the Russian Army for the first time in Russian history, Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu told Russian media on 28 April 2015.
Nearly 400,000 contractors serve in the Russian Army as of March 2019.
According to Defence Minister Shoigu, in every regiment and brigade, two battalions are formed by contractors, while one is formed by recruits, who are not involved in combat missions.
Currently, there are 136 tactical battalion groups in the armed forces formed by contractors.
The number of conscripts amounts to 225,000 and the number of contractors amounts to 405,000 as of March 2020 and exceeds the number of conscripts by 1.8 times as of the end of the year.
Recruitment into the Russian military are also open to non-Russian citizens of the Commonwealth of Independent States, of which Russia is the largest member.
By December 2003, the Russian parliament had approved a law in principle to permit the Armed Forces to employ foreign nationals on contract by offering them Russian citizenship after several years service yet, up to 2010, foreigners could only serve in Russia's armed forces after getting a Russian passport.
Under a 2010 Defence Ministry plan, foreigners without dual citizenship would be able to sign up for five-year contracts and will be eligible for Russian citizenship after serving three years.
The change could open the way for CIS citizens to get fast-track Russian citizenship, and counter the effects of Russia's demographic crisis on its army recruitment.
Each soldier in duty receives an Identity Card of the Russian Armed Forces.

Awards and decorations of the Armed Forces are covered at the Awards and Emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation.

On 17 November 2011, General Nikolai Makarov said that Russia had reached a crisis in the conscript service where there simply were not sufficient able bodied men to draft and was forced to halve its conscription.
Military draft dodging declined 66% since 2012 and as of March 2019.
It is reported that about 80% of the young people who were drafted into the ranks of the Russian Armed Forces in the autumn of 2018 were found fit for military service.
According to the head of the mobilization, in recent years, the fitness of future recruits has increased by 7%.In March 2013, Defence Minister Sergey Shoygu promised that all army quarters would have showers by the end of the year.
RIA also said that the shower plans were the latest in a series of creature-comfort improvements the Defence Ministry had recently announced.
In mid-January, Shoygu said he would rid the army of its antiquated "footwraps," or portyanki, and
a few days later the designer of Russia's new army uniform said that the ear-flap hats traditionally worn in winter would be replaced with more modern headgear.
The Russian military's ushanka hats were improved between 2013 and 2015, when the Russian armed forces were being equipped with new uniforms.
The new version of the traditional - and somewhat stereotypical - hat features better heat insulation and longer ear flaps.
Russian military officers with top secret security clearance are now being issued domestically developed, ultra-secure, cryptographically protected Atlas M-663S cellphones, Russia's Izvestia newspaper has reported in early 2018.
A new uniform for hot climates was introduced in mid-2018.

==
Reserve components ==
According to the article 51.2 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service", Russian Armed Forces have reserve (Russian: запас; transliteration: zapas) which includes 2 components:
Mobilization human reserve (Russian: мобилизационный людской резерв; transliteration: mobilizatsionnyy lyudskoy reserv)
Mobilization human resource (Russian:
мобилизационный людской ресурс; transliteration:
mobilizatsionnyy lyudskoy resurs)By default, at the end of active duty each military personnel is enrolled in mobilization human resource; this applies equally to conscripts and volunteers regardless of ranks.
Furthermore, graduates of civilian institutions of higher education, who have graduated the military training centers of their almae matres, trained under reserve officer program, is enrolled in mobilization human resource after their promotion to officer's rank (unlike graduates of such centers, trained under active duty officer program, who are due to be enrolled for active duty after their promotion to officer's rank).
Moreover, mobilization human resource is replenished with males who reached the age of 27 years old and, herewith, was not in military service for any reasons.

Enrolling in mobilization human reserve is voluntary and implies the special contract; this possibility is available for each persons, who is in mobilization human resource already.
The initial contract is concluded for 3 years period.
Military personnel of mobilization human reserve (reservists) perform part-time duties in military units.
As a rule, in peaceful time reservists perform their duties 2-3 days per month and also during annual military camp training for a duration from 20 to 30 days.
The persons who are in mobilization human resource (non-reservists) may be enlisted to military camp trainings in peaceful time.
According to the article 54 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service", the duration of each training can not exceed 2 months, herewith the total duration of such trainings for the entire period of being in mobilization human resource can not exceed 12 months, and person may be enlisted to such trainings no more than once every three years.
Reservists are subject to mobilization in wartime first of all.
Non-reservists are subject to mobilization secondarily.
Mobilization of non-reservists is carried out taking into account the age category under the article 53 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service": in order from first category to third category.
The first category includes: 1) the persons at the any military rank below that of a commissioned officer (enlisted personnel) and not reached the age of 35 years old; 2) the persons at the any rank from junior lieutenant to captain (captain-lieutenant in naval service) inclusively (junior commissioned officers) and not reached the age of 50 years old; 3) the persons at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively and not reached the age of 55 years old; 4) the persons at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) and not reached the age of 60 years old; 5) the persons at the rank of major general (counter admiral in naval service) or higher (supreme officers) and not reached the age of 65 years old.
The second category includes: 1) enlisted personnel in age from 35 but less than 45; 2) junior commissioned officers in the age from 50 but less than 55; 3) commissioned officers at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively in the age from 55 but less than 60; 4) commissioned officers at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) in the age from 60 but less than 65; 5) supreme officers in age from 65 but less than 70.
The third category includes: 1) enlisted personnel in the age from 45 but less than 50; 2) junior commissioned officers in the age from 55 but less than 60; 3) commissioned officers at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively in the age from 60 but less than 65; 4)
all females in the age less than 45 for enlisted personnel and less than 50 for commissioned officers.
The person who has reached the age limit, established for the third category (the second category for persons at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) or higher), is retired and is not subject to mobilization.

==
Budget ==
Between 1991 and 1997 newly independent Russia's defence spending fell by a factor of eight in real prices.
In 1998, when Russia experienced a severe financial crisis, its military expenditure in real terms reached its lowest point— barely one-quarter of the USSR's in 1991, and two-fifths of the level of 1992, the first year of Russia's independent existence.

In the early 2000s, defence spending increased by at least a minimum of one-third year-on-year, leading to overall defence expenditure almost quadrupling over the past six years, and according to Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, this rate is to be sustained through 2010.
Official government military spending for 2005 was US$32.4 billion, though various sources, have estimated Russia's military expenditures to be considerably higher than the reported amount.
Estimating Russian military expenditure is beset with difficulty; the annual IISS Military Balance has underscored the problem numerous times within its section on Russia.
The IISS Military Balance comments - 'By simple observation..
[the military budget] would appear to be lower than is suggested by the size of the armed forces or the structure of the military–industrial complex, and thus neither of the figures is particularly useful for comparative analysis'.
By some estimates, overall Russian defence expenditure is now at the second highest in the world after the USA.
According to Alexander Kanshin, Chairman of the Public Chamber of Russia on affairs of veterans, military personnel, and their families, the Russian military is losing up to US$13 billion to corruption every year.
On 16 September 2008 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that in 2009, Russia's defence budget would be increased to a record amount of $50 billion.
On 16 February 2009 Russia's deputy defence minister said state defence contracts would not be subject to cuts this year despite the ongoing financial crisis, and that there would be no decrease in 2009.
The budget would still be 1,376 billion roubles and in the current exchange rates this would amount to $41.5 billion.

However, later that month, due to the world financial crisis, the Russian Parliament's Defence Committee stated that the Russian defence budget would instead be slashed by 15 percent, from $40 billion to $34 billion, with further cuts to come.
On 5 May 2009, First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Ivanov said that the defence budget for 2009 will be 1.3 trillion rubles (US$39.4 billion).
322 billion rubles are allocated to purchase weapons, and the rest of the fund will be spent on construction, fuel storage and food supply.

According to the head of the Defence Committee of the State Duma Vladimir Komoyedov, Russia plans to spend 101.15 billion rubles on nuclear weapons in 2013–2015.
"
The budget provisions under 'The Nuclear Weapons Complex' section in 2013-2015 will amount to 29.28 billion rubles, 33.3 billion rubles and 38.57 billion rubles respectively," Komoyedov said, Vechernaya Moskva reports.

Komoyedov added that in 2012 the spending on nuclear weapons made up 27.4 billion rubles.
The draft law "On the Federal Budget for 2013 and for the planning period of 2014 and 2015" will be discussed in the first reading on 19 October 2012, The Voice of Russia reports.
In a meeting in Sochi in November 2013, President Putin said the country's defence budget will reach 2.3 trillion roubles, stressing the huge amount in comparison to the 2003 budget, which stood on 600 billion rubles.

The Russian government's published 2014 military budget is about 2.49 trillion rubles (approximately US$69.3 billion), the fourth largest in the world behind the US, China and Saudi Arabia.
The official budget is set to rise to 3.03 trillion rubles (approximately US$83.7 billion) in 2015, and 3.36 trillion rubles (approximately US$93.9 billion) in 2016.
As of 2014, Russia's military budget is higher than any other European nation, and approximately 1/7th (14 percent) of the US military budget.
In 2015, SIPRI found that Russia was the world's second biggest exporter of major weapons for the period 2010–14, increasing exports by 37 per cent.
India, China and Algeria accounted for almost 60 percent of total Russian exports.
Asia and Oceania received 66 percent of Russian arms exports in 2010–14, Africa 12 percent and the Middle East 10 percent.
In 2017, Russia was reported to have slashed its defense spending by 20%, due to calls by Vladimir Putin to spend money on other initiatives such as healthcare and education.
The cut decreased Russia's military spending to $66.3 billion, in which Russia slumped to being the fourth-highest military spender.
Russia's 2019 defense budget was US$48 billion.

===
Procurement ===
About 70 percent of the former Soviet Union's defence industries are located in the Russian Federation.
Many defence firms have been privatised; some have developed significant partnerships with firms in other countries.

The recent steps towards modernization of the Armed Forces have been made possible by Russia's economic resurgence based on oil and gas revenues as well a strengthening of its own domestic market.
Currently, the military is in the middle of a major equipment upgrade, with the government in the process of spending about $200 billion (what equals to about $400 billion in PPP dollars) on development and production of military equipment between 2006 and 2015 under the State Armament Programme for 2007-2015 (GPV — госпрограмма вооружения).
Mainly as a result of lessons learned during the Russo-Georgian War, the State Armament Programme for 2011-2020 was launched in December 2010.
Prime Minister Putin announced that 20–21.5 trillion rubles (over $650 billion) will be allocated to purchase new hardware in the next 10 years.
The aim is to have a growth of 30% of modern equipment in the army, navy and air force by 2015, and of 70% by 2020.

In some categories, the proportion of new weapon systems will reach 80% or even 100%.
At this point, the Russian MoD plans to purchase, among others, up to 250 ICBMs, 800 aircraft, 1,200 helicopters, 44 submarines, 36 frigates, 28 corvettes, 18 cruisers, 24 destroyers, 6 aircraft carriers, and 62 air defence battalions.
Several existing types will be upgraded.
The share of modern and advanced weapons in some branches of the Russian Armed Forces currently amounts over 60 percent, the Defence Ministry reported 31 July 2015.In total since 2012 and as of 2017, the Armed Forces received more than 30,000 units of new and modernized weapons and equipment, including more than 50 warships, 1,300 aircraft, over 1,800 drones, 4,700 tanks and armored combat vehicles compared to two warships, 151 aircraft and 217 tanks received in 2007–2011.
The Russian army also receives 150-250 aircraft per year and over 300 short-range UAVs.
The Russian Federation is also producing satellite-guided weapons, drones (including combat and kamikaze ones and quadrocopters) and EW systems to counter them, cruise missiles, unmanned vehicles, exoskeletons and military robots and other military equipment.
As of 2011, Russia's chief military prosecutor said that 20 percent of the defence budget was being stolen or defrauded yearly.
In 2018, RF Armed Forces adopted 35 types of weapons and military equipment and completed state tests of 21 more.
The Russian Ministry of Defence (MoD) was procured the YeSU TZ (Yedinaya Sistema Upravleniya Takticheskogo Zvena) battlefield management system that same year.
The YeSU TZ battlefield management system incorporates 11 subsystems that control artillery, electronic warfare systems, ground vehicles, air defence assets, engineering equipment, and logistics support, among other things.
Russian military introduce Big Data decision-making technology.
Twelve missile regiments have been rearmed with Yars ICBMs, 10 missile brigades with Iskander tactical ballistic missile systems, 13 aviation regiments with MiG-31BM, Su-35S, Su-30SM, and Su-34
combat aircraft, three army aviation brigades and six helicopter regiments with Mi-28N and Ka-52
combat helicopters, 20 surface-to-air missile (SAM) regiments with S-400 Triumf SAM systems, 23 batteries with Pantsir-S self-propelled anti-aircraft gun-missile systems, and 17 batteries with Bal and Bastion mobile coastal defence missile systems [MCDMSs] since 2012 and as of March 2019.Since 2012 and as of March 2020, the Ground Forces have received more than 12,000 pieces of weapon systems and equipment and rearmed all missile brigades with the Iskander tactical ballistic missile system.
Aerospace Force and naval aviation have received over 1,400 aircraft and helicopters and the Navy more than 190 ships, vessels and boats.
Since 2012 and as of December 2020, the number of long-range land-, sea-, and air-launched cruise missiles increased by 37 times.
The number of their carriers was also increased by 13 times.

==
Nuclear weapons ==
As of January 2017, the Federation of American Scientists estimated that Russia has approximately 1,765 deployed strategic warheads, and another 2,700 non-deployed strategic and deployed and non-deployed tactical warheads, plus an additional 2,510 warheads awaiting dismantlement.
Russia's Strategic Rocket Forces controls its land-based nuclear warheads, while the Navy controls the submarine based missiles and the Aerospace Forces the air-launched warheads.
Russia's nuclear warheads are deployed in four areas:
Land-based immobile (silos), like
R-36 and its replacement RS-28 Sarmat.

Land-based mobile, like RT-2PM2 Topol-M and new RS-24 Yars.

Submarine based, like R-29RMU2 Layner and RSM-56 Bulava.

Air-launched warheads of the Russian Air Forces' Long Range Aviation CommandThe military doctrine of Russia sees NATO expansion as one of the threats for the Russian Federation and reserves
the right to use nuclear weapons in response to a conventional aggression that can endanger the existence of the state.
In keeping with this, the country's nuclear forces received adequate funding throughout the late 1990s.

The number of intercontinental ballistic missiles and warheads on active duty has declined over the years, in part in keeping with arms limitation agreements with the U.S. and in part due to insufficient spending on maintenance, but this is balanced by the deployment of new missiles as proof against missile defences.
Russia has developed the new RT-2PM2 Topol-M (SS-27) missiles that are stated to be able to penetrate any missile defence, including the planned U.S. National Missile Defence.
The missile can change course in both air and space to avoid countermeasures.
It is designed to be launched from land-based, mobile TEL units.
Russian nuclear forces are confident that they can carry out a successful retaliation strike if attacked.
Because of international awareness of the danger that Russian nuclear technology might fall into the hands of terrorists or rogue officers who it was feared might want to use nuclear weapons to threaten or attack other countries, the federal government of the United States and many other countries provided considerable financial assistance to the Russian nuclear forces in the early 1990s.
Many friendly countries gave huge amounts of money in lieu for Russian Arms purchase deals which kept Russian Agencies functioning.
This money went in part to finance decommissioning of warheads under international agreements, such the Cooperative Threat Reduction programme, but also to improve security and personnel training in Russian nuclear facilities.

In the late evening of 11 September 2007 the fuel-air explosive AVBPM or "Father of All Bombs" was successfully field-tested.
According to the Russian military, the new weapon will replace several smaller types of nuclear bombs in its arsenal.

== See also ==
Military academies in Russia
Awards and emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation
Uniforms of the Russian Armed Forces


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
"How are the mighty fallen".
The Economist.
2–8 July 2005.
pp.
45–46.

Russia Creates Unique Rifle That Can Shoot at Four Kilometres RNS, November 2016
Austin, Greg; Alexey Muraviev (2000).
The Armed Forces of Russia in Asia.
London, New York: I. B. Tauris.
ISBN 1-86064-485-6.

Keir Giles, Military Service in Russia:
No New Model Army, Conflict Studies Research Centre, May 2007
International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, various editions
Odom, William E. (1998).
The Collapse of the Soviet Military.
Yale University Press.
ISBN 0-300-07469-7.

"The United States leads upward trend in arms exports, Asian and Gulf states arms imports up, says SIPRI".
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI.
16 March 2015.
Retrieved 13 April 2017.

==
Further reading ==
Bowen, Andrew (2017).
"
Coercive Diplomacy and the Donbas: Explaining Russian Strategy in Eastern Ukraine".
Journal of Strategic Studies.
42
(3–4): 312–343.
doi:10.1080/01402390.2017.1413550.
S2CID 158522112.

Galeotti, Mark, 'Organised crime and Russian security forces: mafiya, militia and military', Journal of Conflict, Security and Development, issue 1:2, 2001.

Ivanov, Henry, 'Country Briefing: Russia—Austere deterrence', Jane's Defence Weekly, 28 April 2006
Lehrke, Jesse Paul (2013).
The Transition to National Armies in the Former Soviet Republics, 1988-2005.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-135-10886-1.

Pynnöniemi, K., 'Russia's Defence Reform:
Assessing the real "Serdyukov heritage"', FIIA Briefing Paper 126, 26 March 2013, The Finnish Institute of International Affairs.

Turbiville, G., 'Organized crime and the Russian armed forces', Transnational Organized Crime, vol.
1, issue 4, 1995, pp.
55–73;
Waters, T., 'Crime in the Russian military', CSRC Paper C90, (Camberley: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 1996).

==
External links ==
Russian Ministry of Defense (in English)
Russia's Military Analysis
A very comprehensive online database of modern Russian arms and military technologies.
Website also has discussion forums, videos and more.

Russia Military Guide Includes satellite photos of bases.

Russian Military Capabilities in a 10 year perspective
(PDF) 2013 study by the Swedish Defence Research Agency
Russia's military modernisation - Putin's new model army by The Economist, 24 May 2014
Just How Dangerous is Russia's Military?
by The National Interest 15 July 2016 by Nikolas Gvosdev
Что такое
современная армия России
[What is the modern army of Russia].
Vlast (in Russian).
Kommersant.
7 (610).
21 February 2005.
Archived from the original on 14 November 2007.
Retrieved 20 September 2008.

Russia's New Army study from 2011 by the Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies
Russia's Military: Assessment, Strategy, and Threat
report by the Center on Global Interests
Russia's shiny new weapons
an article about Russian drones by Mark Galeotti, 10 January 2014
The following is a list of lists of currently active military equipment by country.

==
Afghanistan ==
List of military equipment used by Afghan National Army


==
Albania ==
List of equipment of the Albanian Armed Forces


==
Algeria ==
List of equipment of the Algerian People's National Army


==
Angola ==
List of equipment of the Angolan Army


==
Argentina ==
Active Argentine Navy ships
Active Argentina military aircraft
Equipment of the Argentine Army


==
Armenia ==
List of equipment of the Armenian Armed Forces


==
Australia ==
Current Royal Australian Navy ships
Current Royal Australian Air Force Aircraft
Equipment of the Australian Army


==
Austria ==
List of equipment of the Austrian Army


==
Azerbaijan ==
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Land Forces
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Air Force


==
Bangladesh ==
Currently active ships of the Bangladesh Navy
List of ships of the Bangladesh Coast Guard
Active aircraft of the Bangladesh Air Force
Active Bangladesh military aircraft
Equipment of the Bangladesh Army


==
Belarus ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Belarus


==
Belgium ==
List of equipment of the Belgian Land Component


==
Bhutan ==
List of equipment used by the Royal Bhutan Army


==
Bolivia ==
List of equipment of the Bolivian Armed Forces


==
Bosnia and Herzegovina ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina


==
Botswana ==
List of equipment of the Botswana Ground Force


==
Brazil ==
Currently active Brazil military watercraft
Currently active Brazil military land vehicles
Active Brazilian military aircraft
Modern equipment of the Brazilian Army


==
Bulgaria ==
Modern equipment of the Bulgarian land forces


==
Burkina Faso ==
List of equipment of the Burkina Faso Armed Forces


==
Cambodia ==
List of equipment of the Royal Cambodian Army


==
Canada ==
Fleet of the Royal Canadian Navy
List of aircraft of the Royal Canadian Air Force
List of active Canadian military aircraft
List of modern Canadian Army equipment


==
Chad ==
List of equipment of the Chadian Ground Forces


==
Chile ==
List of active ships of the Chilean Navy
List of aircraft of the Chilean Air Force
List of equipment of the Chilean Army


==
China ==
Active Chinese Navy ships
Active Chinese military aircraft
Aircraft of the People's Liberation Army Air Force
Equipment of the PLA Ground Force


==
Colombia ==
List of equipment of the National Army of Colombia


==
Comoros ==
List of equipment of the Comorian Army


==
Croatia ==
List of equipment of the Croatian Army


==
Cuba ==
List of equipment of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces


==
Cyprus ==
List of military equipment of Cyprus


==
Czech Republic ==
Military equipment of the Czech Republic


==
DR Congo ==
List of equipment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Army


==
Denmark ==
List of equipment of the Royal Danish Army


==
Djibouti ==
List of equipment of the Djiboutian Army


==
Dominican Republic ==
List of equipment of the Dominican Army


==
Egypt ==
Equipment of the Egyptian Army


==
El Salvador ==
List of equipment of the Salvadoran Army


==
Eritrea ==
List of equipment of the Eritrean Army


==
Ecuador ==
List of equipment of the Ecuadorian Army


==
Estonia ==
List of equipment of the Estonian Defence Forces


==
Ethiopia ==
List of equipment of the Ethiopian National Defence Force


==
Finland ==
List of equipment of the Finnish Army
List of equipment of the Finnish Navy
List of active Finnish Navy ships
List of military aircraft of Finland


==
France ==
Active French Navy ships
Modern equipment and uniform of the French Army
Active French military aircraft


==
Georgia ==
List of equipment of the Defense Forces of Georgia


==
Germany ==
List of modern equipment of the German Army
Active German Navy ships


==
Greece ==
List of equipment of the Hellenic Army
List of active Hellenic Navy ships


==
India ==
Active Indian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indian Army
Active Indian military aircraft
Guided missiles of India
Weapon systems of the Indian Navy


==
Indonesia ==
Equipment of the Indonesian Navy
List of active Indonesian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indonesian Army
Equipment of the Indonesian Air Force


==
Iran ==
List of active Iranian Navy ships
List of active Iranian military Aircraft
Equipment of Iranian army


==
Ireland ==
Modern equipment of the Irish Army
List of aircraft of the Irish Air Corps


==
Italy
==
Equipment of the Italian Army
List of active Italian military aircraft
List of active Italian Navy ships
List of aircraft used by Italian Air Force


==
Japan ==
Active Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force ships
List of modern equipment of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force


==
South Korea ==
List of active Republic of Korea Navy ships
List of equipment of the Republic of Korea Army


==
Malaysia
==
Equipment of the Malaysian Army
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Air Force
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Navy
List of aircraft of the Malaysian Armed Forces


==
Myanmar ==
List of equipment of the Myanmar Army
List of equipment in the Myanmar Navy


==
Malta ==
Equipment of the Armed Forces
Active aircraft of the Air Wing
Active vessels of the Maritime Squadron


==
Morocco
==
List of active Moroccan military aircraft


==
Netherlands ==
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Army
Active Royal Netherlands Navy ships
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Air Force


==
New Zealand ==
List of active New Zealand military aircraft
List of active Royal New Zealand Navy ships
List of individual weapons of the New Zealand armed forces


==
Norway ==
List of equipment of the Norwegian Army
List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships


==
Pakistan ==
List of active Pakistan Navy ships
Equipment of the Pakistan Army
List of missiles of Pakistan
List of active Pakistan Air Force aircraft


==
Philippines ==
 Equipments of the Philippine Army
Current ships of the Philippine Navy
Current aircraft of the Philippine Air Force


==
Poland
==
Equipment of the Polish Army
List of ships of the Polish Navy


==
Portugal ==
Equipment of the Portuguese Army
Active Portuguese Navy ships
List of aircraft of the Portuguese Air Force


==
Romania ==
Equipment of the Romanian Armed Forces
List of aircraft of the Romanian Air Force


==
Russia ==
List of active Russian Navy ships
List of active Russian Air Force aircraft
List of active Russian military aircraft
List of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces


==
Serbia ==
List of equipment of the Serbian Armed Forces


==
South Africa ==
List of equipment of the South African Army
List of aircraft of the South African Air Force
List of weapon systems of the South African Air Force
List of active South African Navy ships


==
Spain ==
List of active Spanish Navy ships
List of currently active Spain military land vehicles
List of active Spanish military aircraft


==
Sri Lanka ==
Sri Lanka Army Equipment
List of current Sri Lanka Navy ships
Sri Lanka Air Force Inventory


==
Sweden ==
List of equipment of the Swedish Army


==
Switzerland ==
List of equipment of the Swiss Armed Forces


==
Syria ==
Equipment of the Syrian Army


==
Thailand ==
List of equipment of the Royal Thai Army
Equipment of the Royal Thai Navy
Aircraft of the Royal Thai Air Force


==
Turkey ==
List of active aircraft of the Turkish Air Force
List of equipment of the Turkish Land Forces
List of active Turkish Navy ships


==
Ukraine ==
Active Ukrainian Navy ships
Equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces


==
United Kingdom ==
Active Royal Navy ships
List of active Royal Marines military watercraft
Royal Fleet Auxiliary
Active United Kingdom military aircraft
Modern equipment of the British Army
Active Royal Navy weapon systems


==
United States
==
Equipment of the United States Armed Forces
Currently active United States military missiles
List of currently active United States military land vehicles
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
Uniforms of the United States Armed Forces
Equipment of the United States Army
Equipment of the United States Marine Corps
Equipment of the United States Navy
Currently active ships of the United States Navy
Currently active United States military watercraft
Equipment of the United States Air Force
Currently active United States military aircraft
Equipment of the United States Coast Guard


==
See also ==
List of military special forces units
This article is a list of U.S. states with firearm death rates per 100,000 population.

In 2016, the overall rate of death by firearms in the United States was 11.8 per 100,000 people — the same as for death by motor vehicles — with suicides accounting for roughly two out of every three gun deaths.

==
Overall firearm death rates ==
State firearm death rates, 2013.
Rate per 100,000 population.
National firearm death rate is 11.8.
These numbers include (among others) death as a result of suicide, self-defense and accidents.
A list regarding only murders is provided below.

==
Age-adjusted table and map
==
These rates have been age-adjusted.
The age-adjusted rates are rates that would exist if the population of each state had the same age distribution as the "standard" US population.
See the references for more info:State firearm death rates, 2013.
Rate per 100,000 population.
Age-adjusted death rates.
United States:
10.4
==
Murders ==
This is a list of the U.S. states and the District of Columbia.
The population data is the official data from the U.S. Census Bureau.
The murder rates and gun murder rates were calculated based on the FBI reports.
The official population of each state for 2010 and gun ownership rates were added for context.
The gun murders in 2010 from FBI Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program was 8,775.
The total number of murders from all weapons was 12,996.
These figures includes murders and willful manslaughters, but excludes "deaths caused by negligence, suicide, or accident" and justifiable homicides.
The U.S. reports a 70% conviction rate for murder prosecutions.

== See also ==
Crime and violence in Latin America
Gun laws in the United States by state
Gun politics in the United States
Gun violence in the United States by state
Suicide in the United States
Homicide in world cities
Index of gun politics articles
List of Brazilian states by murder rate
List of cities by murder rate
List of countries by firearm-related death rate
List of countries by intentional death rate - homicide plus suicide.

List of countries by intentional homicide rate by decade
List of countries by intentional homicide rate
List of countries by life expectancy
List of countries by suicide rate
List of federal subjects of Russia by murder rate
List of Mexican states by homicides
List of U.S. states by homicide rate
List of U.S. states by incarceration rate
List of United States cities by crime rate (2012).
250,001+
Number of guns per capita by country
Right to keep and bear arms in the United States
United States cities by crime rate (100,000–250,000)
United States cities by crime rate (60,000-100,000)


==
References ==
The term assault weapon is used in the United States to define some types of firearms.
The definition varies among regulating jurisdictions but usually includes semi-automatic firearms with a detachable magazine, a pistol grip and sometimes other features such as a vertical forward grip, flash suppressor or barrel shroud.
Some firearms are specified by name.
At the time that the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban passed in 1994, the U.S. Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use."
The origin of the term has been attributed to legislators, gun control groups, firearm manufacturers, and the media.
It is often used interchangeably (but incorrectly) with the term "assault rifle", which may more specifically refer to selective-fire military rifles that can fire in automatic or burst mode.
After the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, many news organizations ran stories about assault weapons, explaining their varying definitions and presenting varying opinions about whether they should be banned again at the federal level.

== Definitions and usage ==
Drawing from federal and state law definitions, the term assault weapon refers primarily to semi-automatic rifles, pistols, and shotguns that are able to accept detachable magazines and possess one or more other features.
Some jurisdictions define revolving cylinder shotguns as assault weapons.
Legislative definitions do not include fully automatic weapons, which are regulated separately as Title II weapons under federal law.
A key defining law was the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994.

At that time, the United States Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use.
"Common attributes used in legislative definitions of assault weapons include:

Semi-automatic firearm capable of accepting a detachable magazine;
Folding or telescoping (collapsible) stock, which reduces the overall length of the firearm;
A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the weapon;
Bayonet lug, which allows the mounting of a bayonet;
Threaded barrel, which can accept muzzle devices such as a flash hider, suppressor, compensator or muzzle brake;
Grenade launcher;
Barrel shroud.
Dictionary definitions vary from legal definitions.

Dictionary.com defines "assault weapon" as "any of various automatic and semiautomatic military firearms utilizing an intermediate-power cartridge, designed for individual use".
Merriam-Webster's online definition is "any of various automatic or semiautomatic firearms; especially: assault rifle".
===
History of terminology ===
The origin of the term is not clearly known and is the subject of much debate.
In the past, the names of certain military weapons used the phrase, such as the Rifleman's Assault Weapon, a grenade launcher developed in 1977 for use with the M16 assault rifle, or the Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon, a rocket launcher introduced in 1984.One of the earliest uses of the term, or a similar term, in its current meaning was in a bill introduced by Art Agnos in the California State Assembly in April 1985 to ban semi-automatic "assault firearms" capable of using detachable magazines of 20 rounds or more.
Speaking to the Assembly Public Safety Committee, Agnos said, "The only use for assault weapons is to shoot people."
The measure did not pass when it came up for a vote.
In 2013, The Washington Post, looking into the history of the term, wrote of the term: "
Many attribute its popularization to a 1988 paper written by gun-control activist and Violence Policy Center founder Josh Sugarmann and the later reaction to the Cleveland School massacre in Stockton, California, in January 1989.
"
Sugarmann had written:

Assault weapons—just like armor-piercing bullets, machine guns, and plastic firearms—are a new topic.
The weapons' menacing looks, coupled with the public's confusion over fully automatic machine guns versus semi-automatic assault weapons—anything that looks like a machine gun is assumed to be a machine gun—can only increase the chance of public support for restrictions on these weapons.
In addition, few people can envision a practical use for these weapons.

Other researchers have found evidence to suggest that the firearms industry itself may have introduced the term "assault weapon" to build interest in new product lines.
Phillip Peterson, the author of Gun Digest Buyer’s Guide to Assault Weapons
(2008) wrote:
The popularly held idea that the term 'assault weapon' originated with anti-gun activists is wrong.
The term was first adopted by manufacturers, wholesalers, importers and dealers in the American firearms industry to stimulate sales of certain firearms that did not have an appearance that was familiar to many firearms owners.
The manufacturers and gun writers of the day needed a catchy name to identify this new type of gun.

Meanwhile many gun rights activists have put forward that the term originated from the media or gun control activists.
Conservative writer Rich Lowry said that assault weapon is a "manufactured term".
Joseph P. Tartaro of the Second Amendment Foundation (SAF) wrote in 1994: "
One of the key elements of the anti-gun strategy to gull the public into supporting bans on the so-called 'assault weapons' is to foster confusion.
As stated previously, the public does not know the difference between a full automatic and a semi-automatic firearm."

Robert Crook, executive director of the Coalition of Connecticut Sportsmen, said "the term 'assault weapon,' as used by the media, is a media invention."
===
Differing state law definitions ===
Seven states have assault weapon bans with different definitions and characteristics.

California defines assault weapons by name, by "series" (AK or AR-15), and by characteristic.

A shotgun with a revolving cylinder is also defined as an assault weapon.

Connecticut defines assault weapons as selective-fire firearms (including assault rifles capable of fully automatic or burst fire); semi-automatic firearms specified by name; and semi-automatic firearms with specific characteristics.

Hawaii defines and bans assault pistols.

Maryland defines and bans assault pistols.
It regulates 45 other assault weapons listed by make or model including copies, regardless of manufacturer.

Massachusetts defines assault weapons as semi-automatic firearms with the same definition provisions from the expired federal ban of 1994.

New York had an assault weapons ban prior to 2013, but on January 16 of that year it passed the SAFE Act, which created a stricter definition of assault weapons and banned them immediately.
The NY SAFE Act defines assault weapons as semi-automatic pistols and rifles with detachable magazines and one military-style feature, and semi-automatic shotguns with one military-style feature.
In Illinois, proposed legislation in 2013 would have defined the term "semi-automatic assault weapon" as any semi-automatic firearm able to accept a detachable magazine, but it was never brought to a vote.
The Illinois State Rifle Association said most of the state's firearms owners owned one or more guns that would have been banned under the proposal.
The NRA said the proposal would have restricted about 75 percent of handguns and 50 percent of long guns in circulation.
As municipalities, Chicago and Cook County bans certain firearms defined as assault weapons and have no provision for legal possession of firearms owned before their laws were passed.

Minnesota also defines certain firearms as assault weapons and regulates their sales.

===
Distinction from assault rifles ===
The term "assault rifle" is sometimes used interchangeably with the term "assault weapon".
According to the Associated Press Stylebook, "although the terms are often used interchangeably, some make the distinction that assault rifle is a military weapon with a selector switch for firing in either fully automatic or semi-automatic mode from
a detachable, 10- to 30-round magazine.
"
Civilian ownership of machine guns, including selective-fire rifles, has been tightly regulated since 1934 under the National Firearms Act and since 1986 under the Firearm Owners Protection Act.

===
Cosmetic features ===
Gun control advocates and gun rights advocates have referred to at least some of the features outlined in assault weapons bans as "cosmetic".
The NRA Institute for Legislative Action and the Violence Policy Center both used the term in 2004 when the federal ban expired.
In May 2012, the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence said, "the inclusion in the list of features that were purely cosmetic in nature created a loophole that allowed manufacturers to successfully circumvent the law by making minor modifications to the weapons they already produced."
Some reporters used the term in stories after the 2012 shootings in Aurora, Colorado and at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Assault weapons, also sometimes called "black guns" or "black rifles", are no more powerful than many other semi-automatic rifles legally used for hunting throughout the United States; they do not shoot faster or have greater range.
Two scholars have written: "
One problem inherent in the study of [assault weapons (AW)] is that the classifications of AW are based on cosmetic features of firearms...
For instance, the Colt AR-15 series of semi-automatic rifles—the civilian version of the fully automatic M-16 rifle issued to U.S. soldiers—was subject to the 1994 AW restrictions, but the Ruger Mini-14 rifle was not banned.
Yet, the Mini-14 is the same caliber, has a similar barrel length, the same semi-automatic action, and can use magazines that hold 30 rounds of ammunition.
The only real meaningful difference between the two firearms is cosmetic:
The AR-15 rifle looks more dangerous.
"The
National Shooting Sports Foundation, a firearms industry trade group, states that the term assault weapon has been misapplied to many semi-automatic firearms because of their appearance and not their use in crime.

== Political and legislative issues ==
Prominent gun-control groups that support restrictions on ownership of firearms include the Brady Campaign and the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence.
Prominent opponents of assault-weapons bans include the National Rifle Association and Gun Owners of America.
In 2002, the NRA's Wayne LaPierre and Jim Baker said "assault weapons" is a pejorative term.
The National Shooting Sports Foundation considers it a politically driven catchphrase aimed to conflate non-automatic weapons with full-automatic assault rifles.
As of 2012, there are an estimated 2.5–3.7 million rifles from just the AR-15 family of rifles in civilian use in the United States; the total number of assault weapons in the United States among all types is not known, and can not be known because of the different definitions in different jurisdictions.

===
Defunct U.S. Federal Assault Weapons Ban ===
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994, more commonly known as the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, expired in 2004.

It banned the manufacture or importation of certain semi-automatic firearms that it defined as "semiautomatic assault weapons", commonly known as assault weapons.

Any firearms so defined that were already possessed at the time the law took effect were grandfathered in, and could be legally owned or transferred.

Another aspect of the law banned the manufacture or importation of magazines that could hold more than ten rounds of ammunition, with existing magazines grandfathered in as legal.
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 defined certain firearms as assault weapons based on the features they possessed.

This included semi-automatic rifles with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a flash suppressor or threaded barrel, a bayonet mount, or a muzzle-mounted grenade launcher.

It included semi-automatic pistols with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip, a threaded barrel, a barrel shroud, or an unloaded weight of 50 ounces or more.
Additionally defined as assault weapons were semi-automatic shotguns with a rotating cylinder, or with at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a detachable magazine, or a fixed magazine that can hold more than five rounds.
The ban also prohibited 19 specifically named models of firearms, as well as copies of those guns.

These included the AK-47, Uzi, Galil, AR-15, FN FAL, MAC-10, Steyr AUG, TEC-9, and Armsel Striker.

===
Failed Assault Weapons Ban of 2013
bill ===
On December 16, 2012, two days after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Senator Dianne Feinstein said she would introduce a new assault weapons ban on the first day of Congress.
Five days later, on December 21, Wayne LaPierre, chief executive of the National Rifle Association, held a news conference repeating the NRA's opposition to additional gun laws.
Feinstein and Senator Richard Blumenthal held a separate news conference in response.
There, Feinstein said that it seemed to her "prudent" to register grandfathered assault weapons under the National Firearms Act (NFA).
A two-page bill summary on the senator's web site also mentioned registering grandfathered assault weapons under the NFA, but the text of the bill introduced to the Senate did not include that provision.

On January 24, 2013, Feinstein introduced S. 150, the "Assault Weapons Ban of 2013".
The bill was similar to the 1994 ban, but differed in that it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the 1994 ban.
On April 17, 2013, it failed on a Senate vote of 60 to 40.

== See also ==
Military-style semi-automatic, New Zealand legal classification
Semi-automatic firearm


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Quotations related to Assault weapon at Wikiquote
The following is a list of modern Russian small arms and light weapons which were in service in 2016:


==
Handguns ==


=== Revolvers ===


===
Pistols ===


===
Special purpose ===


==
Submachine guns ==


===
Special purpose ===


==
Shotguns ==


== Rifles ==


===
Bolt-action ===


===
Semi-automatic ===


===
Selective-fire ===


===
Special purpose ===


===
Anti-materiel rifles ===


==
Machine guns ==


===
Squad automatic weapons (SAWs) ===
The B-300 is a reusable man-portable anti-tank weapon system developed by Israel Military Industries in the late 1970s for use by the Israel Defense Forces.
The B-300 can be carried and operated by a single operator and is effective to approximately 400 meters (1,312 ft).
Pre-packaged munitions and simple operating mechanisms make the weapon quite versatile, permitting use by airborne, motorized, and ground troops alike.
When defence publications first heard reports of the B-300 in the early 1980s, various reports stated in error that it was an Israeli improved and manufactured version of the Russian RPG-7.
==
Usage ==
Munitions used by the B-300 are propelled by a solid rocket motor, and can be equipped with one of two warhead variants.
The first, high explosive anti-tank round, provides specialized support for anti-tank missions.
The second, known as a high explosive follow-through round, is designed for use against fortified targets or enemy units behind cover.
A primary charge punches a hole through the protective structure, allowing a secondary anti-personnel charge to pass through and detonate within the building.
The B-300 was produced during the 1980s and entered service in limited quantities within Israeli Defence Forces SF units.

==
Further development ==


===
SMAW ===
The Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) is a shoulder-launched rocket weapon, designed by McDonnell Douglas, with the primary function of being a portable anti-armor rocket launcher.
It was introduced to the U.S. armed forces in 1984.
It has a maximum range of 500 m against a tank-sized target.

===
Shipon ===
During the late 1990s, IMI introduced the Shipon, an advanced disposable multi-purpose shoulder-launched rocket system consisting of a launch tube and FCS module.
The Shipon includes an advanced fire-control system, helping to aim and increasing effective range to 600 meters.
The Shipon fires two types of rockets:
HEAA Tandem, which penetrates 800 mm of steel armor after explosive reactive armor, and a bunker-buster rocket.
The Shipon is in service within Israeli Special Forces units in the IDF and the YAMAM (the elite police counter-terror unit).

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
Azerbaijan
 Chile
Estonia
India
Israel
Mexico
 Singapore
Sri Lanka
United States Used under the designation Mk153 SMAW.

Trinidad and Tobago


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Early Photos of Israeli B-300
The Mk 153 Shoulder-Launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) is a shoulder-launched rocket weapon with the primary function of being a portable assault weapon (e.g. bunker buster) and a secondary anti-armor rocket launcher.
Developed from the B-300, it was introduced to the United States Armed Forces in 1984.
It has a maximum effective range of 500 metres (550 yd) against a tank-sized target.

It can be used to destroy bunkers and other fortifications during assault operations; it can also destroy other designated targets using the dual mode rocket and main battle tanks using the high-explosive anti-tank rocket.
Operations in Afghanistan and Iraq saw a thermobaric rocket added (described as a "Novel Explosive" [NE]), which is capable of collapsing a building.

==
Service history ==
The SMAW system (launcher, ammunition and logistics support) was fielded in 1984 as a United States Marine Corps–unique system.
The Mod 0 demonstrated several shortcomings, resulting in a series of modifications in the mid-2000s.
These modifications included a re-sleeving process for bubbled launch tubes, rewriting/drafting operator and technical manuals, and a kit to reduce environmental intrusion into the trigger mechanism.
This also includes an optical sight modification to allow the high-explosive anti-armor (HEAA) rocket to be used effectively against moving armor targets.
The U.S. Armed Forces fielded boresight bracket kits which correct the loss of accurate boresight issues between the launch tube and spotting rifle.
During Operation Desert Storm, 150 launchers and 5,000 rockets were deployed by the United States Army.
Initially the Army showed interest in the system but ultimately returned the launchers and any unused rockets to the Marine Corps.
Later, the U.S. Army developed the SMAW-D ("Disposable"), designated by the Army as the M141 Bunker Defeat Munition.

===
Follow-On To SMAW ===
In 2002, the Corps began a program to develop a successor to the SMAW system, tentatively titled "Follow-On To SMAW".
The contract was awarded to Lockheed Martin and Israel Military Industries (IMI); this resulted in the enhanced FGM-172 SRAW.
In combat operations, it was ultimately used to augment, rather than replace, the SMAW system.

===
SMAW II program ===
In 2008, a replacement program was again initiated and titled the SMAW II.
It was developed in tandem with a round capable of being fired from an enclosed area without ill effects on the environment and personnel.
Its combined weight is 13.5 kilograms (29.7
lb)—5.3 kg (11.7 lb) for the launcher, 8.2 kg (18 lb) for the rocket.
The contract was worth up to US$51.7 million


===
SMAW II Serpent ===
In 2012, Raytheon Missile Systems developed a SMAW II launcher called "Serpent, and Nammo Talley developed new rounds for the Serpent.
The Serpent is similar in many respects to the first SMAW launcher, except that it replaces the standard SMAW launcher's spotting gun with sophisticated fire control electronics.
The sighting unit on the launcher is enclosed in a unique roll-cage to protect it.
The roll-cage also serves as a carry handle.
The development reduced the over-all weight by four and a half pounds (2.0 kg) from the older SMAW launcher.
The Serpent fires the same rounds as the standard SMAW and supports new and improved/enhanced rounds.

== Design ==
Compared to the Israel Military Industries' B-300 weapon that it was developed from, the SMAW has slower projectile velocities, it and its ammunition are both heavier, and it takes a second crew member to keep up with the B-300's rate-of-fire, but some of its projectile options have longer ranges than the B-300.
The Mk 153 SMAW has an 83.5 millimetres (3.29 in) diameter tube and fires 83-millimetre (3.3 in) rockets.
It is a man-portable weapon system consisting of the Mk 153 launcher, the Mk 3 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Dual-Purpose (HEDP) rocket, the Mk 6 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor (HEAA) Rocket, the Mk 7 Mod 0 Common Encased Practice Rocket, the Mk 80 Mod 0 Encased Novel Explosive (NE) rocket, and the Mk 217 Mod 0 spotting rifle cartridge.

The launcher consists of the launch tube, spotting rifle, electro-mechanical firing mechanism, mounting brackets, open battle sights and a mount for the Mk 42 Mod 0 day sight or AN/PVS-4 or AN/PVS-17B night sights.
The launch tube is made of fiberglass-epoxy composite material with a gelcoat on the bore.
The spotting rifle is mounted on the right side of the launch tube.
It functions semi-automatically by primer actuation, meaning that when fired the primer sets back and unlocks the breech of the spotting rifle, ejecting the spent round.
The firing mechanism mechanically fires the spotting rifle and uses a magnet to fire the rocket.
The mounting brackets connect the components and provide the means for boresighting the weapon, while the encased rockets are loaded at the rear of the launcher.
The spotting cartridges are stored in a magazine in the cap of the encased rocket.

The 9×51mm Mk 217 spotting round is ballistically matched to the rocket and serves to increase the gunner's first-round hit probability.
Each round consists of a special 9 mm projectile which contains a tracer compound, crimped into a 7.62×51mm NATO casing with a .22 Hornet primer.
The system can be used in conjunction with the AN
/PEQ-2 aiming light in place of the spotting rifle.

As with all of these types of recoilless rocket weapons, the backblast that is created when it is fired is a primary safety concern.
When the rocket is fired, the rocket propellant is expended entirely within the rocket encasement.
This is the cause of the extremely loud and violent backblast.
This backblast extends in a 90-meter, 60° cone to the rear of the weapon.
The backblast is lethal out to 30 metres (98 ft) and still extremely dangerous to 90 metres (300 ft).
An assistant gunner is often used during employment of the weapon system to monitor the backblast area and clear it of fellow troops, or to notify the gunner of obstructions that could reflect the force of the backblast back at the gun team.
The gunner is only cleared to launch a rocket when he hears the command "Backblast area secure" from his assistant gunner.
Rounds are under development that would enable a user to fire the rocket from an enclosed building without risk of injury.
The Mk 153 Mod 2 is an enhanced variant, featuring an electronic modular ballistic sight (MBS) in place of the 9 mm spotting system.
The MBS has a laser rangefinder and thermal weapon sight to provide a firing solution using a displaced reticle, where crosshairs are adjusted for distance and environmental factors; it is lighter, more reliable, and can be detached from the launcher.
While the Mod 0 weighs 7.5 kg (16.5 lb), the Mod 2 weighs 5.9 kg (13 lb) with the MBS attached, and 3.9 kg (8.5 lb) with the MBS detached.
Other improvements include increased pad size on the forward grip and foldable backup iron sights.
The Mod 2 systems were expected to replace the existing inventory by October 2020.

===
Rockets ===
The Mk 4 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor, Practice Rocket is used in training.
The warhead consists of a blue plastic projectile attached to a rocket motor similar to the HEDP rocket.
The rocket has no explosive capability against the target except for kinetic energy.
Upon impact against a target, the plastic warhead ruptures, dispensing an inert white spotting powder.

The Mk 3 Mod 0
Encased HEDP rocket is effective against bunkers, masonry and concrete walls and light armor.
Initiated by a crush switch in its nose, the HEDP rocket is able to distinguish between hard and soft targets resulting in greater penetration into soft targets for increased damage potential.
The HEDP round is capable of penetrating 20 centimetres (7.9 in) of concrete, 30 centimetres (12 in) of brick or up to 210 centimetres (6.9 ft) of wood-reinforced sandbags.

The Mk 6 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor (HEAA) rocket is effective against current tanks without additional armor and utilizes a standoff rod on the detonator, allowing the explosive force to be focused on a small point and for maximum damage against armored targets.
The HEAA round is capable of penetrating up to the equivalent of 600 mm of rolled homogeneous steel.

The Mk 80 Mod 0 Encased Novel Explosive (SMAW-NE) rocket is effective against caves and bunkers.
The SMAW-NE has a 4lb charge of PBXIH-135, an enhanced-blast warhead.
The Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center teamed with Marine Corps Systems Command and Talley Defense Systems to respond to an urgent U.S. Marine Corps need for a shoulder-launched enhanced-blast warhead in 2003.
It was used in combat during both the First and Second offensives in Fallujah, in 2004.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
 Lebanon:
Lebanese Armed Forces
Pakistan:
Pakistan Armed Forces
Taiwan:
Republic of China Marine Corps
United States:
United States Marine Corps


==
See also ==
B-300
M141
Bunker Defeat Munition (SMAW-D)
Breda Folgore
Carl Gustaf
8.4cm recoilless rifle
LRAC F1
M79
Osa


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SMAW – Global Security
SMAW at FAS
SMAW early article
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS INTRODUCTION TO CREW SERVED WEAPONS
U.S. MARINE CORPS TECHNICAL MANUAL OPERATOR’S MANUAL https://www.scribd.com/doc/36175656/TM-08673A-10-1B-83mm-SMAW-Mk
This is a list of Infantry weapons used by the Canadian Military throughout its history and military arms used by militaries in pre-Confederation conflicts in Canada.

==
Colonial Era to Confederation (1604 - 1867) ==


===
Black powder rifles, carbines and pistols ===


===
Service rifles and carbines ===
==
Confederation to First World War (1867 - 1914) ==


===
Service Pistols ===


===
Service Rifles ===


==
First World War to Second World War (1914 - 1939) ==


===
Service pistols ===


===
Rifles ===


===
Machine Guns ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Second World War to Cold War (1939 - 1946) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Scout Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Carriers and Armoured Tractors ===


===
Tanks ===


====
Combat Tanks ====


====
Training Tanks ====


===
Self-Propelled Artillery and Anti-Aircraft ===


===
Engineering Vehicles ===


===
Artillery ===


====
Field artillery ====


====
Anti-tank guns ====


====
Anti-aircraft guns ====


==
Cold War to Modern (Cold War and peace keeping weapons until 2003) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Unsorted ==


===
Approved private purchase and secondary side-arms ===


===
Grenades, mines and other explosives ===


===
Infantry mortars ===


===
Bayonets and Knives ===


===
Ammunition ===


===
Swords ===
1897 Pattern British Infantry Officer's Sword
1908 and 1912 Pattern British Army Cavalry Swords
1857 Artillery Officer Sword
1827
Navy Officer Sword
1926
Air Force Officer Sword


===
Uniforms, Load Bearing and Protective Equipment ===
Uniforms
See also:
Battledress, Uniforms of the Canadian Forces

Foreign Service Dress 1900-1903
Service Dress 1903-1939
Canadian Pattern and British Pattern
Khaki Drill
Battle Dress 1939-1967
Denison smock Used by the Airborne
Canadian Para Smock
Bush Dress
Combat Dress -1968-2002
CADPAT camouflage Combat Dress 2002–presentLoad bearing equipment
Oliver Pattern Equipment 1898-19??

1903
Pattern Bandolier Equipment
1937
Pattern Web Equipment
1942 Battle Jerkin
1951 Pattern Web Equipment
1964 Pattern Web Equipment
1982 Pattern Web Equipment
Tactical Vest (or just known as Tac Vest).
2003–PresentHead dress
Canadian military fur wedge cap
Glengarry
Tam o'shanter
Field Service Cap
Beret
Balmoral bonnet
Brodie helmet
Mk II
helmet
Mk III helmet
M1 Helmet
CG634Protective equipment
Fragmentation Protection Vest


==
Present day ==
List of equipment of the Canadian Army


==
References ==


==
External links ==
canadiansoldier.com
List of military equipment used by Syrian Democratic Forces in the Syrian Civil War.
This list does not include equipment used by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the Syrian opposition.

== Sources ==
The YPG has received weapons and equipment from the United States for the Raqqa offensive.
== Equipment ==


===
Small arms ===


===
Anti-tank ===


===
Artillery ===


===
Armored vehicles ===


===
Utility vehicles ===
All are pickup trucks which were either modified to hold weapons, or are used to transport troops to battlefields.

==
References ==
A high-capacity magazine ban is a law which bans or otherwise restricts high-capacity magazines, detachable firearm magazines that can hold more than a certain number of rounds of ammunition.
For example, in the United States, the now-expired Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 included limits regarding magazines that could hold more than ten rounds.
Eight U.S. states, and a number of local governments, ban or regulate magazines that they have legally defined as high-capacity.

The majority of states (42) do not ban or regulate any magazines on the basis of capacity.

States that do have large capacity magazine bans or restrictions typically do not apply to firearms with fixed magazines whose capacity would otherwise exceed the large capacity threshold.

The federal ban which was in effect from 1994 to 2004 defined a magazine capable of holding more than 10 rounds of ammunition as a large capacity ammunition feeding device.
Likewise, the state of California defines a large capacity magazine as "any ammunition feeding device with a capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.
"
Such devices are commonly called high-capacity magazines.
Among states with bans, the maximum capacity is 10 to 20 rounds.
Several municipalities, such as New York City, restrict magazine capacity to 5 rounds for rifles and shotguns.
The state of New York previously limited magazine capacity to 7 rounds, but a District Court ruled this ban to be excessive and could not "survive intermediate scrutiny".
==
Magazine bans by country ==


===
Canada ===
With the passage of Bill C-17 in 1993 under Prime Minister Kim Campbell (in response to the 1989 Ecole Polytechnique Massacre), magazines designed for use in semi-automatic centrefire rifles and semi-automatic shotguns became limited to five rounds, and magazines designed for use in handguns are limited to 10 rounds.
Magazines designed for use in semi-automatic rimfire rifles, as well as manually operated long guns, are exempt from the magazine capacity restrictions.

In recent years, there has been a growing trend of ways to legally work around the magazine capacity restrictions.
Numerous semi-automatic centrefire rifles also happen to accept handgun magazines, thereby legally increasing magazine capacity.
Numerous rifle and handgun magazines designed for a particular caliber also happen to fit an over-the-limit number of smaller caliber rounds, also legally increasing magazine capacity.

===
United Kingdom ===
There is no ban, restriction or other additional legal requirements on the possession, purchase, sale or import of high capacity magazines in the UK that are designed for use in rifles, shotguns and pistols.
However, since January 1989 all semi automatic rifles (other then those chambered for .22 rimfire cartridges) and since February 1998 all semi automatic pistols have been generally prohibited for possession by the general public without a section 5 firearms licence due to legislation enacted after the 1987 Hungerford Massacre on semi automatic rifles and after the 1996 Dunblane Massacre on semi automatic pistols.
Before those respective dates a member of the public could own them on a standard section 1 firearms licence.
This means that even though high capacity magazines are legal, they can only be legally used on semi automatic rifles owned by citizens with a section 1 firearms licence if they are chambered to fire .22 rimfire cartridges only.
Additionally though long barreled pistols (pistols with a barrel length of at least 12 inches) can still be owned on a section 1 firearms licence as the legislation on pistols passed in February 1998 only affected firearms with a barrel length of less than 12 inches meaning that long barreled pistols are in effect regulated along the same lines as .22 rimfire semi automatic rifles meaning that long barreled pistols can utilize high capacity magazines, though only chambered to .22 rimfire cartridges like semi automatic rifles.
Revolvers are not classed as semi automatic under UK law and thus can be owned in any caliber, however they must still have a barrel length of at least 12 inches like semi automatic rifles and pistols if owned on a section 1 firearms licence.
As for bolt action, straight pull, lever release and any other manually loading rifles they can be owned in any caliber however and utilize high capacity magazines also.

As for shotguns there is legislation on all lever action, pump action and semi automatic shotguns that restricts them to holding a maximum of 3 cartridges at any one time if they are held on a section 2 shotgun licence.
However shotguns with an unlimited capacity can be held on the more strict section 1 firearms licence if an applicant provides a 'good reason' to the chief officer of their local police force as to why they need a shotgun with a capacity over 3 shots, typically a 'good reason' would be for example those hunting or controlling dangerous animals (such as wild boar/hogs) or those who need to control large numbers of pests at once (such as herds of rabbits).
More can be found here Firearms policy in the United Kingdom.

===
United States ===


====
Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 ====
William B. Ruger, a founder of Sturm, Ruger & Co., is often ascribed with providing the impetus for high capacity magazine restrictions.

Ruger proposed that instead of banning firearms, Congress should outlaw magazines holding more than 15 rounds.
“
No honest man needs more than 10 rounds in any gun,” Ruger told Tom Brokaw of NBC News in 1992.
On March 30, 1989, Ruger sent a letter to every member of the US Congress stating:

"The best way to address the firepower concern is therefore not to try to outlaw or license many millions of older and perfectly legitimate firearms (which would be a licensing effort of staggering proportions) but to prohibit the possession of high capacity magazines.
By a simple, complete and unequivocal ban on large capacity magazines, all the difficulty of defining 'assault rifle' and 'semi-automatic rifles' is eliminated.
The large capacity magazine itself, separate or attached to the firearm, becomes the prohibited item.
A single amendment to Federal firearms laws could effectively implement these objectives."

William B. Ruger
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 included a ban on magazines capable of holding more than ten rounds of ammunition.
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act, commonly called the assault weapons ban (AWB), was enacted in September 1994.
The ban, including its ban on magazines capable of holding more than ten rounds of ammunition, became defunct (expired) in September 2004 per a sunset provision.
Attempts to renew the ban have failed on the federal level.

====
State high-capacity magazine bans ====
As of April 2019, Washington, D.C. and nine U.S. states have high-capacity magazine restrictions or bans.

Colorado (on in-state sales of magazines with a capacity of 16 rounds or greater)
Connecticut
Hawaii (on handguns only)
Maryland (on in-state sales of magazines with a capacity of 11 rounds or greater)
Massachusetts
New Jersey
New York
Vermont (10 round magazine limit on rifles and a 15 round limit on handguns)In Virginia, high-capacity magazines, which are defined as being over 20 rounds for a semi-automatic, centerfire rifle or pistol, and 7 shells for a shotgun, are not in and of themselves banned, but using one in combination with a firearm changes its status to an "assault firearm" which is prohibited for foreign nationals without permanent resident to possess, as well as requiring a license to carry in certain counties and cities.

====
Municipal and county high-capacity magazine bans ====
U.S. cities with high-capacity magazine restrictions or bans include: 

Denver, Colorado
Cook County, Illinois
Aurora, Illinois
Chicago, Illinois
Oak Park, Illinois
Albany, New York
Buffalo, New York
New York, New York
Rochester, New York


====
Legal status ====
In 2013, a federal judge in New York struck down the state's prohibition against gun owners loading more than seven rounds into a magazine, calling the limit “an arbitrary restriction” that violated the Second Amendment, but upheld the state's ban on magazines that hold more than 10 rounds.
In 2015, the Second Circuit upheld this decision on appeal.
In December 2013, the National Rifle Association (NRA), representing five residents of Sunnyvale, California, filed a lawsuit to stop enforcement of the city's ban on possession of magazines able to hold more than 10 rounds, in a case known as Fyock v. Sunnyvale.

In March 2014, Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy rejected a request to block enforcement of the law pending appeals.

In March 2015, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit upheld the magazine capacity restriction, ruling that it does not violate the Second Amendment.
Eugene Volokh, constitutional scholar, says that a Federal District Court judge was correct to decide that a local high-capacity magazine ban was constitutional, comparing limits on magazine capacity to limits on free speech.
California's statewide high-capacity magazine ban (enacted by voters in Proposition 63) is the subject of an ongoing legal challenge in Duncan v. Becerra.
In March 2019, Judge Roger T. Benitez of the U.S. District Court of the Southern District of California issued a ruling striking down the ban, concluding that it that infringed Second Amendment rights.
The decision was suspended after six days, pending further litigation.
On August 2020, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held, in a 2–1 decision, that California's ban on large-capacity magazines violated the Second Amendment.
However, in February 2021, the panel decision was vacated after the Ninth Circuit voted to rehear the case en banc (by an 11-member panel).

====
Public opinion ====
In 2012 62% of Americans favored banning the sale of high-capacity ammunition magazines, according to a Gallup poll with a margin of error of +/-
4%.
In 2017 65% of American adults supported banning high-capacity magazines, according to a Pew Research Center survey with an error attributable to sampling of +/-
2.8% at the 95% level of confidence.
In late February early March 2018, after  the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting, 63% of American adults supported a ban on the sale and possession of high-capacity or extended ammunition magazines, according to a CNN poll with a margin of error of +/-
3.7%.
73% of American adults supported banning high-capacity ammunition magazines that hold more than 10 rounds, according to an NPR/Ipsos poll with a margin of error of +/-
3.5%.
70% of registered voters supported banning high-capacity magazines, according to a Politico/Morning Consult poll with a margin of error +/-
2%.

==== Hunting ====
Some jurisdictions apply magazine limits to hunters.
For example, Maine and Oregon have a 5-cartridge limit on auto-loading firearms for hunting.

==
Impact ==


===
On gun homicide rates and lethality ===
A 2004 study examining the effects of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban in effect from 1994 to 2004 which included a prohibition on sales of magazines with over ten rounds.

The study found that, while the ban was effective at reducing crimes committed with assault weapons, the ban was not associated with a reduction in firearm homicides or the lethality of gun crimes in general.

The authors suggest this may be due to the concurrent rise in use of non-banned semiautomatic weapons with large capacity magazines.

The authors note that high-capacity magazines have a greater potential for affecting gun crime as compared to assault weapons due to the fact that high-capacity magazines are used in firearms not classified as assault weapons.

The authors further note, "However, it is not clear how often the ability to fire more than 10 shots without reloading (the current magazine capacity limit) affects the outcomes of gun attacks."

Overall the authors reported that "there has been no discernible reduction in the lethality and injuriousness of gun violence, based on indicators like the percentage of gun crimes resulting in death or the share of gunfire incidents resulting in injury, as we might have expected had the ban reduced crimes with both AWs and LCMs.
"
The authors speculated that "Nonetheless, reducing crimes with AWs and especially LCMs could have nontrivial effects on gunshot victimizations.
As a general matter, hit rates tend to be low in gunfire incidents, so having more shots to fire rapidly can increase the likelihood that offenders hit their targets, and perhaps bystanders as well.
"
A 2019 study found no statistically significant association between state-level LCM bans and homicide rates.
A 2020 RAND Corporation review indicated that there were few methodologically rigorous studies on the impact of LCM bans on violent crime rates, and concluded that "High-capacity magazine bans have uncertain effects on firearm homicides.
Evidence for the effect of high-capacity magazine bans on firearm homicides is also inconclusive.
"

===
On mass shooting rates and lethality ===
A 2019 study examined the effect of large-capacity magazine (LCM) bans on the frequency and lethality of "high-lethality mass shootings" (defined as those resulting in six or more fatalities) in the United States from 1990 to 2017.
Of the 69 high-fatality mass shootings in the U.S. over that period, at least 44 (64%) involved LCMs.
Attacks involving LCMs "resulted in a 62% higher mean average death toll" than mass shootings in which high-capacity magazines were not used.
States which had banned high-capacity magazines had a substantially lower incidence of mass shootings, as well as far fewer fatalities in mass shootings: "The incidence of high-fatality mass shootings in non–LCM ban states was more than double the rate in LCM ban states; the annual number of deaths was more than 3 times higher.
"
The study acknowledged that because 69 incidents over a 28-year period was, for statistical purposes, "a relatively small number and limits the power to detect significant associations," it was possible that the magnitude of the effects detected was overestimated.
The study authors "did not have the statistical power (and thus did not even try) to determine whether different aspects of the various LCM laws might have differential effects on the incidence of high-fatality mass shootings.
"A 2020 study, examining fatal mass shootings in the U.S. for the period 1984–2017, found that, when controlling for other variables, LCM bans, and handgun purchaser licensing laws, were associated with a significant reduction in fatal mass shootings, while assault weapon bans, background checks, and de-regulation of civilian concealed carry were not.

== See also ==
Assault weapons legislation in the United States
Gun laws in the United States by state
Gun politics in the United States
Bullet button


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Dinzeo, Maria (February 21, 2014). "
Mass Shootings Justify S.F. Limit on Bullets".
Courthouse News Service.
Retrieved May 25, 2014.

"California State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"Colorado State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"Connecticut State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"District of Columbia State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"Hawaii State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"Maryland State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"Massachusetts State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 2, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"New Jersey State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 1, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.

"
New York State Law Summary".
smartgunlaws.org.
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
January 1, 2012.
Retrieved April 27, 2014.
The People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN; Vietnamese: Quân
đội Nhân dân Việt Nam), also known as the Vietnamese People's Army (VPA), is the military force of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
The PAVN is a part of the Vietnam People's Armed Forces and includes: Ground Force (including Strategic Rear Forces), Navy, Air Force, Border Guard, Coast Guard, Cyberspace Operations, and Mausoleum Defence Force.
However, Vietnam does not have a separate Ground Force or Army branch.
All ground troops, army corps, military districts and specialised arms belong to the Ministry of Defence, directly under the command of the Central Military Commission, the Minister of Defence, and the General Staff of the Vietnam People's Army.
The military flag of the PAVN is the flag of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, with the words
Quyết thắng (Determination to win) added in yellow at the top left.

During the French Indochina War (1946–1954), the PAVN was often referred to as the Việt Minh.
In the context of the Vietnam War (1955–1975), the army was referred to as the North Vietnamese Army (NVA).
This allowed writers, the U.S. military, and the general public, to distinguish northern communists from the southern communists, called Viet Cong or National Liberation Front.
However, both groups ultimately worked under the same command structure.
The Viet Cong had its own military called the Liberation Army of South Vietnam (LASV).
It was considered a branch of the PAVN by the North Vietnamese.
In 2010, the PAVN undertook the role of leading the 1,000th Anniversary Parade in Hanoi by performing their biggest parade in history.

==
History ==


===
Before 1945 ===
The first historical record of Vietnamese military history dates back on the era of Hồng Bàng, the first recorded state in ancient Vietnam to have assembled military force.
Since then, military plays a crucial role on developing Vietnamese history due to its turbulent history of wars against China, Champa, Cambodia, Laos and Thailand.

The Southern expansion of Vietnam resulted with the destruction of Champa as an independent nation to a level that it did not exist anymore; total destruction of Luang Prabang; the decline of Cambodia which resulted to Vietnam's annexation of Mekong Delta and wars against Siam.
In most of its history, the Royal Vietnamese Armed Forces was often regarded to be one of the most professional, battle-hardened and heavily trained armies in Southeast Asia as well as Asia in a large extent.

===
Establishment ===
The PAVN was first conceived in September 1944 at the first Revolutionary Party Military Conference as Vietnam Propaganda Liberation Army
(Việt Nam Tuyên truyền Giải phóng Quân) to educate, recruit and mobilise the Vietnamese to create a main force to drive the French colonial and Japanese occupiers from Vietnam.
Under the guidelines of Hồ Chí Minh,
Võ Nguyên Giáp was given the task of establishing the brigades and the Vietnam Propaganda Liberation Army
came into existence on 22 December 1944.
The first formation was made up of thirty one men and three women, armed with two revolvers, seventeen rifles, one light machine gun, and fourteen breech-loading flintlocks.
The United States' OSS agents, led by Archimedes Patti – who was sometimes referred as the first instructor of the PAVN due to his role, had provided ammunitions as well as logistic intelligence and equipments and they had also helped training these soldiers which was later become the vital backbone of the later Vietnamese military to fight the Japanese occupiers as well as the future wars.

The name was changed to the Vietnam Liberation Army (Việt Nam Giải phóng Quân) on 15 May 1945.
The Democratic Republic of Vietnam was proclaimed in Hanoi by Ho Chi Minh and Vietminh on 2 September 1945.
Then in November, the army was renamed the Vietnam National Defence Army (Việt Nam Vệ quốc Quân).
At this point, it had about 1,000 soldiers.
On 22 May 1946, the army was called the Vietnam National Army
(Quân đội Quốc gia Việt Nam).
Lastly in 1950, it officially became the People's Army of Vietnam (Quân đội Nhân dân Việt Nam).

Võ
Nguyên Giáp went on to become the first full general of the PAVN on 28 May 1948, and famous for leading the PAVN in victory over French forces at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 and being in overall command against U.S. backed South Vietnam at the Liberation of Saigon on 30 April 1975.

===
French Indochina War ===
On 7 January 1947, its first regiment, the 102nd 'Capital' Regiment, was created for operations around Hanoi.

Over the next two years, the first division, the 308th Division, later well known as the Pioneer Division, was formed from the 88th Tu Vu Regiment and the 102nd Capital Regiment.
By late 1950 the 308th Division had a full three infantry regiments, when it was supplemented by the 36th Regiment.
At that time, the 308th Division was also backed by the 11th Battalion that later became the main force of the 312th Division.
In late 1951, after launching three campaigns against three French strongpoints in the Red River Delta, the PAVN refocused on building up its ground forces further, with five new divisions, each of 10–15,000 men, created: the 304th Glory Division at Thanh Hóa, the 312th Victory Division in Vinh Phuc, the 316th Bong Lau Division in the northwest border region, the 320th Delta Division in the north Red River Delta, the 325th Binh Tri Thien Division in Binh Tri Thien province.
Also in 1951, the first artillery Division, the 351st Division was formed, and later, before Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, for the first time in history, it was equipped with 24 captured 105mm US howitzers supplied by the Chinese People's Liberation Army.
The first six divisions (308th, 304th, 312th, 316th, 320th, 325th) became known as the original PAVN 'Steel and Iron' divisions.
In 1954, four of these divisions (the 308th, 304th, 312nd, 316th, supported by the 351st Division's captured US howitzers) defeated the French Union forces at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu, ending 83 years of French rule in Indochina.

===
Vietnam War ===
Soon after the 1954 Geneva Accords, the 330th and 338th Divisions were formed by southern Viet Minh members who had moved north in conformity with that agreement, and by 1955, six more divisions were formed: the 328th, 332nd and 350th in the north of the North Vietnam, the 305th and the 324th near the DMZ, and the 335 Division of soldiers repatriated from Laos.
In 1957, the theatres of the war with the French were reorganised as the first five military regions, and in the next two years, several divisions were reduced to brigade size to meet the manpower requirements of collective farms.

By 1958, it was becoming increasingly clear that the South Vietnamese government was solidifying its position as an independent republic under Ngô Đình Diệm, who staunchly opposed the terms of the Geneva Accords, that required a national referendum on unification of north and south Vietnam under a single national government.

North Vietnam prepared to settle the issue of unification by force.

In May 1959, the first major steps to prepare infiltration routes into South Vietnam were taken; Group 559 was established, a logistical unit charged with establishing routes into the south via Laos and Cambodia, which later became famous as the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
At about the same time, Group 579 was created as its maritime counterpart to transport supplies into the South by sea.
Most of the early infiltrators were members of the 338th Division, former southerners who had been settled at Xuan Mai from 1954 onwards.

Regular formations were sent to South Vietnam from 1965 onwards; the 325th Division's 101B Regiment and the 66th Regiment of the 304th Division met U.S. forces on a large scale, a first for the PAVN, at the Battle of Ia Drang Valley in November 1965.
The 308th Division's 88A Regiment, the 312th Division's 141A, 141B, 165A, 209A, the 316th Division's 174A, the 325th Division's 95A, 95B, the 320A Division also faced the U.S. forces which included the 1st Cavalry Division, the 101st Airborne Division, the 173rd Airborne Brigade, the 4th Infantry Division, the 1st Infantry Division and the 25th Infantry Division.
Many of those formations later became main forces of the 3rd Division (Yellow Star Division) in Binh Dinh (1965), the 5th Division (1966) of 7th Military Zone (Capital Tactical Area of ARVN), the 7th (created by 141st and 209th Regiments originated in the 312th Division in 1966) and 9th Divisions (first Division of National Liberation Front of Vietnam in 1965 in Mekong Delta), the 10th Dakto Division in Dakto – Central Highlands in 1972.

On 20 December 1960, all anti-American forces in South Vietnam joined together to form a united front called National Liberation Front of South Vietnam
(Mặt trận
Dân
tộc Giải phóng Miền Nam Việt Nam) or simply known as the Vietcong in the United States.
On 15 December 1961, the NLF established its own military called Liberation Army of South Vietnam (LASV) to fight against Americans and Army of the Republic of Vietnam.
The LASV was controlled and equipped by the PAVN.

General Trần Văn Trà, one-time commander of the B2 Front (Saigon) HQ confirms that even though the PAVN and the LASV were confident in their ability to defeat the regular ARVN forces, U.S. intervention in Vietnam forced them to reconsider their operations.
The decision was made to continue to pursue "main force" engagements even though "there were others in the South – they were not military people – who wanted to go back to guerrilla war," but the strategic aims were adjusted to meet the new reality.

We had to change our plan and make it different from when we fought the Saigon regime, because we now had to fight two adversaries — the United States and South Vietnam.
We understood that the U.S. Army was superior to our own logistically, in weapons and in all things.
So strategically we did not hope to defeat the U.S. Army completely.
Our intentions were to fight a long time and cause heavy casualties to the United States, so the United States would see that the war was unwinnable and would leave.

During the Vietnamese Lunar New Year Tết holiday starting on 30 January 1968, the PAVN/VC launched a general offensive in more than 60 cities and towns throughout south of Vietnam against the US Army and Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN), beginning with operations in the border region to try and draw US forces and ARVN troops out of the major cities.
In coordinated attacks, the U.S Embassy in Saigon, Presidential Palace, Headquarters of the Joint General Staff and Republic of Vietnam Navy, TV and Radio Stations, Tan Son Nhat Air Base in Saigon were attacked by commando forces known as "Dac Cong".
This offensive became known as the "Tet Offensive".
The PAVN sustained heavy losses of its main forces in southern military zones.
Some of its regular forces and command structure had to escape to Laos and Cambodia to avoid counterattacks from US forces and ARVN, while local guerrillas forces and political organisations in South Vietnam were exposed and had a hard time remaining within the Mekong Delta area due to the extensive use of the Phoenix Program.

Although the PAVN lost militarily to the US forces and ARVN in the south, the political impact of the war in the United States was strong.
Public demonstrations increased in ferocity and quantity after the Tet Offensive.
During 1970, the 5th, 7th and 9th Divisions fought in Cambodia against U.S., ARVN, and Cambodian Khmer National Armed Forces
but they had gained new allies: the Khmer Rouge and guerrilla fighters supporting deposed Prime Minister Sihanouk.
In 1975 the PAVN were successful in aiding the Khmer Rouge in toppling Lon Nol's U.S.-backed regime, despite heavy US bombing.

After the withdrawal of most U.S. combat forces from Indochina because of the Vietnamization strategy, the PAVN launched the ill-fated Easter Offensive in 1972.
Although successful at the beginning, the South Vietnamese repulsed the main assaults with U.S. air support.
Still North Vietnam retained some South Vietnamese territory.

Nearly two years after the full U.S. withdrawal from Indochina in accordance with the terms of the 1973 Paris Peace Accords, the PAVN launched a Spring Offensive aimed at uniting Vietnam.
Without direct support of the U.S., and suffering from stresses caused by dwindling aid, the ARVN was ill-prepared to confront the highly motivated PAVN, and despite the paper superiority of the ARVN, the PAVN quickly secured victory within two months and captured Saigon on 30 April 1975, effectively ending the 70 years of conflict stemming from French colonial invasion of the 19th century and unifying Vietnam.

After national reunification, the LASV was officially merged into PAVN on 2 July 1976.

=== Sino-Vietnamese conflicts (1975–1990) ===
Towards the second half of the 20th century the armed forces of Vietnam would participate in organised incursions to protect its citizens and allies against aggressive military factions in the neighbouring Indochinese countries of Laos and Cambodia, and the defensive border wars with China.

The PAVN had forces in Laos to secure the Ho Chi Minh Trail and to militarily support the Pathet Lao.
In 1975 the Pathet Lao and PAVN forces succeeded in toppling the Royal Laotian regime and installing a new, and pro-Hanoi government, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, that rules Laos to this day.

Parts of Sihanouk's neutral Cambodia were occupied by troops as well.
A pro US coup led by Lon Nol in 1970 led to the foundation pro-US Khmer Republic state.
This marked the beginning of the Cambodian Civil War.
The PAVN aided Khmer Rouge forces in toppling Lon Nol's government in 1975.
In 1978, along with the FUNSK Cambodian Salvation Front, the Vietnamese and Ex-Khmer Rouge forces succeeded in toppling Pol Pot's Democratic Kampuchea regime and installing a new government, the People's Republic of Kampuchea.

During the Sino-Vietnamese War and the Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979–90, Vietnamese forces would conduct cross-border raids into Chinese territory to destroy artillery ammunition.
This greatly contributed to the outcome of the Sino-Vietnamese War, as the Chinese forces ran out of ammunition already at an early stage and had to call in reinforcements.

While occupying Cambodia, Vietnam launched several armed incursions into Thailand in pursuit of Cambodian guerrillas that had taken refuge on the Thai side of the border.

==
Modern deployment ==
The PAVN has been actively involved in Vietnam's workforce to develop the economy of Vietnam, to co-ordinate national defence and the economy, as for the result of its long-relationship of Vietnamese economic development within military history.
The PAVN has regularly sent troops to aid with natural disasters such as flooding, landslides etc.
The PAVN is also involved in such areas as industry, agriculture, forestry, fishery and telecommunications.
The PAVN has numerous small firms which have become quite profitable in recent years.
However, recent decrees have effectively prohibited the commercialisation of the military.
Conscription is in place for every male, age 18 to 25 years old, though females can volunteer to join.

===
International presence ===
The Foreign Relations Department of the Ministry of National Defence organises international operations of the PAVN.

Apart from its occupation of half of the disputed Spratly Islands, which have been claimed as Vietnamese territory since the 17th century, Vietnam has not officially had forces stationed internationally since its withdrawal from Cambodia and Laos in early 1990.

The Center for Public Policy Analysis and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) as well as Laotian and Hmong human rights organisations, including the Lao Human Rights Council, Inc. and the United League for Democracy in Laos, Inc., have provided evidence that since the end of the Vietnam War, significant numbers of Vietnamese military and security forces continue to be sent to Laos, on a repeated basis, to quell and suppress Laotian political and religious dissident and opposition groups including the peaceful 1999 Lao Students for Democracy protest in Vientiane in 1999 and the Hmong rebellion.

Rudolph Rummel has estimated that 100,000 Hmong perished in genocide between 1975 and 1980 in collaboration with PAVN.
For example, in late November 2009, shortly before the start of the 2009 Southeast Asian Games in Vientiane, the PAVN undertook a major troop surge in key rural and mountainous provinces in Laos where Lao and Hmong civilians and religious believers, including Christians, have sought sanctuary.
In 2014, Vietnam had requested to join the United Nations peacekeeping force, which was later approved.
The first Vietnamese UN peacekeeping officers were sent to South Sudan, marked the first involvement of Vietnam into a United Nations' mission abroad.
Vietnamese peacekeepers were also sent to the Central African Republic.

== Organisation ==
The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces is the President of Vietnam, though this position is nominal and real power is assumed by the Central Military Commission of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam.
The secretary of Central Military Commission (usually the General Secretary of the Communist Party of Vietnam) is the de facto Commander and now is Nguyễn Phú Trọng.

The Minister of National Defence oversees operations of the Ministry of Defence, and the PAVN.
He also oversees such agencies as the General Staff and the General Logistics Department.
However, military policy is ultimately directed by the Central Military Commission of the ruling Communist Party of Vietnam.

Ministry of Defence: is the lead organisation, highest command and management of the Vietnam People's Army.

General Staff Department:
is leading agency
all levels of the Vietnam People's Army, command all of the armed forces, which functions to ensure combat readiness of the armed forces and manage all military activities in peace and war.

General Political Department: is the agency in charge of Communist Party affairs – political work within PAVN, which operates under the direct leadership of the Secretariat of the Communist Party of Vietnam and the Central Military Party Committee.

General Military Intelligence Department: is an intelligence agency of the Vietnamese government and military.

General Logistical Department: is the agency in charge to ensure the full logistical and military unit.

General Technical Department: is the agency in charge to ensure equipped technical means of war for the army and each unit.

General Military Industry Department: is the agency in charge guide task to defence perform and production.

==
Service branches ==
The Vietnamese People's Army is subdivided into the following service branches:

 Vietnam People's Ground Force (Lục quân Nhân dân Việt Nam)
 Vietnam People's Air Force (Không quân Nhân dân Việt Nam)
 Vietnam People's Navy (
Hải quân Nhân dân Việt Nam)
Vietnam Border Guard
(Bộ đội Biên phòng Việt Nam)
Vietnam Coast Guard
(Cảnh sát biển Việt Nam)
Cyberspace Operations (Tác chiến Không gian mạng)
President Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum Defence Force (
Bảo vệ Lăng Chủ tịch Hồ Chí Minh)The People's Army of Vietnam is a "triple armed force" composed of the Main Force, the Local Force and the Border Force.
As with most countries' armed forces, the PAVN consists of standing, or regular, forces as well as reserve forces.

During peacetime, the standing forces are minimised in number, and kept combat-ready by regular physical and weapons training, and stock maintenance.
===
Vietnam People's Ground Force ===
Within PAVN the Ground Force have not been established as a full separate Service Command, thus all of the ground troops, army corps, military districts, specialised arms belong to the Ministry of Defence, under the direct command of the General Staff.
The Vietnam Strategic Rear Forces (Lực lượng dự bị chiến lược) is also a part of the Ground Force.
The VPGF is widely regarded as probably one of the best armies in Southeast Asia, and also one of the most prominent armies in Asia.

====
Structure ====


====
Military regions ====
The following military regions are under the direct control of the General Staff and the Ministry of Defence:
1st Military Region: responsible for the North East of Vietnam.
Headquarters:
Thái Nguyên
2nd Military Region: responsible for the North West of Vietnam.
Headquarters:
Việt Trì, Phú Thọ
3rd Military Region: special command responsible for the defense of the Red River Delta.
Headquarters:
Hai Phong
4th Military Region: responsible for North Central Vietnam.
Headquarters:
Vinh, Nghệ An
5th Military Region: responsible for South Central Vietnam including the Central Highlands and Southern Central coastal provinces.
Headquarters:
Da Nang
7th Military Region: responsible for Southern Vietnam.
Headquarters:
Ho Chi Minh
City
9th Military Region: responsible for the Mekong Delta.
Headquarters:
Cần Thơ
Hanoi Capital City Special High Command: special command tasked for the defense of the Greater Hanoi area.
Headquarters:
Hanoi


====
Main force ====
The Main Force of the PAVN consists of combat ready troops, as well as support units such as educational institutions for logistics, officer training, and technical training.
In 1991, Conboy et al.
stated that the PAVN Ground Force had four 'Strategic Army Corps' in the early 1990s, numbering 1–4, from north to south.
1st Corps, located in the Red River Delta region, consisted of the 308th (one of the six original 'Steel and Iron' divisions) and 312th Divisions, and the 309th Infantry Regiment.
The other three corps, 2 SAC, 3 SAC, and 4 SAC, were further south, with 4th Corps, in Southern Vietnam, consisting of two former LASV divisions, the 7th and 9th.

From 2014 to 2016, the IISS Military Balance attributed the Vietnamese ground forces with an estimated 412,000 personnel.
Formations, according to the IISS, include 8 military regions, 4 corps headquarters, 1 special forces airborne brigade, 6 armoured brigades and 3 armoured regiments, two  mechanised infantry divisions, and 23 active infantry divisions plus another 9 reserve ones.

Combat support formations include 13 artillery brigades and one artillery regiment, 11 air defence brigades, 10 engineers brigades, 1 electronic warfare unit, 3 signals brigades and 2 signals regiment.

Combat service support formations include 9 economic construction divisions, 1 logistical regiment, 1 medical unit and 1 training regiment.
Ross wrote in 1984 that economic construction division "are composed of regular troops that are fully trained and armed, and reportedly they are surbordinate to their own directorate in the Ministry of Defense.
They have specific military missions; however, they are also entrusted with economic tasks such as food production or construction work.
They are composed partially of older veterans."
Ross also cited 1980s sources saying that economic construction divisions each had a strength of about 3,500.

In 2017, the listing was amended, with the addition of a single Short-range ballistic missile brigade.
The ground forces according to the IISS, hold Scud-B/C SRBMs.1st Corps – Binh
đoàn Quyết thắng
(Corps of the Determined Victory):
First organised on 24 October 1973 during the Vietnam War, the 1st Corps had a major role in the Ho Chi Minh Campaign that ended the war.
It is stationed in Tam Điệp District, Ninh Bình.
The combat forces of the corps include:

308th Division
312th Infantry Division
390th Division
367th Air Defence Division
202nd Tank Brigade
45th Artillery Brigade
299th Engineer Brigade2nd Corps –
Binh đoàn Hương Giang (Corps of the Perfume River):
First organised on 17 May 1974 during the Vietnam War, the 2nd Corps had a major role in the Ho Chi Minh Campaign that ended the war.
Stationed in Lạng Giang District, Bắc Giang.
The combat forces of the corps include:

304th Division
306th Infantry Division
325th
Division
673rd Air Defence Division
203rd Tank Brigade
164th Artillery Brigade
219th
Engineer Brigade3rd Corps –
Binh đoàn Tây Nguyên (Corps of the Central Highlands):
First organised on 26 March 1975 during the Vietnam War, 3rd Corps had a major role in the Ho Chi Minh Campaign and the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
Stationed in Pleiku, Gia Lai.
The combat forces of the corps include:

10th Infantry Division
31st Infantry Division
320th Infantry Division
312th Air Defence Regiment
273rd Tank Regiment
675th Artillery Regiment
198th
Commando Regiment
29th
Signal Regiment
545th
Engineer Regiment4th Corps – Binh đoàn
Cửu Long (Corps of the Mekong):
First organised 20 July 1974 during the Vietnam War, 4th Corps had a major role in the Ho Chi Minh Campaign and the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
Stationed in Dĩ An, Bình Dương.
The combat forces of the corps include:

7th Infantry Division
9th Infantry Division
324th Infantry Division
71st Air Defence Regiment
24th
Artillery Regiment
429th Commando Regiment
550th
Engineer Regiment


====
Local forces ====
Local forces are an entity of the PAVN that, together with the militia and "self-defence forces," act on the local level in protection of people and local authorities.

While the local forces are regular VPA forces, the people's militia consists of rural civilians, and the people's self-defence forces consist of civilians who live in urban areas and/or work in large groups, such as at construction sites or farms.
The current number stands at 3–4 million reservists and militia personnel combined.
They serve as force multipliers to the PAVN and Public Security during wartime and peacetime contingencies.

===
Vietnam People's Navy ===


===
Vietnam People's Air Force ===


===
Vietnam Border Guard ===


===
Vietnam Coast Guard ===
As mentioned above, reserves exist in all branches and are organised in the same way as the standing forces, with the same chain of command, and with officers and non-commissioned officers.
It is modeled after the United States Coast Guard with some Vietnamese characteristics.

==
Ranks and insignia ==


== Equipment ==
From the 1960s to 1975, the Soviet Union, along with some smaller Eastern Bloc countries, was the main supplier of military hardware to North Vietnam.

After the latter's victory in the war, it remained the main supplier of equipment to Vietnam.
The United States had been the primary supplier of equipment to South Vietnam; much of the equipment left by the U.S. Army and ARVN came under control of the re-unified Vietnamese government.
The PAVN captured large numbers of ARVN weapons on 30 April 1975 after Saigon was captured.

Russia remains the biggest arms-supplier for Vietnam; even after 1986, there are also increasing arms sales from other nations, notably from India, Turkey, Israel, Japan, South Korea, and France.
In 2016, President Barack Obama announced the lifting of the lethal weapons embargo on Vietnam, which has increased Vietnamese military equipment choices from other countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, and other Western countries, which could enable a faster modernization of the Vietnamese military.

Despite Russia remaining Vietnam's largest weapon supplier, increasing cooperation with Israel has resulted in the development of Vietnamese weaponry with a strong mixture of Russian and Israeli weapons.
For examples, the PKMS, GK1, and GK3 guns are three Vietnam-made indigenous guns modeled after the Galil ACE of Israel.
Many new Vietnamese weapons, armor, and equipment are also greatly influenced by Israeli military doctrines, due to Vietnam's long and problematic relations with most of its neighbors.

== Notes ==


===
Footnotes ===


===
Citations ===


==
References ==
Conboy, Bowra, and McCouaig, '
The NVA and Vietcong', Osprey Publishing, 1991.

Military History Institute of Vietnam,(2002)
Victory in Vietnam:
The Official History of the People's Army of Vietnam, 1954–1975, translated by Merle L. Pribbenow.
University Press of Kansas.
ISBN 0-7006-1175-4.

Morris, Virginia and Hills, Clive. '
Ho Chi Minh's Blueprint for Revolution:
In the Words of Vietnamese Strategists and Operatives', McFarland & Co Inc, 2018.

Tran, Doan Lam (2012).
How the Vietnamese People's Army was Founded.
Hanoi:
World Publishers.
ISBN 978-604-7705-13-9.
==
External links ==
Ministry of Defence Vietnam
People's Army of Vietnam English Edition
Center for Public Policy Analysis, Washington, D.C.
A spotting rifle or ranging gun is a small-calibre rifle used as a sighting device for artillery.
The ballistics of the spotting rifle are matched to those of the artillery piece, so that if a shot from the spotting rifle lands on the target, it may be assumed that the main weapon will also do so.

==
Anti-tank recoilless rifles ==
Spotting rifles were most commonly used with recoilless rifles as anti-tank artillery, from the 1950s to the 1970s.
These weapons are used for direct fire with line-of-sight visibility to the target.
As recoilless rifles have a relatively low muzzle velocity and thus a high trajectory, accurate ranging is important
An optical sight can measure the bearing to a target, but not easily or accurately measure the range.
Optical rangefinders were too large for lightweight portable artillery, and the later development of laser rangefinders would in turn make spotting rifles obsolete.

The British BAT series of 120 mm anti-tank recoilless rifles used a variety of sighting systems.
The original BAT used a purely optical sight.
The MoBAT, a lightweight and more portable version, had a 7.62×51mm NATO Bren light machine gun.
The final version, the WOMBAT, used the same American Remington M8C .50
in as the M40 recoilless rifle.
Both of these were used as gas-operated semi-automatic rifles.
The .50 was not, as often assumed, a development of the .50 M2 machine gun using the 12.7×99mm NATO cartridge, but was a shortened 12.7×76mm cartridge.
Where a vehicle, such as the M50 Ontos, used multiple barrels, spotting rifles were usually provided for each barrel so that each could be accurately boresighted to its own barrel.
The Ontos used six barrels with four spotting rifles; two without, to avoid making an already tall vehicle even higher.
This provision may have been over-generous, although it did also increase the magazine capacity available for repeated ranging shots.
Many photographs of the Ontos in service in Vietnam show it with only two of the spotting rifles installed in their mounts.
The Ontos also often carried only four or even two main gun tubes.

===
Recoilless rifles using spotting rifles ===
Davis gun
M40 recoilless rifle
M50 Ontos
Model 1968
Recoilless Gun
MoBAT
Type 60 Self-propelled 106 mm Recoilless Gun
WOMBAT


==
Rocket launchers ==
Perhaps the smallest weapons to use spotting rifles are man-portable shoulder-launched rocket launchers.

The British 94mm LAW 80 is a rocket launcher developed as a replacement for the LAW 66 and Carl Gustav to give a more powerful infantry anti-tank capability.
This uses a 9 mm rifle with a 5-round magazine and a particularly unusual design of ballistically matched cartridge.
This same spotting rifle (Mk 8 Mod 0) and round was later adopted for the US 83 mm Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW).
==
Tank main guns ==
A rare few tanks have used spotting rifles, termed a "ranging gun" for ranging their main gun.
This was a short-lived use, from the period in the 1950s when the increasingly powerful tank guns (and their reduced capacity for spare ammunition) encouraged a more carefully ranged first shot in the hope of an immediate kill, and the later development of laser rangefinders.
The British Centurion Mk 5/2 with its new 105mm L7 main gun introduced a ranging gun.
This was derived from the M2 Browning design, both the L6 variant of the gun and also its 12.7×99mm ammunition.
This ammunition was once again ballistically matched to the main gun.
As this was a rather higher velocity round than the recoilless rifles, the case was the same as the M2 and the rounds could be used in either weapon.
The enhanced tracer effect of the spotting round was sometimes used in an M2.
Mounted in the Centurion it was alongside another conventional co-axial machine gun, the ranging gun being the one in the mantlet closest to the main gun.

The ranging gun was considered a success on the Centurion and was fitted to several marks of it, including retrofitting to earlier models with the 84 mm gun.
The same ranging gun principle was later used for the 120mm gun of the Chieftain.
It was considered less successful with the more powerful gun, as the range for accurate ranging was limited to 2,600 yards — beyond this the tracer element burned out and the fall of shot could no longer be seen.
As the gun's own range with HESH could be up to 8,700 yards, this represented a serious limitation on performance.
Battle planning at this time also saw a need for combat at increasing ranges, from the 2,000 yards expected for the Centurion's vintage out to 3,000 yards and beyond.
As soon as they became available, the Chieftain rapidly adopted a laser rangefinder instead.

A later UK light tank using a ranging gun is the FV101 Scorpion, which uses a 7.62mm L43A1 machine gun.
This is mounted as a normal co-axial machine gun and may be used as such.
it is a development of the standard British L8 Tk MG, used on a number of AFVs and Artillery Pieces.
It has an additional barrel bearing that is used to mount the gun.
This bearing, rather than mounting by the receiver as for the L8, gives a more consistent point of impact between a cold and hot barrel, which is important for use when ranging.

==
References ==
Notes
BibliographyUser Handbook for the Gun, Equipment, 120mm BAT, L6 (WOMBAT).
Director of Infantry, Ministry of Defence.
1964.
WO Code 14202.

Jane's Weapon Systems.
Jane's.
1977.
This is a list of countries by estimated number of privately owned guns per 100 persons.
The Small Arms Survey 2017  provides estimates of the total number of civilian-owned guns in a country.
It then calculates the number per 100 persons.
This number for a country does not indicate the percentage of the population that owns guns.
This is because individuals can own more than one gun.

See also: Percent of households with guns by country.
It gives the percent of households with guns.
It is further broken down by the percent of households with handguns.
Also, by the percent of adults living in armed households.

==
List of countries by estimated number of guns per 100 people ==
All the numbers in the main column of the table below are from the annex table of Small Arms Survey 2017.
The briefing paper for it says: "Numbers provided here include all firearms in civilian hands, both licit and illicit.
"
The annex table where all the numbers in the main column come from also includes some sub-national areas and territories such as Northern Ireland, Puerto Rico, Scotland, etc.

Sorting: Click the sorting cells below the header cells.

"Notes" column links to notes section below the chart.
The notes below the table are for additional info.
Additional data and alternative rates should be placed there.
This way the main column stays in descending order.

United Kingdom.
Small Arms Survey 2017 does not have a number for the UK.
It only provides numbers for these countries which comprise the UK:
Scotland, Northern Ireland, England and Wales.

Region and subregion names.
Table source uses United Nations geoscheme.

Computation method:
1: survey(s) and expert estimate(s)
2: expert estimate(s)
3:
analogous comparison


===
Notes ===
Return to top of table.

Some of the notes below refer to a previous version of the table that used numbers from Small Arms Survey 2007.
So some of the info below may be out of date.

== See also ==
Gun politics
Small arms trade
Small Arms and Light Weapons
List of countries by firearm-related death rate
Index of gun politics articles
List of countries by intentional homicide rate
Overview of gun laws by nation
Long gun
Handgun


=
= References ==


==
External links ==
GunPolicy.org is hosted by the Sydney Medical School, at the University of Sydney in Australia.
Choose any country or region from the sidebar menus for more info.
==
See also ==
Template:Gun politics interest groups in the United States
Flux-cored arc welding (FCAW or FCA) is a semi-automatic or automatic arc welding process.

FCAW requires a continuously-fed consumable tubular electrode containing a flux and a constant-voltage or, less commonly, a constant-current welding power supply.

An externally supplied shielding gas is sometimes used, but often the flux itself is relied upon to generate the necessary protection from the atmosphere, producing both gaseous protection and liquid slag protecting the weld.

The process is widely used in construction because of its high welding speed and portability.

FCAW was first developed in the early 1950s as an alternative to shielded metal arc welding (SMAW).

The advantage of FCAW over SMAW is that the use of the stick electrodes used in SMAW is unnecessary.
This helped FCAW to overcome many of the restrictions associated with SMAW.

== Types ==
One type of FCAW requires no shielding gas.
This is made possible by the flux core in the tubular consumable electrode.
However, this core contains more than just flux.
It also contains various ingredients that when exposed to the high temperatures of welding generate a shielding gas for protecting the arc.
This type of FCAW is attractive because it is portable and generally has good penetration into the base metal.
Also, windy conditions need not be considered.
Some disadvantages are that this process can produce excessive, noxious smoke (making it difficult to see the weld pool).
As with all welding processes, the proper electrode must be chosen to obtain the required mechanical properties.
Operator skill is a major factor as improper electrode manipulation or machine setup can cause porosity.

Another type of FCAW uses a shielding gas that must be supplied by an external source.
This is known informally as "dual shield" welding.
This type of FCAW was developed primarily for welding structural steels.
In fact, since it uses both a flux-cored electrode and an external shielding gas, one might say that it is a combination of gas metal (GMAW) and flux-cored arc welding (FCAW).
The most often used shielding gases are either straight carbon dioxide or argon carbon dioxide blends.

The most common blend used is 75% Argon 25% Carbon Dioxide.
This particular style of FCAW is preferable for welding thicker and out-of-position metals.
The slag created by the flux is also easy to remove.
The main advantages of this process is that in a closed shop environment, it generally produces welds of better and more consistent mechanical properties, with fewer weld defects than either the SMAW or GMAW processes.
In practice it also allows a higher production rate, since the operator does not need to stop periodically to fetch a new electrode, as is the case in SMAW.
However, like GMAW, it cannot be used in a windy environment as the loss of the shielding gas from air flow will produce porosity in the weld.

== Process variables ==
Wire feed speed
Arc
voltage
Electrode extension
Travel speed and angle
Electrode angles
Electrode wire type
Shielding gas composition (if required)
Reverse polarity (Electrode Positive) is used for FCAW Gas-Shielded wire, Straight polarity (Electrode Negative) is used for self shielded
FCAW
Contact tip to work distance (CTWD)


==
Advantages and applications ==
FCAW may be an "all-position" process with the right filler metals (the consumable electrode)
No shielding gas needed with some wires making it suitable for outdoor welding and/or windy conditions
A high-deposition rate process (speed at which the filler metal is applied) in the 1G/1F/2F
Some "high-speed"
(e.g., automotive) applications
As compared to SMAW and GTAW, there is less skill required for operators.

Less precleaning of metal required
Metallurgical benefits from the flux such as the weld metal being protected initially from external factors until the slag is chipped away
Porosity chances very low
Less equipment required, easier to move around (no gas bottle)Used on the following alloys:

Mild and low alloy steels
Stainless steels
Some high nickel alloys
Some wearfacing/surfacing alloys
== Disadvantages ==
Of course, all of the usual issues that occur in welding can occur in FCAW such as incomplete fusion between base metals, slag inclusion (non-metallic inclusions), and cracks in the welds.
But there are a few concerns that come up with FCAW that are worth taking special note of:

Melted contact tip – when the contact tip actually contacts the base metal, fusing the two and melting the hole on the end.

Irregular wire feed – typically a mechanical problem.

Porosity – the gases (specifically those from the flux-core) don’t escape the welded area before the metal hardens, leaving holes in the welded metal.

More costly filler material/wire
as compared to GMAW.

The amount of smoke generated can far exceed that of SMAW, GMAW, or GTAW.

Changing filler metals requires changing an entire spool.
This can be slow and difficult as compared to changing filler metal for SMAW or GTAW.

Creates more fumes than SMAW.

==
References ==
American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, Vol 2
(9th ed.)

"Flux Cored Welding."
Welding Procedures & Techniques.
23 June 2006.
American Metallurgical Consultants.
13 Sep 2006 <http://www.weldingengineer.com/1flux.htm>.

Groover, Mikell P. Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing.
Second.
New York City:
John Wiley & Sons, INC, 2002.

"Solid Wire Versus Flux-Cored Wire
- When to Use Them and Why."
Miller Electric Mfg.
Co. 13 Sep 2006
<http://www.millerwelds.com/education/articles/article62.html>.
Medieval technology is the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule.
After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.
The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder, the invention of vertical windmills, spectacles, mechanical clocks, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques (Gothic architecture, medieval castles), and agriculture in general (three-field crop rotation).

The development of water mills from their ancient origins was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone.
By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages had turnable mills, around 6,500 in England alone.
Water-power was also widely used in mining for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.

European technical advancements from the 12th to 14th centuries were either built on long-established techniques in medieval Europe, originating from Roman and Byzantine antecedents, or adapted from cross-cultural exchanges through trading networks with the Islamic world, China, and India.
Often, the revolutionary aspect lay not in the act of invention itself, but in its technological refinement and application to political and economic power.
Though gunpowder along with other weapons had been started by Chinese, it was the Europeans who developed and perfected its military potential, precipitating European expansion and eventual imperialism in the Modern Era.

Also significant in this respect were advances in maritime technology.
Advances in shipbuilding included the multi-masted ships with lateen sails, the sternpost-mounted rudder and the skeleton-first hull construction.
Along with new navigational techniques such as the dry compass, the Jacob's staff and the astrolabe, these allowed economic and military control of the seas adjacent to Europe and enabled the global navigational achievements of the dawning Age of Exploration.

At the turn to the Renaissance, Gutenberg’s invention of mechanical printing made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.
The technical drawings of late-medieval artist-engineers Guido da Vigevano and Villard de Honnecourt can be viewed as forerunners of later Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola or da Vinci.

==
Civil technologies ==
The following is a list of some important medieval technologies.
The approximate date or first mention of a technology in medieval Europe is given.
Technologies were often a matter of cultural exchange and date and place of first inventions are not listed here (see main links for a more complete history of each).
===
Agriculture ===
Carruca (6th to 9th centuries)
A type of heavy wheeled plough commonly found in Northern Europe.
The device consisted of four major parts.
The first part was a coulter at the bottom of the plough.
This knife was used to vertically cut into the top sod to allow for the plowshare to work.
The plowshare was the second pair of knives which cut the sod horizontally, detaching it from the ground below.
The third part was the moldboard, which curled the sod outward.
The fourth part of the device was the team of eight oxen guided by the farmer.
This type of plough eliminated the need for cross-plowing by turning over the furrow instead of merely pushing it outward.
This type of wheeled plough made seed placement more consistent throughout the farm as the blade could be locked in at a certain level relative to the wheels.
A disadvantage to this type of plough was its poor maneuverability.
Since this equipment was large and led by a small herd of oxen, turning the plough was difficult and time-consuming.
This caused many farmers to turn away from traditional square fields and adopt a longer, more rectangular field to ensure maximum efficiency.
Ard (plough) (5th century)
While ploughs have been used since ancient times, during the medieval period plough technology improved rapidly.

The medieval plough, constructed from wooden beams, could be yoked to either humans or a team of oxen and pulled through any type of terrain.

This allowed for faster clearing of forest lands for agriculture in parts of Northern Europe where the soil contained rocks and dense tree roots.
With more food being produced, more people were able to live in these areas.

Horse collar (6th to 9th centuries)Once oxen started to be replaced by horses on farms and in fields, the yoke became obsolete due to its shape not working well with a horses' posture.
The first design for a horse collar was a throat-and-girth-harness.
These types of harnesses were unreliable though due to them not being sufficiently set in place.
The loose straps were prone to slipping and shifting positions as the horse was working and often caused asphyxiation.
Around the eighth century, the introduction of the rigid collar eliminated the problem of choking.
The rigid collar was "placed over the horses head and rested on its shoulders.
This permitted unobstructed breathing and placed the weight of the plow or wagon where the horse could best support it.
"Horseshoes
(9th century)
While horses are already able to travel on all terrain without a protective covering on the hooves, horseshoes allowed horses to travel faster along the more difficult terrains.
The practice of shoeing horses was initially practiced in the Roman Empire but lost popularity throughout the Middle Ages until around the 11th century.
Although horses in the southern lands could easily work while on the softer soil, the rocky soil of the north proved to be damaging to the horses' hooves.
Since the north was the problematic area, this is where shoeing horses first became popular.
The introduction of gravel roadways was also cause for the popularity of horseshoeing.
The loads a shoed horse could take on these roads were significantly higher than one that was barefoot.
By the 14th century, not only did horses have shoes, but many farmers were shoeing oxen and donkeys in order to help prolong the life of their hooves.
The size and weight of the horseshoe changed significantly over the course of the Middle Ages.
In the 10th century, horseshoes were secured by six nails and weighed around one-quarter of a pound, but throughout the years, the shoes grew larger and by the 14th century, the shoes were being secured with eight nails and weighed nearly half a pound.
Crop rotation
Two-field system (8th century)
Crop rotation involved farmers to plant half of the field with a crop while the other half would be fallowed for the season.
This was also called the two-field system.
This system included the farmers' field being divided into two separate crops.
One field would grow a crop while the other was allowed to lie fallow and was used to feed livestock and regain lost nutrients.
Every year, the two fields would switch in order to ensure fields did not become nutrient deficient.
In the 11th century, this system was introduced into Sweden and spread to become the most popular form of farming.

The system of crop rotation is still used today by many farmers, who will grow corn one year in a field and will then grow beans or other legumes in the field the next year, this system is how farmers allow for nutrients to be replenished in the soil.
Three-field system (11th century)
While the two-field system was used by medieval farmers, there was also a different system that was being developed at the same time.
Around each village in medieval Europe there were three fields that could be used to grow food.
One part holds a spring crop, such as barley or oats, another part holds a winter crop, such as wheat or rye, and the third part is an off-field that is left alone to grow and is used to help feed livestock.
By rotating the three crops to a new part of the land after each year, the off-field regains some of the nutrients lost during the growing of the two crops.
This system increases agricultural productivity over the two-field system by only having one-third of the field not being used instead of one half.
Another advantage of crop rotation is that many scholars believe it helped increase yields by up to 50%.Wine press (12th century)
The act of making wine was people stepping on grapes inside of a box and then draining the fruit juice and allowing the fermentation process to begin.

During the medieval period the wine press had been constantly evolving into a more modern and efficient machine that would give wine makers more wine with less work.

This device was the first practical means of Pressing (wine) on a plane surface.

The wine press was made of a giant wooden basket that was bound together by wooden or metal rings that held the basket together.

At the top of the basket was a large disc that would depress the contents in the basket crushing the grapes and making the juice to be fermented.
The wine press was an expensive piece of machinery that only the wealthy could afford.
The method of Grape stomping was often used as a less expensive alternative.
While white wines required the use of a wine press in order to preserve the color of the wine by removing the juices quickly from the skin, red wine did not need to be pressed until the end of the juice removal process since the color did not matter.
Many red wine winemakers used their feet to smash the grapes then used a press to remove any juice that remained in the grape skins.
Qanat (water ducts) (5th century)

Ancient and medieval civilizations needed and used water to grow the human population as well as to partake in daily activities.

One of the ways that ancient and medieval people gained access to water was through qanats, which were a water duct system that would bring water from an underground source or river source to villages or cities.

A qanat is a tunnel that is just big enough that a single digger could travel through the tunnel and find the source of water as well as allow for water to travel through the duct system to farm land or villages for irrigation or drinking purposes.
These tunnels had a gradual slope which used gravity to pull the water from either an aquifer or water well.
This system was originally found in middle eastern areas and is still used today in places where surface water is hard to find.
Qanats were very helpful in not losing water while being transported as well.

The most famous water duct system was the Roman aqueduct system, and medieval inventors used the aqueduct system as a blueprint to make getting water to villages quicker and easier than diverting rivers.

After aqueducts and qanats many other water based technology was created and used in medieval periods including water mills, dams, wells and other such technology for easy access to water.

===
Architecture and construction ===
Pendentive architecture (6th century)
A specific spherical form in the upper corners to support a dome.
Although the first experimentation was made in the 3rd century, it wasn't until the 6th century in the Byzantine Empire that its full potential was achieved.

Artesian well (1126)
A thin rod with a hard iron cutting edge is placed in the bore hole and repeatedly struck with a hammer, underground water pressure forces the water up the hole without pumping.
Artesian wells are named after the town of Artois in France, where the first one was drilled by Carthusian monks in 1126.

Central heating through underfloor channels (9th century)
In the early medieval Alpine upland, a simpler central heating system where heat travelled through underfloor channels from the furnace room replaced the Roman hypocaust at some places.
In Reichenau Abbey a network of interconnected underfloor channels heated the 300 m2 large assembly room of the monks during the winter months.
The degree of efficiency of the system has been calculated at 90%.Rib vault (12th century)
An essential element for the rise of Gothic architecture, rib vaults allowed vaults to be built for the first time over rectangles of unequal lengths.
It also greatly facilitated scaffolding and largely replaced the older groin vault.

Chimney (12th century)
The first basic chimney appeared in a Swiss monastery in 820.
The earliest true chimney did not appear until the 12th century, with the fireplace appearing at the same time.
Segmental arch bridge (1345)
The Ponte Vecchio in Florence is considered medieval Europe's first stone segmental arch bridge since the end of classical civilizations.

Treadwheel crane (1220s)
The earliest reference to a treadwheel in archival literature is in France about 1225, followed by an illuminated depiction in a manuscript of probably also French origin dating to 1240.
Apart from tread-drums, windlasses and occasionally cranks were employed for powering cranes.
Stationary harbour crane (1244)
Stationary harbour cranes are considered a new development of the Middle Ages; its earliest use being documented for Utrecht in 1244.
The typical harbour crane was a pivoting structure equipped with double treadwheels.
There were two types: wooden gantry cranes pivoting on a central vertical axle and stone tower cranes which housed the windlass and treadwheels with only the jib arm and roof rotating.
These cranes were placed on docksides for the loading and unloading of cargo where they replaced or complemented older lifting methods like see-saws, winches and yards.
Slewing cranes which allowed a rotation of the load and were thus particularly suited for dockside work appeared as early as 1340.Floating crane

Beside the stationary cranes, floating cranes which could be flexibly deployed in the whole port basin came into use by the 14th century.
Mast crane
Some harbour cranes were specialised at mounting masts to newly built sailing ships, such as in Gdańsk, Cologne and Bremen.
Wheelbarrow (1170s)
The wheelbarrow proved useful in building construction, mining operations, and agriculture.
Literary evidence for the use of wheelbarrows appeared between 1170 and 1250 in north-western Europe.
The first depiction is in a drawing by Matthew Paris in the mid-13th century.

===
Art ===
Oil paint (by 1125)
As early as the 13th century, oil was used to add details to tempera paintings and paint wooden statues.
Flemish painter Jan van Eyck developed the use of a stable oil mixture for panel painting around 1410.

===
Clocks ===
Hourglass (1338)
Reasonably dependable, affordable and accurate measure of time.
Unlike water in a clepsydra, the rate of flow of sand is independent of the depth in the upper reservoir, and the instrument is not liable to freeze.
Hourglasses are a medieval innovation (first documented in Siena, Italy).

Mechanical clocks (13th to 14th centuries)
A European innovation, these weight-driven clocks were used primarily in clock towers.

===
Mechanics ===
Compound crank
The Italian physician Guido da Vigevano combines in his 1335 Texaurus, a collection of war machines intended for the recapture of the Holy Land, two simple cranks to form a compound crank for manually powering war carriages and paddle wheel boats.
The devices were fitted directly to the vehicle's axle respectively to the shafts turning the paddle wheels.

===
Metallurgy ===
Blast furnace (1150–1350)
Cast iron had been made in China since before the 4th century BC.

European cast iron first appears in Middle Europe (for instance Lapphyttan in Sweden, Dürstel in Switzerland and the Märkische Sauerland in Germany) around 1150, in some places according to recent research even before 1100.
The technique is considered to be an independent European development.

===
Milling ===
Ship mill (6th century)
The ship mill is a Byzantine invention, designed to mill grains using hydraulic power.
The technology eventually spread to the rest of Europe and was in use until ca.
1800.

Paper mill (13th century)
The first certain use of a water-powered paper mill, evidence for which is elusive in both Chinese and Muslim paper making, dates to 1282.Rolling mill (15th century)
Used to produce metal sheet of an even thickness.
First used on soft, malleable metals, such as lead, gold and tin.
Leonardo da Vinci described a rolling mill for wrought iron.

Tidal Mills (6th century)
The earliest tidal mills were excavated on the Irish coast where watermillers knew and employed the two main waterwheel types: a 6th-century tide mill at Killoteran near Waterford was powered by a vertical waterwheel, while the tide changes at Little Island were exploited by a twin-flume horizontal-wheeled mill (c. 630) and a vertical undershot waterwheel alongside it.
Another early example is the Nendrum Monastery mill from 787 which is estimated to have developed seven to eight horsepower at its peak.

Vertical windmills (1180s)
Invented in Europe as the pivotable post mill, the first surviving mention of one comes from Yorkshire in England in 1185.
They were efficient at grinding grain or draining water.
Stationary tower mills were also developed in the 13th century.

Water hammer
(12th century at the latest)
Used in metallurgy to forge the metal blooms from bloomeries and Catalan
forges, they replaced manual hammerwork.
The water hammer was eventually superseded by steam hammers in the 19th century.

===
Navigation ===
Dry compass (12th century)
The first European mention of the directional compass is in Alexander Neckam's On the Natures of Things, written in Paris around 1190.
It was either transmitted from China or the Arabs or an independent European innovation.
Dry compass were invented in the Mediterranean around 1300.Astronomical compass (1269)
The French scholar Pierre de Maricourt describes in his experimental study Epistola de magnete (1269) three different compass designs he has devised for the purpose of astronomical observation.

Stern-mounted rudders (1180s)
The first depiction of a pintle-and-gudgeon rudder on church carvings dates to around 1180.
They first appeared with cogs in the North and Baltic Seas and quickly spread to Mediterranean.
The iron hinge system was the first stern rudder permanently attached to the ship hull and made a vital contribution to the navigation achievements of the age of discovery and thereafter.

===
Printing, paper and reading ===
Movable type printing press (1440s)
Johannes Gutenberg's great innovation was not the printing itself, but instead of using carved plates as in woodblock printing, he used separate letters (types) from which the printing plates for pages were made up.
This meant the types were recyclable and a page cast could be made up far faster.

Paper (13th century)
Paper was invented in China and transmitted through Islamic Spain in the 13th century.
In Europe, the paper-making processes was mechanized by water-powered mills and paper presses (see paper mill).

Rotating bookmark (13th century)
A rotating disc and string device used to mark the page, column, and precise level in the text where a person left off reading in a text.

Materials used were often leather, velum, or paper.

Spectacles (1280s)
The first spectacles, invented in Florence, used convex lenses which were of help only to the far-sighted.
Concave lenses were not developed prior to the 15th century.

Watermark (1282)
This medieval innovation was used to mark paper products and to discourage counterfeiting.
It was first introduced in Bologna, Italy.
===
Science and learning ===
Theory of impetus (6th century)
A scientific theory that was introduced by John Philoponus who made criticism of Aristotelian principles of physics, and
it served as an inspiration to medieval scholars as well as to Galileo Galilei  who ten centuries later, during the Scientific Revolution, extensively cited Philoponus in his works while making the case as to why Aristotelian physics was flawed.
It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics.

The first extant treatise of magnetism (13th century)
The first extant treatise describing the properties of magnets was done by Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt when he wrote Epistola de magnete.

Arabic numerals (13th century)
The first recorded mention in Europe was in 976, and they were first widely published in 1202 by Fibonacci with his Liber Abaci.

University
The first medieval universities were founded between the 11th and 13th centuries leading to a rise in literacy and learning.
By 1500, the institution had spread throughout most of Europe and played a key role in the Scientific Revolution.
Today, the educational concept and institution has been globally adopted.
===
Textile industry and garments ===
Functional button (13th century)
German buttons appeared in 13th-century Germany as an indigenous innovation.
They soon became widespread with the rise of snug-fitting clothing.

Horizontal loom (11th century)
Horizontal looms operated by foot-treadles were faster and more efficient.

Silk (6th century)
Manufacture of silk began in Eastern Europe in the 6th century and in Western Europe in the 11th or 12th century.
Silk had been imported over the Silk Road since antiquity.
The technology of "silk throwing" was mastered in Tuscany in the 13th century.
The silk works used waterpower and some regard these as the first mechanized textile mills.

Spinning wheel (13th century)
Brought to Europe probably from India.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Chess (1450)
The earliest predecessors of the game originated in 6th-century AD India and spread via Persia and the Muslim world to Europe.
Here the game evolved into its current form in the 15th century.

Forest glass (c. 1000)
This type of glass uses wood ash and sand as the main raw materials and is characterised by a variety of greenish-yellow colours.

Grindstones (834)
Grindstones are a rough stone, usually sandstone, used to sharpen iron.
The first rotary grindstone (turned with a leveraged handle) occurs in the Utrecht Psalter, illustrated between 816 and 834.
According to Hägermann, the pen drawing is a copy of a late-antique manuscript.
A second crank which was mounted on the other end of the axle is depicted in the Luttrell Psalter from around 1340.Liquor (12th century)
Primitive forms of distillation were known to the Babylonians, as well as Indians in the first centuries AD.
Early evidence of distillation also comes from alchemists working in Alexandria, Roman Egypt, in the 1st century.
The medieval Arabs adopted the distillation process, which later spread to Europe.
Texts on the distillation of waters, wine, and other spirits were written in Salerno and Cologne in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Liquor consumption rose dramatically in Europe in and after the mid-14th century, when distilled liquors were commonly used as remedies for the Black Death.
These spirits would have had a much lower alcohol content (about 40% ABV) than the alchemists' pure distillations, and they were likely first thought of as medicinal elixirs.
Around 1400, methods to distill spirits from wheat, barley, and rye were discovered.
Thus began the "national" drinks of Europe, including  gin (England) and grappa (Italy).
In 1437, "burned water" (brandy) was mentioned in the records of the County of Katzenelnbogen in Germany.
Magnets (12th century)
Magnets were first referenced in the Roman d'Enéas, composed between 1155 and 1160.

Mirrors (1180)
The first mention of a "glass" mirror is in 1180 by Alexander Neckham who said "Take away the lead which is behind the glass
and there will be no image of the one looking in."

Illustrated surgical atlas (1345)
Guido da Vigevano (c. 1280 − 1349) was the first author to add illustrations to his anatomical descriptions.
His Anathomia provides pictures of neuroanatomical structures and techniques such as the dissection of the head by means of trephination, and depictions of the meninges, cerebrum, and spinal cord.
Quarantine (1377)
Initially a 40-day-period, the quarantine was introduced by the Republic of Ragusa as a measure of disease prevention related to the Black Death.
It was later adopted by Venice from where the practice spread all around in Europe.

Rat traps (1170s)
The first mention of a rat trap is in the medieval romance
Yvain, the Knight of the Lion by Chrétien de Troyes.

==
Military technologies ==


===
Armour ===
Quilted Armour (pre 5th - 14th Century)
There was a vast amount of armour technology available through the 5th to 16th centuries.

Most soldiers during this time wore padded or quilted armor.
This was the cheapest and most available armor for the majority of soldiers.
Quilted armour was usually just a jacket made of thick linen and wool meant to pad or soften the impact of blunt weapons and light blows.
Although, this technology predated the 5th century, it was still extremely prevalent because of the low cost and the weapon technology at the time made the bronze armor of the Greeks and Romans obsolete.
Quilted armour was also used in conjunction with other types of armour.
Usually worn over or under leather, mail, and later plate armour.
Cuir Bouilli (5th-10th Century)
Hardened leather armour also called Cuir Bouilli was a step up from quilted armour.
Made by boiling leather in either water, wax or oil to soften it so it can be shaped, it would then be allowed to dry and become very hard.
Large pieces of armour could be made such as breast plates, helmets, and leg guards, but many times smaller pieces would be sewn into the quilting of quilted armour or strips would be sewn together on the outside of a linen jacket.
This was not as affordable as the quilted armour but offered much better protection against edged slashing weapons.

Chain Mail (11th-16th Century)
The most common type during the 11th through the 16th centuries was the Hauberk, also known earlier than the 11th century as the Carolingian byrnie.
Made of interlinked rings of metal, it sometimes consisted of a coif that covered the head and a tunic that covered the torso, arms, and legs down to the knees.
Chain mail was very effective at protecting against light slashing blows but ineffective against stabbing or thrusting blows.
The great advantage was that it allowed a great freedom of movement and was relatively light with significant protection over quilted or hardened leather armour.
It was far more expensive than the hardened leather or quilted armour because of the massive amount of labor it required to create.
This made it unattainable for most soldiers and only the more wealthy soldiers could afford it.
Later, toward the end of the 13th century banded mail became popular.
Constructed of washer shaped rings of iron overlapped and woven together by straps of leather as opposed to the interlinked metal rings of chain mail, banded mail was much more affordable to manufacture.
The washers were so tightly woven together that it was very difficult penetrate and offered greater protection from arrow and bolt attacks.
Jazerant (11th century)
The Jazerant or Jazeraint was an adaptation of chain mail in which the chain mail would be sewn in between layers of linen or quilted armour.
Exceptional protection against light slashing weapons and slightly improved protection against small thrusting weapons, but little protection against large blunt weapons such as maces and axes.
This gave birth to reinforced chain mail and became more prevalent in the 12th and 13th century.
Reinforced armour was made up of chain mail with metal plates or hardened leather plates sewn in.
This greatly improved protection from stabbing and thrusting blows.

Scale Armour (12th century)
A type of Lamellar armour, was made up entirely of small, overlapping plates.
Either sewn together, usually with leather straps, or attached to a backing such as linen, or a quilted armor.
Scale armour does not require the labor to produce that chain mail does and therefore is more affordable.
It also affords much better protection against thrusting blows and pointed weapons.
Though, it is much heavier, more restrictive and impedes free movement.

Plate Armour (14th century)
Plate armour covered the entire body.
Although parts of the body were already covered in plate armour as early as 1250, such as the Poleyns for covering the knees and Couters - plates that protected the elbows, the first complete full suit without any textiles was seen around 1410-1430.
Components of medieval armour that made up a full suit consisted of a cuirass, a gorget, vambraces, gauntlets, cuisses, greaves, and sabatons held together by internal leather straps.
Improved weaponry such as crossbows and the long bow had greatly increased range and power.
This made penetration of the chain mail hauberk much easier and more common.
By the mid 1400s most plate was worn alone and without the need of a hauberk.
Advances in metal working such as the blast furnace and new techniques for carburizing made plate armour nearly impenetrable and the best armour protection available at the time.
Although plate armour was fairly heavy, because each suit was custom tailored to the wearer, it was very easy to move around in.
A full suit of plate armour was extremely expensive and mostly unattainable for the majority of soldiers.
Only very wealthy land owners and nobility could afford it.
The quality of plate armour increases as more armour makers became more proficient in metal working.
A suit of plate armour became a symbol of social status and the best made were personalized with embellishments and engravings.
Plate armour saw continued use in battle until the 17th century.

===
Cavalry ===
Arched saddle (11th century)
The arched saddle enabled mounted knights to wield lances underarm and prevent the charge from turning into an unintentional pole-vault.
This innovation gave birth to true shock cavalry, enabling fighters to charge on full gallop.

Spurs (11th century)
Spurs were invented by the Normans and appeared at the same time as the cantled saddle.
They enabled the horseman to control his horse with his feet, replacing the whip and leaving his arms free.
Rowel spurs familiar from cowboy films were already known in the 13th century.
Gilded spurs were the ultimate symbol of the knighthood - even today someone is said to "earn his spurs" by proving his or her worthiness.

Stirrup (6th century)
Stirrups were invented by steppe nomads in what is today Mongolia and northern China in the 4th century.
They were introduced in Byzantium in the 6th century and in the Carolingian Empire in the 8th.
They allowed a mounted knight to wield a sword and strike from a distance leading to a great advantage for mounted cavalry.

===
Gunpowder weapons ===
Cannon (1324)
Cannons are first recorded in Europe at the siege of Metz in 1324.
In 1350 Petrarch wrote "these instruments which discharge balls of metal with most tremendous noise and flashes of fire...
were a few years ago very rare and were viewed with greatest astonishment and admiration, but now they are become as common and familiar as  kinds of arms.
"Volley
gun
See Ribauldequin.

Corned gunpowder (late 14th century)
First practiced in Western Europe, corning the black powder allowed for more powerful and faster ignition of cannons.
It also facilitated the storage and transportation of black powder.
Corning constituted a crucial step in the evolution of gunpowder warfare.

very large-calibre cannon (late 14th century)
Extant examples include the wrought-iron Pumhart von Steyr, Dulle Griet and Mons Meg as well as the cast-bronze Faule Mette and Faule Grete (all from the 15th century).

===
Mechanical artillery ===
Counterweight trebuchet (12th century)
Powered solely by the force of gravity, these catapults revolutionized medieval siege warfare and construction of fortifications by hurling huge stones unprecedented distances.
Originating somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean basin, counterweight trebuchets were introduced in the Byzantine Empire around 1100 CE, and was later adopted by the Crusader states and as well by the other armies of Europe and Asia.
===
Missile weapons ===
Greek fire
(7th century)
An incendiary weapon which could even burn on water is also attributed to the Byzantines, where they installed it on their ships.
It played a crucial role in the Byzantine Empire's victory over the Umayyad Caliphate during the 717-718 Siege of Constantinople.

Grenade (8th century)
Rudimentary incendiary grenades appeared in the Byzantine Empire, as the Byzantine soldiers learned that Greek fire, a Byzantine invention of the previous century, could not only be thrown by flamethrowers at the enemy, but also in stone and ceramic jars.

Longbow with massed, disciplined archery (13th century)
Having a high rate of fire and penetration power, the longbow contributed to the eventual demise of the medieval knight class.
Used particularly by the English to great effect against the French cavalry during the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453).

Steel crossbow (late 14th century)
European innovation came with several different cocking aids to enhance draw power, making the weapons also the first hand-held mechanical crossbows.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Combined arms tactics (14th century)
The battle of Halidon Hill 1333 was the first battle where intentional and disciplined combined arms infantry tactics were employed.
The English men-at-arms dismounted aside the archers, combining thus the staying power of super-heavy infantry and striking power of their two-handed weapons with the missiles and mobility of the archers using longbows and shortbows.
Combining dismounted knights and men-at-arms with archers was the archetypal Western Medieval battle tactics until the battle of Flodden 1513 and final emergence of firearms.

==
Gallery ==
== Notes and references ==


==
Bibliography ==
Andrews, Francis B.
The Medieval Builder and His Methods.
New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1973.
Medieval construction technique, with a brief chapter on tools.

Blair, John, and Nigel Ramsay, editors.
English Medieval Industries: Craftsmen, Techniques, Products London:
Hambledon Press.
1991.
ISBN
1-85285-326-3
Burns, Robert I. (1996), "Paper comes to the West, 800−1400",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.)
,
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
413–422, ISBN
3-7861-1748-9
Crosby, Alfred.
The Measure of Reality : Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997
Jared Diamond, Guns, germs and steel.
A short history of everybody for the last 13'000 years, 1997.

Di Ieva, Antonio;  et al.
(
2007), "The Neuroanatomical Plates of Guido da Vigevano", Neurosurgical Focus, 23 (1): 1–4, doi:10.3171/FOC-07/07/E15
Gies, Frances and Joseph.
Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel:  Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages.
New York:
Harper Collins, 1994.
ISBN 0-06-092581-7
Gimpel, Jean.
The Medieval Machine:
The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages.
London: Pimlico, (2nd ed.
1992)
ISBN 0
-14-004514-7
Hägermann, Dieter; Schneider, Helmuth (1997), Propyläen Technikgeschichte.
Landbau und Handwerk, 750 v. Chr.
bis 1000 n. Chr (2nd ed.),
Berlin, ISBN 3-549-05632-X
Hall, Bert S. (1979), The Technological Illustrations of the So-Called "Anonymous of the Hussite Wars".
Codex Latinus Monacensis 197,
Part 1, Wiesbaden:
Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag, ISBN 3-920153-93-6
Holt, Richard (1988), The Mills of Medieval England, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, ISBN 978-0-631-15692-5
Long, Pamela O.,editor.
Science and Technology in Medieval Society.
in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol 441 New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1985 ISBN 0-89766-277-6
A series of papers on highly specific topics.

Lucas, Adam Robert (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds.
A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture, 46 (1): 1–30, doi:10.1353
/tech.2005.0026
Makdisi, George (1970), "Madrasa and University in the Middle Ages", Studia Islamica, 32 (32): 255–264, doi:10.2307/1595223, JSTOR 1595223
Matheus, Michael (1996), "Mittelalterliche Hafenkräne",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.),
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
345–348
, ISBN 3-7861-1748-9
Matthies, Andrea (1992), "Medieval Treadwheels.
Artists' Views of Building Construction", Technology and Culture, 33 (3): 510–547, doi:10.2307/3106635, JSTOR 3106635
McErlean, Thomas; Crothers, Norman (2007), Harnessing the Tides:
The Early Medieval Tide Mills at Nendrum Monastery, Strangford Lough, Belfast:
Stationery Office Books, ISBN 978-0-337-08877-3
Murphy, Donald (2005), Excavations of a Mill at Killoteran,
Co. Waterford as Part of the N-25 Waterford By-Pass Project (PDF), Estuarine/ Alluvial Archaeology in Ireland.
Towards Best Practice, University College Dublin and National Roads Authority, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-11-18
Rynne, Colin (2000), "Waterpower in Medieval Ireland",  in Squatriti, Paolo (ed.),
Working with Water in Medieval Europe, Technology and Change in History, 3, Leiden:
Brill, pp.
1–50
, ISBN 90-04-10680-4
Singer, Charles, editor.
History of Technology.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1954.
Volumes II and III cover the Middle Ages with great scope and detail.
This is the standard work.

Taylor, E. g. r. (1951), "The South-Pointing Needle", Imago Mundi, 8: 1–7, doi:10.1080/03085695108591973
Thompson, Susan (1978), "Paper Manufacturing and Early Books", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 314: 167–176,
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1978.tb47791.x
White, Jr., Lynn (1962), Medieval Technology and Social Change, Oxford:
At the Clarendon Press
White, Lynn, Jr., "The Study of Medieval Technology, 1924-1974:
Personal Reflections" Technology and Culture 16.4 (October 1975), pp.
519–530.
A chronology and basic bibliography of landmark studies.

Wikander, Örjan (1985), "Archaeological Evidence for Early Water-Mills.
An Interim Report", History of Technology, 10, pp.
151–179


==
See also ==
Earlier periods:
Ancient Greek technology
Ancient Roman technologyMedieval
period:
Medieval medicine of Western Europe
Medieval transport
Renaissance of the 12th century
Islamic Golden Age
List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinentGeneral
:

History of technology


==
External links ==
The Medieval Technology Pages
Technology in the Medieval Age
The Cleveland Elementary School shooting (also known as the Stockton schoolyard shooting and the Cleveland School massacre) occurred on January 17, 1989, at Cleveland Elementary School at 20 East Fulton Street in Stockton, California, United States.
The gunman, Patrick Purdy, who had an extended criminal history, shot and killed five schoolchildren and wounded 32 others.
As first responders arrived at the scene, Purdy committed suicide by shooting himself in the head.
His victims were predominantly Southeast Asian refugees.
This particular shooting happened almost exactly ten years after another school shooting in San Diego, which happened to be at a school named Grover Cleveland Elementary.

The attack was the U.S. non-college school shooting with the highest number of fatalities and injuries until the Columbine High School massacre.
Of all U.S. school shootings in the 1980s, it had the largest number of victims.

==
Shooting ==
Tuesday morning January 17, 1989, an anonymous person phoned the Stockton Police Department regarding a death threat against Cleveland Elementary School in Stockton, California.
At noon that day, Patrick Purdy, a disturbed drifter and former Stockton resident, began his attack by setting his fireworks-laden Chevrolet station wagon on fire with a Molotov cocktail after parking it behind the school, later causing the vehicle to explode.
Purdy went to the school playground, where he began firing with a semi-automatic rifle from behind a portable building.
Purdy fired 106 rounds in three minutes, killing five children and wounding thirty others, including one teacher.
All of those who died and many of the wounded were Cambodian and Vietnamese immigrants, who had come with their families to the U.S. as refugees.
Purdy committed suicide by shooting himself in the head with a pistol.
He had carved the words "freedom", "victory", "Earthman", and "Hezbollah" on his rifle, and his flak jacket was inscribed with "PLO", "Libya", and "death to the Great Satin" [sic].

==
Perpetrator ==
Patrick Edward Purdy (November 10, 1964 – January 17, 1989) was an unemployed former welder and drifter.
He was born in Tacoma, Washington, to Patrick Benjamin Purdy and Kathleen Toscano.
His father was a soldier in the U.S. Army and was stationed at Fort Lewis at the time of his son's birth.
When the younger Purdy was two years old, his mother filed for divorce against her husband after he had threatened to kill her with a firearm.
Toscano later moved with her son to South Lake Tahoe before settling in Stockton, California.
Purdy attended Cleveland Elementary from kindergarten through second grade.
Purdy's mother remarried in September 1969; she divorced her husband four years later.
Albert Gulart, Sr.,
Purdy's stepfather, said Purdy was an overly quiet child who cried often.
In fall 1973, Kathleen separated from Gulart and moved with her children from Stockton to the Sacramento area.
In December of that year, the Sacramento Child Protective Services were twice called to her residence, on allegations that Kathleen was physically abusing her children.
When Purdy was thirteen, he struck his mother in the face and was permanently banned from her house.
He lived on the streets of San Francisco for a period before being placed in foster care by authorities.
He was later placed in the custody of his father, who was living in Lodi, California, at the time.
While attending Lodi High School, Purdy became an alcoholic and a drug addict, and attended high school sporadically.
On September 13, 1981, Purdy's father was killed after being struck by a car.
His family filed a wrongful-death suit in San Joaquin Superior Court against the driver of the car, asking for US$600,000 in damages; the suit was later dismissed.
Purdy accused his mother of taking money his father had left him, using the money to buy a car and taking a vacation to New York City.
This incident appeared to deepen the animosity between them.
After his father's death, Purdy was briefly homeless, before being placed in the custody of a foster mother in Los Angeles.
Purdy’s criminal activities had begun by 1977, when Sacramento police confiscated BB guns from then 12-year-old Purdy.
In June 1980, Purdy was first arrested at age 15 for a court-order violation.
He was arrested that same month for underage drinking.
Purdy was then arrested for prostitution in August 1980, possession of marijuana and drug dealing in 1982, and in 1983 for possession of an illegal weapon and receipt of stolen property.
On October 11, 1984, he was arrested for being an accomplice in an armed robbery at a service station, for which he spent 32 days in the Yolo County Jail.
In 1986, Kathleen called police after Purdy vandalized her car after she refused to give him money for narcotics.
In April 1987, Purdy and his half-brother Albert were arrested for firing a semi-automatic pistol at trees in the Eldorado National Forest.
At the time, he was carrying a book about the white supremacist group Aryan Nations.
He told the County Sheriff that it was his "duty to help the suppressed and overthrow the suppressor.
"
In prison, he twice attempted suicide, once by hanging himself with a rope made out of strips of his shirt, and a second time by cutting his wrists with his fingernails.
A subsequent psychiatric assessment found him to suffer from very mild mental retardation, and to be a danger to himself and others.
In the fall of 1987, Purdy began attending welding classes at San Joaquin Delta College; he complained about the high percentage of Southeast Asian students there.
In October 1987, he left California and drifted among Oregon, Nevada, Texas, Florida, Connecticut, South Carolina, and Tennessee, searching for jobs.
In early 1988, he worked at Numeri Tech, a small machine shop located in Stockton.
From July to October 1988, he worked as a boilermaker in Portland, Oregon, living in Sandy with his aunt.

On August 3 in Sandy, he purchased a Chinese-made AK-47 at Sandy Trading Post, which he later used in the shooting.
He eventually returned to Stockton and rented a room at the El Rancho Motel on December 26.
After the shooting, police found his room decorated with numerous toy soldiers.
On December 28, Purdy purchased a Taurus pistol at Hunter Loan and Jewelry Company in Stockton.

Police stated that Purdy had problems with alcohol and drug addiction.
He talked openly of hatred toward Asian immigrants, believing that they took jobs from "native-born" Americans.
According to Purdy's friends, who described him as friendly and never violent toward anyone, he was suicidal at times and frustrated that he failed to "make it on his own".
Steve Sloan, a night-shift supervisor at Numeri Tech, said: "He was a real ball of frustration, and was angry about everything."
Another one of Purdy's former co-workers stated, "He was always miserable.
I've never seen a guy that didn't want to smile as much as he didn't.
"
In a notebook found in a hotel where he lived in early 1988, Purdy wrote about himself in the following terms: "I'm so dumb
, I'm dumber than a sixth-grader.
My mother and father were dumb."
==
Reaction and aftermath ==
The multiple murders at Stockton received national news coverage and spurred calls for regulation of semiautomatic weapons.
"
Why could Purdy, an alcoholic who had been arrested for such offenses as selling weapons and attempted robbery, walk into a gun shop in Sandy, Oregon, and leave with an AK-47 under his arm?",
Time magazine asked.
The article continued: "The easy availability of weapons like this, which have no purpose other than killing human beings, can all too readily turn the delusions of sick gunmen into tragic nightmares.
"
A few weeks after the shooting, singer Michael Jackson made a short visit to the school and met with some of the children affected by the event.
In California, measures were taken to first define and then ban assault weapons, resulting in the Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989.
On the federal level, Congressional legislators struggled with a way to ban weapons such as military-style rifles without banning sporting-type rifles.
In 1989, the ATF issued a rule citing the lack of "sporting purpose" to ban importation of assault weapons.
In July 1989, the G.H.W. Bush Administration made the import ban permanent.
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban was enacted in 1994, and expired in 2004.
President Bill Clinton signed another executive order in 1994 which banned importation of most firearms and ammunition from China.

== See also ==
List of school shootings in the United States


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Vanairsdale, S. T. (January 2014). "
Trigger Effect".
Sactown.
Retrieved June 21, 2014.

25th Anniversary of Cleveland Elementary Shooting,
The Huffington Post (January 16, 2014)
20 years later:
Remembering the Tragedy, The Stockton Record (January 18, 2009)
Five Children Killed As Gunman Attacks A California School, The New York Times (January 18, 1989)
After Shooting, Horror but Few Answers, The New York Times (January 19, 1989)
Killer Depicted as Loner Full of Hate
The New York Times (January 20, 1989)
Effort to Ban Assault Rifles Gains Momentum,
The New York Times (January 28, 1989)
Ban on Assault Rifles Takes Effect in Los Angeles, The New York Times (March 3, 1989)
Stockton Journal
; Where 5 Died, a Monk Gives Solace, The New York Times (May 11, 1989)
Title 18 USC Chapter 44 — PDF file
Title 26 USC Chapter 53 — PDF file
Since the Vietnam War, most Vietnamese aircraft were supplied by the Soviet Union and later Russia, while hundreds of others were left by the United States via South Vietnam.
Most of these are no longer in service either due to the unavailability of parts or the age of the aircraft.

To decrease its dependence on Russian weapons as the nation moves towards modernisation, Vietnam has begun to explore the purchase of American and European aircraft, especially due to its conflict in the South China Sea with its former Communist ally China.

==
Aircraft ==


===
Current ===


== Munitions ==


==
Air defence ==


==
Former ==


=
= See also ==
Vietnam People's Air Force
Aircraft losses of the Vietnam War


==
References ==
Science and technology studies or science, technology and society studies (STS) are the study of how society, politics, and culture affect scientific research and technological innovation, and how these, in turn, affect society, politics and culture.

==
History ==
Like most interdisciplinary fields of study, STS emerged from the confluence of a variety of disciplines and disciplinary subfields, all of which had developed an interest—typically, during the 1960s or 1970s—in viewing science and technology as socially embedded enterprises.

The key disciplinary components of STS took shape independently, beginning in the 1960s, and developed in isolation from each other well into the 1980s, although Ludwik Fleck's (1935) monograph Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact anticipated many of STS's key themes.

In the 1970s
Elting E. Morison founded the STS program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which served as a model.
By 2011, 111 STS research centres and academic programs were counted worldwide.

===
Key themes ===
History of technology, that examines technology in its social and historical context.
Starting in the 1960s, some historians questioned technological determinism, a doctrine that can induce public passivity to technologic and scientific "natural" development.

At the same time, some historians began to develop similarly contextual approaches to the history of medicine.

History and philosophy of science (1960s).
After the publication of Thomas Kuhn's well-known The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), which attributed changes in scientific theories to changes in underlying intellectual paradigms, programs were founded at the University of California, Berkeley and elsewhere
that brought historians of science and philosophers together in unified programs.

Science, technology, and society.
In the mid- to late-1960s, student and faculty social movements in the U.S., UK, and European universities helped to launch a range of new interdisciplinary fields (such as women's studies) that were seen to address relevant topics that the traditional curriculum ignored.
One such development was the rise of "science, technology, and society" programs, which are also—confusingly—known by the STS acronym.
Drawn from a variety of disciplines, including anthropology, history, political science, and sociology, scholars in these programs created undergraduate curricula devoted to exploring the issues raised by science and technology.
Feminist scholars in this and other emerging STS areas addressed themselves to the exclusion of women from science and engineering.

Science, engineering, and public policy studies emerged in the 1970s from the same concerns that motivated the founders of the science, technology, and society movement:
A sense that science and technology were developing in ways that were increasingly at odds with the public's best interests.
The science, technology, and society movement tried to humanize those who would make tomorrow's science and technology, but this discipline took a different approach
: It would train students with the professional skills needed to become players in science and technology policy.
Some programs came to emphasize quantitative methodologies, and most of these were eventually absorbed into systems engineering.
Others emphasized sociological and qualitative approaches, and found that their closest kin could be found among scholars in science, technology, and society departments.
During the 1970s and 1980s, leading universities in the US, UK, and Europe began drawing these various components together in new, interdisciplinary programs.
For example, in the 1970s, Cornell University developed a new program that united science studies and policy-oriented scholars with historians and philosophers of science and technology.
Each of these programs developed unique identities due to variation in the components that were drawn together, as well as their location within the various universities.
For example, the University of Virginia's STS program united scholars drawn from a variety of fields (with particular strength in the history of technology); however, the program's teaching responsibilities—it is located within an engineering school and teaches ethics to undergraduate engineering students—means that all of its faculty share a strong interest in engineering ethics.

===
The "turn to technology" (and beyond) ===
A decisive moment in the development of STS was the mid-1980s addition of technology studies to the range of interests reflected in science.
During that decade, two works appeared en seriatim that signaled what Steve Woolgar was to call the "turn to technology".
In a seminal 1984 article, Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker attached the sociology of scientific knowledge to technology by showing how the sociology of technology could proceed along the theoretical and methodological lines established by the sociology of scientific knowledge.
This was the intellectual foundation of the field they called the social construction of technology.
Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman primed the pump by publishing a collection of articles attesting to the influence of society on technological design (Social Shaping of Technology, 1985).The
"turn to technology" helped to cement an already growing awareness of underlying unity among the various emerging STS programs.
More recently, there has been an associated turn to ecology, nature, and materiality in general, whereby the socio-technical and natural/material co-produce each other.
This is especially evident in work in STS analyses of biomedicine (such as Carl May and Annemarie Mol) and ecological interventions (such as Bruno Latour, Sheila Jasanoff, Matthias Gross, and S. Lochlann Jain).

==
Important concepts ==


===
Social construction(s) ===
Social constructions are human-created ideas, objects, or events created by a series of choices and interactions.
These interactions have consequences that change the perception that different groups of people have on these constructs.
Some examples of social construction include class, race, money, and citizenship.

The following also alludes to the notion that not everything is set, a circumstance or result could potentially be one way or the other.
According to the article "What is Social Construction?"
by Laura Flores, "Social construction work is critical of the status quo.
Social constructionists about X tend to hold that:
X need not have existed, or need not be at all as it is.
X, or X as it is at present, is not determined by the nature of things; it is not inevitableVery often they go further, and urge that:
X is quite as bad as it is.

We would be much better off if X were done away with, or at least radically transformed.
"In
the past, there have been viewpoints that were widely regarded as fact until being called to question due to the introduction of new knowledge.
Such viewpoints include the past concept of a correlation between intelligence and the nature of a human's ethnicity or race (X may not be at all as it is).An example of the evolution and interaction of various social constructions within science and technology can be found in the development of both the high-wheel bicycle, or velocipede, and then of the bicycle.

The velocipede was widely used in the latter half of the 19th century.
In the latter half of the 19th century, a social need was first recognized for a more efficient and rapid means of transportation.

Consequently, the velocipede was first developed, which was able to reach higher translational velocities than the smaller non-geared bicycles of the day, by replacing the front wheel with a larger radius wheel.
One notable trade-off was a certain decreased stability leading to a greater risk of falling.
This trade-off resulted in many riders getting into accidents by losing balance while riding the bicycle or being thrown over the handle bars.

The first "social construction" or progress of the velocipede caused the need for a newer "social construction" to be recognized and developed into a safer bicycle design.

Consequently, the velocipede was then developed into what is now commonly known as the "bicycle" to fit within society's newer "social construction," the newer standards of higher vehicle safety.
Thus the popularity of the modern geared bicycle design came as a response to the first social construction, the original need for greater speed, which had caused the high-wheel bicycle to be designed in the first place.

The popularity of the modern geared bicycle design ultimately ended the widespread use of the velocipede itself, as eventually it was found to best accomplish the social-needs/ social-constructions of both greater speed and of greater safety.

===
Technoscience ===
Technoscience is a subset of Science, Technology, and Society studies that focuses on the inseparable connection between science and technology.
It states that fields are linked and grow together, and scientific knowledge requires an infrastructure of technology in order to remain stationary or move forward.
Both technological development and scientific discovery drive one another towards more advancement.
Technoscience excels at shaping human thought and behavior by opening up new possibilities that gradually or quickly come to be perceived as necessities.
Recently, an Italian sociologist has studied the relationship with the history of science, which is underestimated by modern STS sociologists.
Instead, it is worth emphasising the links that exist between the production of books on the history of science and technology and the study of the relationship between science and technology within a framework of social developments.
We must always consider the generational leap between historical periods and scientific discoveries, machine building, creation of tools in relation to technological change occurring in very specific situations.
From this point of view, the study of the motives of scientific history is important for studying the development of technoscience.
And also for its sociological benefit ( Cfr.
Guglielmo Rinzivillo, Raccontare la tecnoscienza.
Storia di macchine, strumenti e idee per fare funzionare il mondo, Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2020,
ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5; ISSN 2284-0567).
===
Technosocial ===
"Technological action is a social process."
Social factors and technology are intertwined so that they are dependent upon each other.
This includes the aspect that social, political, and economic factors are inherent in technology and that social structure influences what technologies are pursued.
In other words, "technoscientific phenomena combined inextricably with social/political/ economic/psychological phenomena, so 'technology' includes a spectrum of artifacts, techniques, organizations, and systems.
"
Winner expands on this idea by saying "in the late twentieth century technology and society, technology and culture, technology and politics are by no means separate."
====
Examples ====
Ford Pinto – Ford Motor Company sold and produced the Pinto during the 1970s.
A flaw in the automobile design of the rear gas tank caused a fiery explosion upon impact.
The exploding fuel tank killed and injured hundreds of people.
Internal documents of test results, proved Ford CEO Lee Iacocca and engineers were aware of the flaw.
The company decided to ignore improving their technology because of profit-driven motives, strict internal control, and competition from foreign competitors such as Volkswagen.
Ford Motor Company conducted a cost-benefit analysis to determine if altering the Ford Pinto model was feasible.
An analysis conducted by Ford employees argued against a new design because of increased cost.
Employees were also under tight control by the CEO who rushed the Pinto through production lines to increase profits.
Ford finally changed after public scrutiny.
Safety organizations later influenced this technology by requiring stricter safety standards for motor vehicles.

DDT/toxins – DDT was a common and highly effective insecticide used during the 1940s until its ban in the early 1970s.
It was utilized during World War 2 to combat insect-borne human disease that plagued military members and civilian populations.
People and companies soon realized other benefits of DDT for agricultural purposes.
Rachel Carson became worried of wide spread use on public health and the environment.
Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring left an imprint on the industry by claiming linkage of DDT to many serious illness such as cancer.
Carson's book drew criticism from chemical companies who felt their reputation and business threatened by such claims..
DDT was eventually banned by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) after a long and arduous process of research on the chemical substance.
The main cause for the removal of DDT was the public deciding that any benefits were outweighed by the potential health risk.

Autopilots/computer-aided tasks (CATs) – From a security point of view
the effects of making a task more computer driven is in the favor of technological advance because there is less reaction time required and computational error than a human pilot.
Due to reduced error and reaction times flights on average, using autopilot, have been shown to be safer.
Thus the technology has a direct impact on people by increasing their safety, and society affects technology because people want to be safer so they are constantly trying to improve the autopilot systems.

Cell phones – Cell phone technology emerged in the early 1920s after advancements were made in radio technology.
Engineers at Bell Laboratories, the research, and development division of AT&T discovered that cell towers can transmit and receive signals to and from many directions.
The discovery by Bell Labs revolutionized the capabilities and outcomes of cellular technology.
Technology only improved once mobile phone users could communicate outside of a designated area.
First-generation mobile phones were first created and sold by Motorola.
Their phone was only intended for use in cars.
Second-generation mobile phone capabilities continued to improve because of the switch to digital.
Phones were faster which enhanced the communication capabilities of customers.
They were also sleeker and weighed less than bulky first-generation technology.
Technological advances boosted customer satisfaction and broadened cell phone companies' customer base.
Third-generation technology changed the way people interact with others.
Now customers had access to Wi-Fi, texting and other applications.
Mobile phones are now entering into the fourth generation.
Cellular and mobile phones revolutionized the way people socialize and communicate in order to establish a modern social structure.
People have affected the development of this technology by demanding features such as larger screens, touch capabilities, and internet accessibility.

Internet –  The internet arose because of extensive research on ARPANET between various universities, corporations, and ARPA (Advanced Research Project Agency), an agency of the Department of Defense.
Scientists theorized a network of computers connected to each other.
Computing capabilities contributed to developments and the creation of the modern day computer or laptop.
The internet has become a normal part of life and business, to such a degree that the United Nations views it as a basic human right.
The internet is becoming larger, one way is that more things are being moved into the digital world due to demand, for example online banking.
It has drastically changed the way most people go about daily habits.

===
Deliberative democracy ===
Deliberative democracy is a reform of representative or direct democracies which mandates discussion and debate of popular topics which affect society.

Deliberative democracy is a tool for making decisions.

Deliberative democracy can be traced back all the way to Aristotle's writings.
More recently, the term was coined by Joseph Bessette in his 1980 work Deliberative Democracy:
The Majority Principle in Republican Government, where he uses the idea in opposition to the elitist interpretations of the United States Constitution with emphasis on public discussion.
Deliberative democracy can lead to more legitimate, credible, and trustworthy outcomes.

Deliberative democracy allows for "a wider range of public knowledge", and it has been argued that this can lead to "more socially intelligent and robust" science.
One major shortcoming of deliberative democracy is that many models insufficiently ensure critical interaction.
According to Ryfe, there are five mechanisms that stand out as critical to the successful design of deliberative democracy:
Rules of equality, civility, and inclusivity may prompt deliberation even when our first impulse is to avoid it.

Stories anchor reality by organizing experience and instilling a normative commitment to civic identities and values, and function as a medium for framing discussions.

Leadership provides important cues to individuals in deliberative settings, and can keep groups on a deliberative track when their members slip into routine and habit.

Individuals are more likely to sustain deliberative reasoning when they have a stake in the outcomes.

Apprenticeship teaches citizens to deliberate well.
We might do well to imagine education as a form of apprenticeship learning, in which individuals learn to deliberate by doing it in concert with others more skilled in the activity.

====
Importance ====
Recently, there has been a movement towards greater transparency in the fields of policy and technology.
Jasanoff comes to the conclusion that there is no longer a question of if there needs to be increased public participation in making decisions about science and technology, but now there needs to be ways to make a more meaningful conversation between the public and those developing the technology.

====
In practice ====
Bruce Ackerman and James S. Fishkin offered an example of a reform in their paper "Deliberation Day.
"
The deliberation is to enhance public understanding of popular, complex and controversial issues through devices such as Fishkin's deliberative polling, though implementation of these reforms is unlikely in a large government such as that of the United States.
However, things similar to this have been implemented in small, local governments like New England towns and villages.
New England town hall meetings are a good example of deliberative democracy in a realistic setting.
An ideal deliberative democracy balances the voice and influence of all participants.
While the main aim is to reach consensus, deliberative democracy should encourage the voices of those with opposing viewpoints, concerns due to uncertainties, and questions about assumptions made by other participants.
It should take its time and ensure that those participating understand the topics on which they debate.
Independent managers of debates should also have substantial grasp of the concepts discussed, but must "[remain] independent and impartial as to the outcomes of the process."

===
Tragedy of the commons ===
In 1968, Garrett Hardin popularised the phrase "tragedy of the commons.
"
It is an economic theory where rational people act against the best interest of the group by consuming a common resource.
Since then, the tragedy of the commons has been used to symbolize the degradation of the environment whenever many individuals use a common resource.
Although Garrett Hardin was not an STS scholar, the concept of the tragedy of the commons still applies to science, technology and society.
In a contemporary setting, the Internet acts as an example of the tragedy of the commons through the exploitation of digital resources and private information.
Data and internet passwords can be stolen much more easily than physical documents.
Virtual spying is almost free compared to the costs of physical spying.
Additionally, net neutrality can be seen as an example of tragedy of the commons in an STS context.
The movement for net neutrality argues that the Internet should not be a resource that is dominated by one particular group, specifically those with more money to spend on Internet access.

A counterexample to the tragedy of the commons is offered by Andrew Kahrl.
Privatization can be a way to deal with the tragedy of the commons.
However, Kahrl suggests that the privatization of beaches on Long Island, in an attempt to combat the overuse of Long Island beaches, made the residents of Long Island more susceptible to flood damage from Hurricane Sandy.
The privatization of these beaches took away from the protection offered by the natural landscape.
Tidal lands that offer natural protection were drained and developed.
This attempt to combat the tragedy of the commons by privatization was counter-productive.
Privatization actually destroyed the public good of natural protection from the landscape.

===
Alternative modernity ===
Alternative modernity is a conceptual tool conventionally used to represent the state of present western society.
Modernity represents the political and social structures of the society, the sum of interpersonal discourse, and ultimately a snapshot of society's direction at a point in time.
Unfortunately conventional modernity is incapable of modeling alternative directions for further growth within our society.
Also, this concept is ineffective at analyzing similar but unique modern societies such as those found in the diverse cultures of the developing world.
Problems can be summarized into two elements: inward failure to analyze growth potentials of a given society, and outward failure to model different cultures and social structures and predict their growth potentials.

Previously, modernity carried a connotation of the current state of being modern, and its evolution through European colonialism.
The process of becoming "modern" is believed to occur in a linear, pre-determined way, and is seen by Philip Brey as a way to interpret and evaluate social and cultural formations.
This thought ties in with modernization theory, the thought that societies progress from "pre-modern" to "modern" societies.

Within the field of science and technology, there are two main lenses with which to view modernity.
The first is as a way for society to quantify what it wants to move towards.
In effect, we can discuss the notion of "alternative modernity" (as described by Andrew Feenberg) and which of these we would like to move towards.
Alternatively, modernity can be used to analyze the differences in interactions between cultures and individuals.
From this perspective, alternative modernities exist simultaneously, based on differing cultural and societal expectations of how a society (or an individual within society) should function.
Because of different types of interactions across different cultures, each culture will have a different modernity.

===
Pace of innovation ===
Pace of Innovation is the speed at which technological innovation or advancement is occurring, with the most apparent instances being too slow or too rapid.
Both these rates of innovation are extreme and therefore have effects on the people that get to use this technology.

===
No innovation without representation ===
"No innovation without representation" is a democratic ideal of ensuring that everyone involved gets a chance to be represented fairly in technological developments.

Langdon Winner states that groups and social interests likely to be affected by a particular kind of technological change ought to be represented at an early stage in defining exactly what that technology will be.
It is the idea that relevant parties have a say in technological developments and are not left in the dark.

Spoken about by Massimiano Bucchi
This ideal does not require the public to become experts on the topics of science and engineering, it only asks that the opinions and ideas be heard before making drastic decisions, as talked about by Steven L. Goldman.

===
Privileged positions of business and science ===
The privileged positions of business and science refer to the unique authority that persons in these areas hold in economic, political, and technosocial affairs.
Businesses have strong decision-making abilities in the function of society, essentially choosing what technological innovations to develop.
Scientists and technologists have valuable knowledge, the ability to pursue the technological innovations they want.
They proceed largely without public scrutiny and as if they had the consent of those potentially affected by their discoveries and creations.

===
Legacy thinking ===
Legacy thinking is defined as an inherited method of thinking imposed from an external source without objection by the individual, because it is already widely accepted by society.

Legacy thinking can impair the ability to drive technology for the betterment of society by blinding people to innovations that do not fit into their accepted model of how society works.

By accepting ideas without questioning them, people often see all solutions that contradict these accepted ideas as impossible or impractical.

Legacy thinking tends to advantage the wealthy, who have the means to project their ideas on the public.

It may be used by the wealthy as a vehicle to drive technology in their favor rather than for the greater good.

Examining the role of citizen participation and representation in politics provides an excellent example of legacy thinking in society.
The belief that one can spend money freely to gain influence has been popularized, leading to public acceptance of corporate lobbying.
As a result, a self-established role in politics has been cemented where the public does not exercise the power ensured to them by the Constitution to the fullest extent.
This can become a barrier to political progress as corporations who have the capital to spend have the potential to wield great influence over policy.
Legacy thinking, however, keeps the population from acting to change this, despite polls from Harris Interactive that report over 80% of Americans to feel that big business holds too much power in government.
Therefore, Americans are beginning to try to steer away from this line of thought, rejecting legacy thinking, and demanding less corporate, and more public, participation in political decision making.

Additionally, an examination of net neutrality functions as a separate example of legacy thinking.
Starting with dial-up, the internet has always been viewed as a private luxury good.
Internet today is a vital part of modern-day society members.
They use it in and out of life every day.
Corporations are able to mislabel and greatly overcharge for their internet resources.
Since the American public is so dependent upon internet there is little for them to do.
Legacy thinking has kept this pattern on track despite growing movements arguing that the internet should be considered a utility.
Legacy thinking prevents progress because it was widely accepted by others before us through advertising that the internet is a luxury and not a utility.
Due to pressure from grassroots movements the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has redefined the requirements for broadband and internet in general as a utility.
Now AT&T and other major internet providers are lobbying against this action and are in-large able to delay the onset of this movement due to legacy thinking's grip on American culture and politics.

For example, those who cannot overcome the barrier of legacy thinking may not consider the privatization of clean drinking water as an issue.
This is partial because access to water has become such a given fact of the matter to them.
For a person living in such circumstances, it may be widely accepted to not concern themselves with drinking water because they have not needed to be concerned with it in the past.
Additionally, a person living within an area that does not need to worry about their water supply or the sanitation of their water supply is less likely to be concerned with the privatization of water.

This notion can be examined through the thought experiment of "veil of ignorance".
Legacy thinking causes people to be particularly ignorant about the implications behind the "you get what you pay for" mentality applied to a life necessity.
By utilizing the "veil of ignorance", one can overcome the barrier of legacy thinking as it requires a person to imagine that they are unaware of their own circumstances, allowing them to free themselves from externally imposed thoughts or widely accepted ideas.

====
Related concepts ====
Technoscience –
The perception that science and technology are intertwined and depend on each other.

Technosociety –  An industrially developed society with a reliance on technology.

Technological utopianism – A positive outlook on the effect technology has on social welfare.
Includes the perception that technology will one day enable society to reach a utopian state.

Technosocial systems – people and technologies that combine to work as heterogeneous but functional wholes.

Critical Technical Practice – the practice of technological creation while simultaneously critiquing and maintaining awareness of the inherent biases and value systems which become embedded in those technologies.
====
Classifications ====
Technological optimism –
The opinion that technology has positive effects on society and should be used in order to improve the welfare of people.

Technological pessimism –
The opinion that technology has negative effects on society and should be discouraged from use.

Technological neutrality – "maintains that a given technology has no systematic effects on society: individuals are perceived as ultimately responsible, for better or worse, because technologies are merely tools people use for their own ends."

Technological determinism – "maintains that technologies are understood as simply and directly causing particular societal outcomes."

Scientism – The belief in the total separation of facts and values.

Technological progressivism – technology is a means to an end itself and an inherently positive pursuit.

==
Academic programs ==
STS is taught in several countries.
According to the STS wiki, STS programs can be found in twenty countries, including 45 programs in the United States, three programs in India, and eleven programs in the UK.
STS programs can be found in Canada, Germany, Israel, Malaysia, and Taiwan.
Some examples of institutions offering STS programs are Stanford University, Harvard University, the University of Oxford, Mines ParisTech, Bar-Ilan University, and York University.

==
Professional associations ==
The field has professional associations in regions and countries around the world.

===
In Europe ===
In Europe, the European Association for the Study of Science and Technology (EASST) was founded in 1981 to "improve scholarly communication and exchange in the field", "increase the visibility of the subject to policy-makers and to the general public", and "stimulate and support teaching on the subject at all levels".
Similarly, the European Inter-University Association on Society, Science and Technology (ESST) researches and studies science and technology in society, in both historical and contemporary perspectives.

In European nation states and language communities, a range of STS associations exist, including in the UK, Spain, Germany, Austria, Turkey.
For instance, in 2015, the UK-based Association for Studies in Innovation, Science and Technology
(AsSIST-UK) was established, Chaired by Andrew Webster (York) and Robin Williams (Edinburgh) principally to foster stronger integration between the innovation studies and STS fields.
In 2021 it had a membership of 380.
It holds annual conferences and has built strong links to policy practitioners in Westminster.

In Italy, STS Italia – The Italian Society for Social Studies of Science and Technology was founded in 2005.
Its mission is "to build up an Italian network of researchers oriented to study Science and Technology starting from the social dynamics which characterize and interweave science and technology themselves".
===
In Asia ===
The Asia Pacific Science Technology & Society Network (APSTSN) primarily has members from Australasia, Southeast and East Asia and Oceania.

In Japan, the Japanese Society for Science and Technology Studies (JSSTS) was founded in 2001.

===
In Latin America ===
Estudios Sociales de la Ciencia y la Tecnología (ESOCITE) is the biggest association of Science and Technology studies.
The study of STS (CyT in Spanish, CTS in Portuguese) here was shaped by authors like Amílcar Herrera and Jorge Sabato and Oscar Varsavsky in Argentina, José Leite Lopes in Brazil, Miguel Wionczek in Mexico, Francisco Sagasti in Peru, Máximo Halty Carrere in Uruguay and Marcel Roche in Venezuela.

===
In North America ===
Founded in 1975, the Society for Social Studies of Science initially provided scholarly communication facilities, including a journal (Science, Technology, and Human Values) and annual meetings that were mainly attended by science studies scholars.
The society has since grown into the most important professional association of science and technology studies scholars worldwide.
The Society for Social Studies of Science members also include government and industry officials concerned with research and development as well as science and technology policy; scientists and engineers who wish to better understand the social embeddedness of their professional practice; and citizens concerned about the impact of science and technology in their lives.

Founded in 1958, the Society for the History of Technology initially attracted members from the history profession who had interests in the contextual history of technology.
After the "turn to technology" in the mid-1980s, the society's well-regarded journal (Technology and Culture) and its annual meetings began to attract considerable interest from non-historians with technology studies interests.

Less identified with STS, but also of importance to many STS scholars, are the History of Science Society, the Philosophy of Science Association, and the American Association for the History of Medicine.

Additionally, within the US there are significant STS-oriented special interest groups within major disciplinary associations, including the American Anthropological Association, the American Political Science Association, the National Women's Studies Association, and the American Sociological Association.

==
Journals ==
Notable peer-reviewed journals in STS include: 

Student journals in STS include: 


==
Notable scholars ==


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Bauchspies, Wenda; Croissant, Jennifer; Restivo, Sal (2005).
Science, Technology, and Society: A Sociological Approach.
Wiley-Blackwell.
ISBN 9780631232100.

Bijker, Wiebe; Hughes, Thomas; Pinch, Trevor, eds.
(
1987).
The Social Construction of Technological Systems:
New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0262022620.

Felt, Ulrike; Fouché, Rayvon; Miller, Clark A.; Smith-Doerr, Laruel, eds.
(
2017).
The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies (4th ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ISBN 9780262035682.

Fuller, Steve (1993).
Philosophy, Rhetoric, and the End of Knowledge:
The Coming of Science and Technology Studies.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
(
2nd edition, with James H. Collier, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004)
Hess, David J. (1997).
Science Studies:
An Advanced Introduction.
New York:
NYU Press.
ISBN 9780814735640.

Jasanoff, Sheila; Markle, Gerald; Petersen, James; Pinch, Trevor, eds.
(
1994).
Handbook of Science and Technology Studies.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
ISBN 978-0803940215.

Kuhn, Thomas (1962).
The structure of scientific revolutions.
Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Latour, Bruno (1987).
Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society.
Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press.

Restivo, Sal, ed.
(
2005).
Science, Technology, and Society: An Encyclopedia.
New York:
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 9780195141931.

Guglielmo Rinzivillo (2020),
Raccontare la tecnoscienza.
Storia di macchine, strumenti e idee per fare funzionare il mondo, Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura; ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5; ISSN 2284-0567).
==
External links ==
STSWiki (devoted to building resources, such as a worldwide list of STS programs and scholars)
STS-Wiki of (Dutch) STS PhD research school
(this page is partly a private wiki)
Argentinean Network for Science and Technology Studies
Instituto de Estudios sobre
la Ciencia y la Tecnología - Universidad Nacional de Quilmes
Science and Technology Studies Department - University College London


===
Journals ===
The Vietnam War (Vietnamese: Chiến tranh Việt Nam), also known as the Second Indochina War, and in Vietnam as the Resistance War Against America (Vietnamese:
Kháng chiến chống Mỹ) or simply the American War, was a conflict in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia from 1 November 1955 to the fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975.
It was the second of the Indochina Wars and was officially fought between North Vietnam and South Vietnam.
North Vietnam was supported by the Soviet Union, China, and other communist allies; South Vietnam was supported by the United States, South Korea, the Philippines, Australia, Thailand, and other anti-communist allies.
The war, considered a Cold War-era proxy war by some, lasted 19 years, with direct U.S. involvement ending in 1973, and included the Laotian Civil War and the Cambodian Civil War, which ended with all three countries becoming communist in 1975.

The conflict emerged from the First Indochina War between the French and the communist-led Viet Minh.

After the French quit Indochina in 1954, the US assumed financial and military support for the South Vietnamese state.
The Việt Cộng, also known as Front national de libération du Sud-Viêt Nam or NLF (the National Liberation Front), a South Vietnamese common front under the direction of North Vietnam, initiated a guerrilla war in the south.
North Vietnam had also invaded Laos in the mid-1950s in support of insurgents, establishing the Ho Chi Minh Trail to supply and reinforce the Việt Cộng.
U.S. involvement escalated under President John F. Kennedy through the MAAG program from just under a thousand military advisors in 1959 to 16,000 in 1963.
By 1963, the North Vietnamese had sent 40,000 soldiers to fight in South Vietnam.
North Vietnam was heavily backed by the USSR and the People's Republic of China.
China also sent hundreds of PLA servicemen to North Vietnam to serve in air-defense and support roles.
By 1964, 23,000 US advisors were stationed in South Vietnam.
In the Gulf of Tonkin incident in August, a U.S. destroyer was alleged to have clashed with North Vietnamese fast attack craft.
In response, the U.S. Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution and gave President Lyndon B. Johnson broad authority to increase American military presence in Vietnam.
Johnson ordered the deployment of combat units for the first time and increased troop levels to 184,000.
Past this point, the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (also known as the North Vietnamese Army or NVA) engaged in more conventional warfare with U.S. and South Vietnamese forces.
Despite little progress, the United States continued a significant build-up of forces.
U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, one of the principal architects of the war, began expressing doubts of victory by the end of 1966.
U.S. and South Vietnam forces relied on air superiority and overwhelming firepower to conduct search and destroy operations, involving ground forces, artillery, and airstrikes.
The U.S. also conducted a large-scale strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam and Laos.

The Tet Offensive of 1968 showed the lack of progress with these doctrines.
With the VC and PAVN mounting large-scale urban offensives throughout 1968, U.S. domestic support for the war began fading.
The Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) expanded following a period of neglect after Tet and was modeled after U.S. doctrine.
The VC sustained heavy losses during the Tet Offensive and subsequent U.S.-ARVN operations in the rest of 1968, losing over 50,000 men.
The CIA's Phoenix Program further degraded the VC's membership and capabilities.
By the end of the year, the VC insurgents held almost no territory in South Vietnam, and their recruitment dropped by over 80% in 1969, signifying a drastic reduction in guerrilla operations, necessitating increased use of PAVN regular soldiers from the north.
In 1969, North Vietnam declared a Provisional Revolutionary Government in South Vietnam in an attempt to give the reduced VC a more international stature, but the southern guerrillas from then on were sidelined as PAVN forces began more conventional combined arms warfare.
By 1970, over 70% of communist troops in the south were northerners, and southern-dominated VC units no longer existed.
Operations crossed national borders: Laos was invaded by North Vietnam early on, while Cambodia was used by North Vietnam as a supply route starting in 1967; the route through Cambodia began to be bombed by the U.S. in 1969, while the Laos route had been heavily bombed since 1964.
The deposing of the monarch Norodom Sihanouk by the Cambodian National Assembly resulted in a PAVN invasion of the country at the request of the Khmer Rouge, escalating the Cambodian Civil War and resulting in a U.S.-ARVN counter-invasion.

In 1969, following the election of U.S. President Richard Nixon, a policy of "Vietnamization" began, which saw the conflict fought by an expanded ARVN, with U.S. forces sidelined and increasingly demoralized by domestic opposition and reduced recruitment.
U.S. ground forces had largely withdrawn by early 1972 and support was limited to air support, artillery support, advisers, and materiel shipments.
The ARVN, buttressed by said U.S. support, stopped the first and largest mechanized PAVN offensive during the Easter Offensive of 1972.
The offensive resulted in heavy casualties on both sides and the failure of the PAVN to subdue South Vietnam, but the ARVN itself failed to recapture all territory, leaving its military situation difficult.
The Paris Peace Accords of January 1973 saw all U.S. forces withdrawn; the Case–Church Amendment, passed by the U.S. Congress on 15 August 1973, officially ended direct U.S. military involvement.
The Peace Accords were broken almost immediately, and fighting continued for two more years.
Phnom Penh fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975 while the 1975 Spring Offensive saw the capture of Saigon by the PAVN on 30 April
; this marked the end of the war, and
North and South Vietnam were reunified the following year.

The scale of fighting was enormous.
By 1970, the ARVN was the world's fourth largest army, and the PAVN was not far behind with approximately one million regular soldiers.
The war exacted an enormous human cost: estimates of the number of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians killed range from 966,000 to 3.8 million.
Some 275,000–310,000 Cambodians, 20,000–62,000 Laotians, and 58,220 U.S. service members also died in the conflict, and a further 1,626 remain missing in action.
The Sino-Soviet split re-emerged following the lull during the Vietnam War.
Conflict between North Vietnam and its Cambodian allies in the Royal Government of the National Union of Kampuchea, and the newly formed Democratic Kampuchea began almost immediately in a series of border raids by the Khmer Rouge, eventually escalating into the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
Chinese forces directly invaded Vietnam in the Sino-Vietnamese War, with subsequent border conflicts lasting until 1991.
The unified Vietnam fought insurgencies in all three countries.
The end of the war and resumption of the Third Indochina War would precipitate the Vietnamese boat people and the larger Indochina refugee crisis, which saw millions of refugees leave Indochina (mainly southern Vietnam), an estimated 250,000 of whom perished at sea.
Within the U.S, the war gave rise to what was referred to as Vietnam Syndrome, a public aversion to American overseas military involvements, which together with the Watergate scandal contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected America throughout the 1970s.

==
Names ==
Various names have been applied to the conflict.
Vietnam War is the most commonly used name in English.
It has also been called the Second Indochina War and the Vietnam Conflict.
Given that there have been several conflicts in Indochina, this particular conflict is known by its primary protagonists' names to distinguish it from others.
In Vietnamese, the war is generally known as Kháng chiến chống Mỹ (Resistance War Against America), but less formally as 'Cuộc chiến tranh Mỹ' (The American War).
It is also called Chiến tranh Việt Nam (The Vietnam War).

==
Background ==
The primary military organizations involved in the war were the United States Armed Forces and the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, pitted against the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (commonly called the North Vietnamese Army, or NVA, in English-language sources) and the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NLF, more commonly known as the Viet Cong (VC) in English language sources), a South Vietnamese communist guerrilla force.
Daniel Ellsberg contends that U.S. participation in Vietnam had begun in 1945 when it gave support to a French effort to reconquer its colony in Vietnam, a nation which had just declared independence in August 1945.Indochina had been a French colony from late 19th century to mid-20th century.
When the Japanese invaded during World War II, the Viet Minh opposed them with support from the US, the Soviet Union and China.
They received some Japanese arms when Japan surrendered.
The Viet Minh, a Communist-led common front under the leadership of Ho Chi Minh, then initiated an insurgency against French rule.
Hostilities escalated into the First Indochina War (beginning in December 1946).
By the 1950s, the conflict had become entwined with the Cold War.
In January 1950, China and the Soviet Union recognized the Viet Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam, based in Hanoi, as the legitimate government of Vietnam.
The following month the United States and Great Britain recognized the French-backed State of Vietnam in Saigon, led by former Emperor Bảo Đại, as the legitimate Vietnamese government.
The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 convinced many Washington policymakers that the war in Indochina was an example of communist expansionism directed by the Soviet Union.
Military advisors from the People's Republic of China (PRC) began assisting the Viet Minh in July 1950.
PRC weapons, expertise, and laborers transformed the Viet Minh from a guerrilla force into a regular army.
In September 1950, the United States created a Military Assistance and Advisory Group (MAAG) to screen French requests for aid, advise on strategy, and train Vietnamese soldiers.
By 1954, the United States had spent $1 billion in support of the French military effort, shouldering 80 percent of the cost of the war.
During the Battle of Dien Bien Phu (1954), U.S. carriers sailed to the Gulf of Tonkin and the U.S. conducted reconnaissance flights.
France and the United States also discussed the use of three tactical nuclear weapons, although reports of how seriously this was considered and by whom are vague and contradictory.
According to then-Vice President Richard Nixon, the Joint Chiefs of Staff drew up plans to use small tactical nuclear weapons to support the French.
Nixon, a so-called "hawk" on Vietnam, suggested that the United States might have to "put American boys in".
President Dwight D. Eisenhower made American participation contingent on British support, but the British were opposed.
Eisenhower, wary of involving the United States in a land war in Asia, decided against military intervention.
Throughout the conflict, U.S. intelligence estimates remained sceptical of France's chance of success.
On 7 May 1954, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrendered.
The defeat marked the end of French military involvement in Indochina.
At the Geneva Conference, the French negotiated a ceasefire agreement with the Viet Minh, and independence was granted to Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.

==
Transition period ==
At the 1954 Geneva peace conference, Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel.
Ho Chi Minh had wished to continue the war in the south, but was restrained by his Chinese allies who convinced him that he could win control by electoral means.
Under the terms of the Geneva Accords, civilians were allowed to move freely between the two provisional states for a 300-day period.
Elections throughout the country were to be held in 1956 to establish a unified government.
Around one million northerners, mainly minority Catholics, fled south, fearing persecution by the communists.
This followed an American psychological warfare campaign, designed by Edward Lansdale for the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), which exaggerated anti-Catholic sentiment among the Viet Minh and which falsely claimed the US was about to drop atomic bombs on Hanoi.
The exodus was coordinated by a U.S.-funded $93 million relocation program, which included the use of the Seventh Fleet to ferry refugees.
The northern, mainly Catholic refugees gave the later Ngô Đình Diệm regime a strong anti-communist constituency.
Diệm staffed his government's key posts mostly with northern and central Catholics.

In addition to the Catholics flowing south, up to 174,000 "Revolutionary Regroupees" and their 86,000 dependents went to the north for "regroupment", expecting to return to the south within two years.
The Viet Minh left roughly 5,000 to 10,000 cadres in the south as a base for future insurgency.
The last French soldiers left South Vietnam in April 1956.
The PRC completed its withdrawal from North Vietnam at around the same time.
Between 1953 and 1956, the North Vietnamese government instituted various agrarian reforms, including "rent reduction" and "land reform", which resulted in significant political oppression.
During the land reform, testimony from North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution for every 160 village residents, which extrapolated resulted in an initial estimation of nearly 100,000 executions nationwide.
Because the campaign was concentrated mainly in the Red River Delta area, a lower estimate of 50,000 executions became widely accepted by scholars at the time.
However, declassified documents from the Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate that the number of executions was much lower than reported at the time, although likely greater than 13,500.
In 1956, leaders in Hanoi admitted to "excesses" in implementing this program and restored a large amount of the land to the original owners.
The south, meanwhile, constituted the State of Vietnam, with Bảo Đại as Emperor and Ngô Đình Diệm (appointed in July 1954) as his prime minister.
Neither the United States government nor Ngô Đình Diệm's State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference.
With respect to the question of reunification, the non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost out when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Phạm Văn Đồng, who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of "local commissions".
The United States countered with what became known as the "American Plan", with the support of South Vietnam and the United Kingdom.
It provided for unification elections under the supervision of the United Nations, but was rejected by the Soviet delegation.
The United States said, "With respect to the statement made by the representative of the State of Vietnam, the United States reiterates its traditional position that peoples are entitled to determine their own future and that it will not join in any arrangement which would hinder this".

U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower wrote in 1954:
"I have never talked or corresponded with a person knowledgeable in Indochinese affairs who did not agree that had elections been held as of the time of the fighting, possibly eighty percent of the population would have voted for the Communist Ho Chi Minh as their leader rather than Chief of State Bảo Đại.
Indeed, the lack of leadership and drive on the part of Bảo Đại was a factor in the feeling prevalent among Vietnamese that they had nothing to fight for."

According to the Pentagon Papers, however, from 1954 to 1956 "Ngô Đình Diệm really did accomplish miracles" in South Vietnam: "It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho—in a free election against Diệm—would have been much smaller than eighty percent.
"
In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, with the ICC reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement.

From April to June 1955, Diệm eliminated any political opposition in the south by launching military operations against two religious groups: the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo of Ba Cụt.
The campaign also focused on the Bình Xuyên organized crime group, which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had some military elements.
As broad-based opposition to his harsh tactics mounted, Diệm increasingly sought to blame the communists.
In a referendum on the future of the State of Vietnam on 23 October 1955, Diệm rigged the poll supervised by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and was credited with 98.2 percent of the vote, including 133% in Saigon.
His American advisors had recommended a more modest winning margin of "60 to 70 percent.
"
Diệm, however, viewed the election as a test of authority.
Three days later, he declared South Vietnam to be an independent state under the name Republic of Vietnam (ROV), with himself as president.
Likewise, Ho Chi Minh and other communist officials always won at least 99% of the vote in North Vietnamese "elections".

The domino theory, which argued that if one country fell to communism, then all of the surrounding countries would follow, was first proposed as policy by the Eisenhower administration.
John F. Kennedy, then a U.S. senator, said in a speech to the American Friends of Vietnam: "Burma, Thailand, India, Japan, the Philippines and obviously Laos and Cambodia are among those whose security would be threatened if the Red Tide of Communism overflowed into Vietnam."
==
Diệm era,
1954–1963 ==
===
Rule ===
A devout Roman Catholic, Diệm was fervently anti-communist, nationalist, and socially conservative.
Historian Luu Doan Huynh notes that "Diệm represented narrow and extremist nationalism coupled with autocracy and nepotism.
"
Most Vietnamese people were Buddhist, and they were alarmed by Diệm's actions, like his dedication of the country to the Virgin Mary.

Beginning in the summer of 1955, Diệm launched the "Denounce the Communists" campaign, during which suspected communists and other anti-government elements were arrested, imprisoned, tortured, or executed.
He instituted the death penalty against any activity deemed communist in August 1956.
About 12,000 suspected opponents of Diệm were killed between 1955 and 1957, and by the end of 1958, an estimated 40,000 political prisoners had been jailed.

In May 1957, Diệm undertook a ten-day state visit to the United States.
President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diệm's honor in New York City.
Although Diệm was publicly praised, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles privately conceded that Diệm had been selected because they could find no better alternative.
===
Insurgency in the South, 1954–1960 ===
Between 1954 and 1957, the Diệm government succeeded in quelling large-scale, disorganized dissidence in the countryside.
In early 1957, South Vietnam enjoyed its first peace in over a decade.
Incidents of political violence began to occur in mid-1957, but the government "did not construe it as a campaign, considering the disorders too diffuse to warrant committing major GVN [Government of Vietnam] resources."
By early 1959, however, Diệm had come to regard the (increasingly frequent) disorders as an organized campaign and implemented Law 10/59, which made political violence punishable by death and property confiscation.
There had been some division among former Viet Minh whose main goal was to hold the elections promised in the Geneva Accords, leading to "wildcat" activities separate from the other communists and anti-GVN activists.
In December 1960, the Viet Cong was formally created with the intent of uniting all anti-GVN activists, including non-communists.
It was formed in Memot, Cambodia, and directed through a central office known as COSVN.
According to the Pentagon Papers, the Viet Cong "placed heavy emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence, on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government and the neutralization of Vietnam."
The identities of the leaders of the organization often were kept secret.
Support for the VC was driven by peasant resentment of Diem's reversal of land reforms in the countryside.
Most of the population lived in countryside villages and strongly supported the reforms.
In areas they controlled, the Viet Minh had confiscated large private landholdings, reduced rents and debts, and leased communal lands, mostly to the poorer peasants.
Diem brought the landlords back to the villages.
People who were farming land they had held for years now had to return it to landlords and pay years of back rent.
This rent collection was enforced by the South Vietnamese army.
The divisions within villages reproduced those that had existed against the French: "75 percent support for the NLF, 20 percent trying to remain neutral and 5 percent firmly pro-government".
====
North Vietnamese involvement ====
In March 1956, southern communist leader Lê Duẩn presented a plan to revive the insurgency entitled "The Road to the South" to the other members of the Politburo in Hanoi; however, as both China and the Soviets opposed confrontation at this time, Lê Duẩn's plan was rejected.
Despite this, the North Vietnamese leadership approved tentative measures to revive the southern insurgency in December 1956.
This decision was made at the 11th Plenary Session of the Lao Dong Central Committee.
Communist forces were under a single command structure set up in 1958.

The North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a "people's war" on the South at a session in January 1959, and, in May, Group 559 was established to maintain and upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, at this time a six-month mountain trek through Laos.
About 500 of the "regroupees" of 1954 were sent south on the trail during its first year of operation.
The first arms delivery via the trail was completed in August 1959.
About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south from 1961 to 1963.

==
Kennedy's escalation, 1961–1963 ==
In the 1960 U.S. presidential election, Senator John F. Kennedy defeated incumbent Vice President Richard M. Nixon.
Although Eisenhower warned Kennedy about Laos and Vietnam, Europe and Latin America "loomed larger than Asia on his sights.
"
In April 1961, Kennedy approved the Bay of Pigs Invasion and that invasion failed.
In June 1961, he bitterly disagreed with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev when they met in Vienna to discuss key U.S.–Soviet issues.
Only 16 months later, the Cuban Missile Crisis (16–28 October 1962) played out on television worldwide.
It was the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war, and the U.S. raised the readiness level of Strategic Air Command (SAC) forces to DEFCON 2.

The Kennedy administration remained essentially committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations.
In 1961, the U.S. had 50,000 troops based in South Korea, and Kennedy faced four crisis situations: the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion that he had approved on 4 April, settlement negotiations between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement in May ("Kennedy sidestepped Laos, whose rugged terrain was no battleground for American soldiers."),
the construction of the Berlin Wall in August, and the Cuban Missile Crisis in October.
Kennedy believed that yet another failure to gain control and stop communist expansion would irreparably damage U.S. credibility.
He was determined to "draw a line in the sand" and prevent a communist victory in Vietnam.
He told James Reston of The New York Times immediately after his Vienna summit meeting with Khrushchev, "Now we have a problem making our power credible and Vietnam looks like the place."

Kennedy's policy toward South Vietnam assumed that Diệm and his forces had to ultimately defeat the guerrillas on their own.
He was against the deployment of American combat troops and observed that "to introduce U.S. forces in large numbers there today, while it might have an initially favorable military impact, would almost certainly lead to adverse political and, in the long run, adverse military consequences.
"
The quality of the South Vietnamese military, however, remained poor.
Poor leadership, corruption, and political promotions all played a part in weakening the ARVN.
The frequency of guerrilla attacks rose as the insurgency gathered steam.
While Hanoi's support for the Viet Cong played a role, South Vietnamese governmental incompetence was at the core of the crisis.
One major issue Kennedy raised was whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the United States.
Although Kennedy stressed long-range missile parity with the Soviets, he was also interested in using special forces for counterinsurgency warfare in Third World countries threatened by communist insurgencies.
Although they were originally intended for use behind front lines after a conventional Soviet invasion of Europe, Kennedy believed that the guerrilla tactics employed by special forces such as the Green Berets would be effective in a "brush fire" war in Vietnam.

Kennedy advisors Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow recommended that U.S. troops be sent to South Vietnam disguised as flood relief workers.
Kennedy rejected the idea but increased military assistance yet again.
In April 1962, John Kenneth Galbraith warned Kennedy of the "danger we shall replace the French as a colonial force in the area and bleed as the French did.
"
By November 1963, 16,000 American military personnel were stationed in South Vietnam.
The Strategic Hamlet Program was initiated in late 1961.
This joint U.S.–South Vietnamese program attempted to resettle the rural population into fortified camps.
It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation, village internment, and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from the Viet Cong.
It was hoped these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government.
However, by November 1963 the program had waned, and it officially ended in 1964.On 23 July 1962, fourteen nations, including China, South Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Vietnam and the United States, signed an agreement promising to respect the neutrality of Laos.
===
Ousting and assassination of Ngô Đình Diệm ===
The inept performance of the ARVN was exemplified by failed actions such as the Battle of Ap Bac on 2 January 1963, in which a small band of Viet Cong won a battle against a much larger and better-equipped South Vietnamese force, many of whose officers seemed reluctant even to engage in combat.
During the battle the South Vietnamese had lost 83 soldiers, 5 US war helicopters that had been shot down by Vietcong forces, while the Vietcong forces had lost only 18 soldiers.
The ARVN forces were led by Diệm's most trusted general, Huỳnh Văn Cao, commander of the IV Corps.
Cao was a Catholic who had been promoted due to religion and fidelity rather than skill, and his main job was to preserve his forces to stave off coup attempts; he had earlier vomited during a communist attack.
Some policymakers in Washington began to conclude that Diệm was incapable of defeating the communists and might even make a deal with Ho Chi Minh.
He seemed concerned only with fending off coups and had become more paranoid after attempts in 1960 and 1962, which he partly attributed to U.S. encouragement.
As Robert F. Kennedy noted, "Diệm wouldn't make even the slightest concessions.
He was difficult to reason with ..."
Historian James Gibson summed up the situation:

Strategic hamlets had failed ...
The South Vietnamese regime was incapable of winning the peasantry because of its class base among landlords.
Indeed, there was no longer a 'regime' in the sense of a relatively stable political alliance and functioning bureaucracy.
Instead, civil government and military operations had virtually ceased.
The National Liberation Front had made great progress and was close to declaring provisional revolutionary governments in large areas.

Discontent with Diệm's policies exploded in May 1963 following the Huế Phật Đản shootings of nine unarmed Buddhists protesting against the ban on displaying the Buddhist flag on Vesak, the Buddha's birthday.
This resulted in mass protests against discriminatory policies that gave privileges to the Catholic Church and its adherents over the Buddhist majority.
Diệm's elder brother
Ngô Đình Thục was the Archbishop of Huế and aggressively blurred the separation between church and state.
Thuc's anniversary celebrations shortly before Vesak had been bankrolled by the government, and Vatican flags were displayed prominently.
There had also been reports of Catholic paramilitaries demolishing Buddhist pagodas throughout Diệm's rule.
Diệm refused to make concessions to the Buddhist majority or take responsibility for the deaths.
On 21 August 1963, the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel Lê Quang Tung, loyal to Diệm's younger brother Ngô Đình Nhu, raided pagodas across Vietnam, causing widespread damage and destruction and leaving a death toll estimated to range into the hundreds.

U.S. officials began discussing the possibility of a regime change during the middle of 1963.
The United States Department of State wanted to encourage a coup, while the Defense Department favored Diệm.
Chief among the proposed changes was the removal of Diệm's younger brother Nhu, who controlled the secret police and special forces, and was seen as the man behind the Buddhist repression and more generally the architect of the Ngô family's rule.
This proposal was conveyed to the U.S. embassy in Saigon in Cable 243.

The CIA contacted generals planning to remove Diệm and told them that the United States would not oppose such a move nor punish the generals by cutting off aid.
President Diệm was overthrown and executed, along with his brother, on 2 November 1963.
When Kennedy was informed, Maxwell Taylor remembered that he "rushed from the room with a look of shock and dismay on his face."
Kennedy had not anticipated Diệm's murder.
The U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, invited the coup leaders to the embassy and congratulated them.
Ambassador Lodge informed Kennedy that "the prospects now are for a shorter war".
Kennedy wrote Lodge a letter congratulating him for "a fine job".
Following the coup, chaos ensued.
Hanoi took advantage of the situation and increased its support for the guerrillas.
South Vietnam entered a period of extreme political instability, as one military government toppled another in quick succession.
Increasingly, each new regime was viewed by the communists as a puppet of the Americans; whatever the failings of Diệm, his credentials as a nationalist (as Robert McNamara later reflected) had been impeccable.

U.S. military advisors were embedded at every level of the South Vietnamese armed forces.
They were however criticized for ignoring the political nature of the insurgency.
The Kennedy administration sought to refocus U.S. efforts on pacification- which in this case was defined as countering the growing threat of insurgency-
and "winning over the hearts and minds" of the population.
The military leadership in Washington, however, was hostile to any role for U.S. advisors other than conventional troop training.
General Paul Harkins, the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, confidently predicted victory by Christmas 1963.
The CIA was less optimistic, however, warning that "the Viet Cong by and large retain de facto control of much of the countryside and have steadily increased the overall intensity of the effort".
Paramilitary officers from the CIA's Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam.
The indigenous forces numbered in the tens of thousands and they conducted direct action missions, led by paramilitary officers, against the Communist Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese supporters.
The CIA also ran the Phoenix Program and participated in Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group (MAC-V SOG), which was originally named the Special Operations Group, but was changed for cover purposes.

==
Johnson's escalation, 1963–1969 ==
President Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963.
Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had not been heavily involved with policy toward Vietnam; however, upon becoming president, Johnson immediately focused on the war.
On 24 November 1963, he said, "the battle against communism ... must be joined ... with strength and determination."
Johnson knew he had inherited a rapidly deteriorating situation in South Vietnam, but he adhered to the widely accepted domino theory argument for defending the South: Should they retreat or appease, either action would imperil other nations beyond the conflict.
The military revolutionary council, meeting in lieu of a strong South Vietnamese leader, was made up of 12 members.
This council was headed by General Dương Văn Minh, whom Stanley Karnow, a journalist on the ground, later recalled as "a model of lethargy".
Lodge, frustrated by the end of the year, cabled home about Minh: "Will he be strong enough to get on top of things?"
Minh's regime was overthrown in January 1964 by General Nguyễn Khánh.
There was also persistent instability in the military, however, as several coups—not all successful—occurred in a short period of time.

In a statement similar to that made to the French almost two decades earlier, Ho Chi Minh warned that if the Americans "want to make war for twenty years then we shall make war for twenty years.
If they want to make peace, we shall make peace and invite them to afternoon tea.
"
Some have argued that the policy of North Vietnam was not to topple other non-communist governments in South East Asia.

===
Gulf of Tonkin incident ===
On 2 August 1964, USS Maddox, on an intelligence mission along North Vietnam's coast, allegedly fired upon and damaged several torpedo boats that had been stalking it in the Gulf of Tonkin.
A second attack was reported two days later on USS Turner Joy and Maddox in the same area.
The circumstances of the attacks were murky.
Lyndon Johnson commented to Undersecretary of State George Ball that "those sailors out there may have been shooting at flying fish.
"An
undated NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed that there was no attack on 4 August.

The second "attack" led to retaliatory airstrikes, and prompted Congress to approve the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on 7 August 1964.
The resolution granted the president power "to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression" and Johnson would rely on this as giving him authority to expand the war.
In the same month, Johnson pledged that he was not "committing American boys to fighting a war that I think ought to be fought by the boys of Asia to help protect their own land".

The National Security Council recommended a three-stage escalation of the bombing of North Vietnam.
Following an attack on a U.S. Army base in Pleiku on 7 February 1965, a series of airstrikes was initiated, Operation Flaming Dart, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin was on a state visit to North Vietnam.
Operation Rolling Thunder and Operation Arc Light expanded aerial bombardment and ground support operations.
The bombing campaign, which ultimately lasted three years, was intended to force North Vietnam to cease its support for the Viet Cong by threatening to destroy North Vietnamese air defenses and industrial infrastructure.
It was additionally aimed at bolstering the morale of the South Vietnamese.
Between March 1965 and November 1968, Rolling Thunder deluged the north with a million tons of missiles, rockets and bombs.

===
Bombing of Laos ===
Bombing was not restricted to North Vietnam.
Other aerial campaigns, such as Operation Barrel Roll, targeted different parts of the Viet Cong and PAVN infrastructure.
These included the Ho Chi Minh trail supply route, which ran through Laos and Cambodia.
The ostensibly neutral Laos had become the scene of a civil war, pitting the Laotian government backed by the US against the Pathet Lao and its North Vietnamese allies.

Massive aerial bombardment against the Pathet Lao and PAVN forces were carried out by the US to prevent the collapse of the Royal central government, and to deny the use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
Between 1964 and 1973, the U.S. dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly equal to the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II, making Laos the most heavily bombed country in history relative to the size of its population.
The objective of stopping North Vietnam and the Viet Cong was never reached.
The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that "we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age".
===
The 1964 Offensive ===

Following the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Hanoi anticipated the arrival of US troops and began expanding the Viet Cong, as well as sending increasing numbers of North Vietnamese personnel southwards.
At this phase they were outfitting the Viet Cong forces and standardising their equipment with AK-47 rifles and other supplies, as well as forming the 9th Division.
"
From a strength of approximately 5,000 at the start of 1959 the Viet Cong's ranks grew to about 100,000 at the end of 1964 ...
Between 1961 and 1964 the Army's strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men."
The numbers for U.S. troops deployed to Vietnam during the same period were much lower: 2,000 in 1961, rising rapidly to 16,500 in 1964.
During this phase, the use of captured equipment decreased, while greater numbers of ammunition and supplies were required to maintain regular units.
Group 559 was tasked with expanding the Ho Chi Minh trail, in light of the near constant bombardment by US warplanes.
The war had begun to shift into the final, conventional warfare phase of Hanoi's three-stage protracted warfare model.
The Viet Cong was now tasked with destroying the ARVN and capturing and holding areas; however, the Viet Cong was not yet strong enough to assault major towns and cities.

In December 1964, ARVN forces had suffered heavy losses at the Battle of Bình Giã, in a battle that both sides viewed as a watershed.
Previously, the VC had utilised hit-and-run guerrilla tactics.
At Binh Gia, however, they had defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle and remained in the field for four days.
Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of Đồng Xoài.

===
American ground war ===
On 8 March 1965, 3,500 U.S. Marines were landed near Da Nang, South Vietnam.
This marked the beginning of the American ground war.
U.S. public opinion overwhelmingly supported the deployment.
The Marines' initial assignment was the defense of Da Nang Air Base.
The first deployment of 3,500 in March 1965 was increased to nearly 200,000 by December.
The U.S. military had long been schooled in offensive warfare.
Regardless of political policies, U.S. commanders were institutionally and psychologically unsuited to a defensive mission.
General William Westmoreland informed Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp Jr., commander of U.S. Pacific forces, that the situation was critical.
He said, "I am convinced that U.S. troops with their energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight to the NLF (Viet Cong)".
With this recommendation, Westmoreland was advocating an aggressive departure from America's defensive posture and the sidelining of the South Vietnamese.
By ignoring ARVN units, the U.S. commitment became open-ended.
Westmoreland outlined a three-point plan to win the war:
Phase 1.
Commitment of U.S. (and other free world) forces necessary to halt the losing trend by the end of 1965.

Phase 2.
U.S. and allied forces mount major offensive actions to seize the initiative to destroy guerrilla and organized enemy forces.
This phase would end when the enemy had been worn down, thrown on the defensive, and driven back from major populated areas.

Phase 3.
If the enemy persisted, a period of twelve to eighteen months following Phase 2 would be required for the final destruction of enemy forces remaining in remote base areas.

The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the previous administration's insistence that the government of South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the guerrillas.
Westmoreland predicted victory by the end of 1967.
Johnson did not, however, communicate this change in strategy to the media.
Instead he emphasized continuity.
The change in U.S. policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong in a contest of attrition and morale.
The opponents were locked in a cycle of escalation.
The idea that the government of South Vietnam could manage its own affairs was shelved.
Westmoreland and McNamara furthermore touted the body count system for gauging victory, a metric that would later prove to be flawed.
The American buildup transformed the South Vietnamese economy and had a profound effect on society.
South Vietnam was inundated with manufactured goods.
Stanley Karnow noted that "the main PX [Post Exchange], located in the Saigon suburb of Cholon, was only slightly smaller than the New York Bloomingdale's ..." A huge surge in corruption was witnessed.
Meanwhile, the one-year tour of duty of American soldiers deprived units of experienced leadership.
As one observer noted "we were not in Vietnam for 10 years, but for one year 10 times."
As a result, training programs were shortened.

Washington encouraged its SEATO allies to contribute troops.
Australia, New Zealand, Thailand and the Philippines all agreed to send troops.
South Korea would later ask to join the Many Flags program in return for economic compensation.
Major allies, however, notably NATO nations Canada and the United Kingdom, declined Washington's troop requests.
The U.S. and its allies mounted complex search and destroy operations, designed to find enemy forces, destroy them, and then withdraw, typically using helicopters.
In November 1965, the U.S. engaged in its first major battle with the PAVN, the Battle of Ia Drang.
The operation was the first large scale helicopter air assault by the U.S., and first to employ Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bombers in a tactical support role.
These tactics continued in 1966–1967 with operations such as Masher, Thayer, Attleboro, Cedar Falls and Junction City.
However, the PAVN/VC insurgents remained elusive and demonstrated great tactical flexibility.
By 1967, these operations had generated large-scale internal refugees, numbering nearly 2.1 million in South Vietnam, with 125,000 people evacuated and rendered homeless during Operation Masher alone, which was the largest search and destroy operation in the war up to that point.
Operation Masher would have negligible impact, however, as the PAVN/VC returned to the province just four months after the operation ended.
Despite the continual conductance of major operations, which the Viet Cong and PAVN would typically evade, the war was characterised by smaller-unit contacts or engagements.
Up to the war's end, the Viet Cong and PAVN would initiate 90% of large firefights, of which 80% were clear and well-planned operations, and thus the PAVN/Viet Cong would retain strategic initiative despite overwhelming US force and fire-power deployment.
The PAVN/Viet Cong had furthermore developed strategies capable of countering U.S. military doctrines and tactics (see NLF and PAVN battle tactics).

Meanwhile, the political situation in South Vietnam began to stabilise with the coming to power of prime minister Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ and figurehead chief of state, General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, in mid-1965 at the head of a military junta.
This ended a series of coups that had happened more than once a year.
In 1967, Thieu became president with Ky as his deputy, after rigged elections.
Although they were nominally a civilian government, Ky was supposed to maintain real power through a behind-the-scenes military body.
However, Thieu outmanoeuvred and sidelined Ky by filling the ranks with generals from his faction.
Thieu was also accused of murdering Ky loyalists through contrived military accidents.
Thieu, mistrustful and indecisive, remained president until 1975, having won a one-candidate election in 1971.

The Johnson administration employed a "policy of minimum candor" in its dealings with the media.
Military information officers sought to manage media coverage by emphasizing stories that portrayed progress in the war.
Over time, this policy damaged the public trust in official pronouncements.
As the media's coverage of the war and that of the Pentagon diverged, a so-called credibility gap developed.
Despite Johnson and Westmoreland publicly proclaiming victory and Westmoreland stating that the "end is coming into view", internal reports in the Pentagon Papers indicate that Viet Cong forces retained strategic initiative and controlled their losses.
Viet Cong attacks against static US positions accounted for 30% of all engagements,
VC/PAVN ambushes and encirclements for 23%, American ambushes against Viet Cong/PAVN forces for 9%, and American forces attacking Viet Cong emplacements for only 5% of all engagements.

===
Tet Offensive ===
In late 1967, the PAVN lured American forces into the hinterlands at Đắk Tô and at the Marine Khe Sanh combat base in Quảng Trị Province, where the U.S. fought a series of battles known as The Hill Fights.
These actions were part of a diversionary strategy meant to draw US forces towards the Central Highlands.
Preparations were underway for the General Offensive, General Uprising, known as Tet Mau Than, or the Tet Offensive, with the intention of Văn Tiến Dũng for forces to launch "direct attacks on the American and puppet nerve centers—Saigon, Huế, Danang, all the cities, towns and main bases...
" Le Duan sought to placate critics of the ongoing stalemate by planning a decisive victory.
He reasoned that this could be achieved through sparking a general uprising within the towns and cities, along with mass defections among ARVN units, who were on holiday leave during the truce period.
The Tet Offensive began on 30 January 1968, as over 100 cities were attacked by over 85,000 VC/PAVN troops, including assaults on key military installations, headquarters, and government buildings and offices, including the U.S. Embassy in Saigon.
U.S. and South Vietnamese forces were initially shocked by the scale, intensity and deliberative planning of the urban offensive, as infiltration of personnel and weapons into the cities was accomplished covertly; the offensive constituted an intelligence failure on the scale of Pearl Harbor.

Most cities were recaptured within weeks, except the former imperial capital of Huế in which PAVN/
Viet Cong troops captured most of the city and citadel except the headquarters of the 1st Division and held on in the fighting for 26 days.
During that time, they had executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Huế civilians and foreigners they considered to be enemy's spies.
In the following Battle of Huế American forces employed massive firepower that left 80 percent of the city in ruins.
Further north, at Quảng Trị City, the ARVN Airborne Division, the 1st Division and a regiment of the US 1st Cavalry Division had managed to hold out and overcome an assault intended to capture the city.
In Saigon, Viet Cong/PAVN fighters had captured areas in and around the city, attacking key installations and the neighbourhood of Cholon before US and ARVN forces dislodged them after three weeks.
During one battle, Peter Arnett reported an infantry commander saying of the Battle of Bến Tre (laid to rubble by U.S. attacks) that "it became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it."

During the first month of the offensive, 1,100 Americans and other allied troops, 2,100 ARVN and 14,000 civilians were killed.
By the end of the first offensive, after two months, nearly 5,000 ARVN and over 4,000 U.S. forces had been killed and 45,820 wounded.

The U.S. claimed 17,000 of the PAVN and Viet Cong had been killed and 15,000 wounded.
A month later a second offensive known as the May Offensive was launched; although less widespread, it demonstrated the Viet Cong were still capable of carrying out orchestrated nationwide offensives.
Two months later a third offensive was launched, the Phase III Offensive.
The PAVN's own official records of their losses across all three offensives was 45,267 killed and 111,179 total casualties.
By then it had become the bloodiest year of the war up to that point.
The failure to spark a general uprising and the lack of defections among the ARVN units meant both war goals of Hanoi had fallen flat at enormous costs.
Prior to Tet, in November 1967, Westmoreland had spearheaded a public relations drive for the Johnson administration to bolster flagging public support.
In a speech before the National Press Club he said a point in the war had been reached "where the end comes into view."
Thus, the public was shocked and confused when Westmoreland's predictions were trumped by the Tet Offensive.
Public approval of his overall performance dropped from 48 percent to 36 percent, and endorsement for the war effort fell from 40 percent to 26 percent.
"
The American public and media began to turn against Johnson as the three offensives contradicted claims of progress made by the Johnson administration and the military.
At one point in 1968, Westmoreland considered the use of nuclear weapons in Vietnam in a contingency plan codenamed Fracture Jaw, which was abandoned when it became known to the White House.
Westmoreland requested 200,000 additional troops, which was leaked to the media, and the subsequent fallout combined with intelligence failures caused him to be removed from command in March 1968, succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams.

On 10 May 1968, peace talks began between the United States and North Vietnam in Paris.
Negotiations stagnated for five months, until Johnson gave orders to halt the bombing of North Vietnam.
At the same time, Hanoi realized it could not achieve a "total victory" and employed a strategy known as "talking while fighting, fighting while talking", in which military offensives would occur concurrently with negotiations.
Johnson declined to run for re-election as his approval rating slumped from 48 to 36 percent.
His escalation of the war in Vietnam divided Americans into warring camps, cost 30,000 American lives by that point and was regarded to have destroyed his presidency.
Refusal to send more U.S. troops to Vietnam was also seen as Johnson's admission that the war was lost.
As Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara noted, "the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead.
"Vietnam was a major political issue during the United States presidential election in 1968.
The election was won by Republican party candidate Richard Nixon who claimed to have a secret plan to end the war.

==
Vietnamization, 1969–1972 ==


===
Nuclear threats and diplomacy ===
U.S. president Richard Nixon began troop withdrawals in 1969.
His plan to build up the ARVN so that it could take over the defense of South Vietnam became known as "Vietnamization".
As the PAVN/VC recovered from their 1968 losses and generally avoided contact, Creighton Abrams conducted operations aimed at disrupting logistics, with better use of firepower and more cooperation with the ARVN.
On 27 October 1969, Nixon had ordered a squadron of 18 B-52s loaded with nuclear weapons to race to the border of Soviet airspace to convince the Soviet Union, in accord with the madman theory, that he was capable of anything to end the Vietnam War.
Nixon had also sought détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China, which decreased global tensions and led to nuclear arms reduction by both superpowers; however, there was disappointment when both sides continued to supply the North Vietnamese with aid.

===
Hanoi's war strategy ===
In September 1969, Ho Chi Minh died at age seventy-nine.
The failure of Tet in sparking a popular uprising caused a shift in Hanoi's war strategy, and the Giáp-Chinh "Northern-First" faction regained control over military affairs from the Lê Duẩn-Hoàng Văn Thái "Southern-First" faction.
An unconventional victory was sidelined in favor of a strategy built on conventional victory through conquest.
Large-scale offensives were rolled back in favour of small-unit and sapper attacks as well as targeting the pacification and Vietnamization strategy.
In the two-year period following Tet, the PAVN had begun its transformation from a fine light-infantry, limited mobility force into a high-mobile and mechanised combined arms force.

===
U.S. domestic controversies ===
The anti-war movement was gaining strength in the United States.
Nixon appealed to the "silent majority" of Americans who he said supported the war without showing it in public.
But revelations of the 1968 My Lai Massacre, in which a U.S. Army unit raped and killed civilians, and the 1969 "Green Beret Affair", where eight Special Forces soldiers, including the 5th Special Forces Group Commander, were arrested for the murder of a suspected double agent, provoked national and international outrage.

In 1971, the Pentagon Papers were leaked to The New York Times.
The top-secret history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed a long series of public deceptions on the part of the U.S. government.
The Supreme Court ruled that its publication was legal.
===
Collapsing U.S. morale ===
Following the Tet Offensive and the decreasing support among the U.S. public for the war, U.S. forces began a period of morale collapse, disillusionment and disobedience.
At home, desertion rates quadrupled from 1966 levels.
Among the enlisted, only 2.5% chose infantry combat positions in 1969–1970.
ROTC enrollment decreased from 191,749 in 1966 to 72,459 by 1971, and reached an all-time low of 33,220 in 1974, depriving U.S. forces of much-needed military leadership.

Open refusal to engage in patrols or carry out orders and disobedience began to emerge during this period, with one notable case of an entire company refusing orders to engage or carry out operations.
Unit cohesion began to dissipate and focused on minimising contact with Viet Cong and PAVN.
A practice known as "sand-bagging" started occurring, where units ordered to go on patrol
would go into the country-side, find a site out of view from superiors and rest while radioing in false coordinates and unit reports.
Drug usage increased rapidly among U.S. forces during this period, as 30% of U.S. troops regularly used marijuana, while a House subcommittee found 10–15% of U.S. troops in Vietnam regularly used high-grade heroin.
From 1969 on, search-and-destroy operations became referred to as "search and evade" or "search and avoid" operations, falsifying battle reports while avoiding guerrilla fighters.
A total of 900 fragging and suspected fragging incidents were investigated, most occurring between 1969 and 1971.
In 1969, field-performance of the U.S. Forces was characterised by lowered morale, lack of motivation, and poor leadership.
The significant decline in U.S. morale was demonstrated by the Battle of FSB Mary Ann in March 1971, in which a sapper attack inflicted serious losses on the U.S. defenders.
William Westmoreland, no longer in command but tasked with investigation of the failure, cited a clear dereliction of duty, lax defensive postures and lack of officers in charge as its cause.
On the collapse of U.S. morale, historian Shelby Stanton wrote:

In the last years of the Army's retreat, its remaining forces were relegated to static security.
The American Army's decline was readily apparent in this final stage.
Racial incidents, drug abuse, combat disobedience, and crime reflected growing idleness, resentment, and frustration...
the fatal handicaps of faulty campaign strategy, incomplete wartime preparation, and the tardy, superficial attempts at Vietnamization.
An entire American army was sacrificed on the battlefield of Vietnam.

===
ARVN taking the lead and U.S. ground-force withdrawal ===
Beginning in 1970, American troops were withdrawn from border areas where most of the fighting took place and instead redeployed along the coast and interior.
US casualties in 1970 were less than half of 1969 casualties after being relegated to less active combat.
While US forces were redeployed, the ARVN took over combat operations throughout the country, with casualties double US casualties in 1969, and more than triple US ones in 1970.
In the post-Tet environment, membership in the South Vietnamese Regional Force and Popular Force militias grew, and they were now more capable of providing village security, which the Americans had not accomplished under Westmoreland.
In 1970, Nixon announced the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops, reducing the number of Americans to 265,500.
By 1970, Viet Cong forces were no longer southern-majority, as nearly 70% of units were northerners.
Between 1969 and 1971 the Viet Cong and some PAVN units had reverted to small unit tactics typical of 1967 and prior instead of nationwide grand offensives.
In 1971, Australia and New Zealand withdrew their soldiers and U.S. troop count was further reduced to 196,700, with a deadline to remove another 45,000 troops by February 1972.
The United States also reduced support troops, and in March 1971 the 5th Special Forces Group, the first American unit deployed to South Vietnam, withdrew to Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
===
Cambodia ===
Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but permitted the PAVN/Viet Cong to use the port of Sihanoukville and the Sihanouk Trail.
In March 1969 Nixon launched a massive secret bombing campaign, called Operation Menu, against communist sanctuaries along the Cambodia/Vietnam border.
Only five high-ranking congressional officials were informed of Operation Menu.
In March 1970, Prince Sihanouk was deposed by his pro-American prime minister Lon Nol, who demanded that North Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia or face military action.

Lon Nol began rounding up Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia into internment camps and massacring them, provoking harsh reactions from both the North Vietnamese and South Vietnamese government.
North Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with deputy leader Nuon Chea.
In April–May 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam by Nuon Chea.
Nguyen Co Thach recalls: "Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days.
"
U.S. and ARVN forces launched the Cambodian Campaign to attack PAVN and Viet Cong bases.
A counter-offensive later that year as part of Operation Chenla II by the PAVN would recapture most of the border areas and decimate most of Lon Nol's forces.

The invasion of Cambodia sparked nationwide U.S. protests as Nixon had promised to deescalate the American involvement.
Four students were killed by National Guardsmen in May 1970 during a protest at Kent State University in Ohio, which provoked further public outrage in the United States.
The reaction to the incident by the Nixon administration was seen as callous and indifferent, reinvigorating the declining anti-war movement.
The U.S. Air Force continued to heavily bomb Cambodia in support of the Cambodian government as part of Operation Freedom Deal.

===
Laos ===
Building up on the success of ARVN units in Cambodia, and further testing the Vietnamization program, the ARVN were tasked to launch Operation Lam Son 719 in February 1971, the first major ground operation aimed directly at attacking the Ho Chi Minh trail by attacking the major crossroad of Tchepone.
This offensive would also be the first time the PAVN would field-test its combined arms force.
The first few days were considered a success but the momentum had slowed after fierce resistance.
Thiệu had halted the general advance, leaving armoured divisions able to surround them.
Thieu had ordered air assault troops to capture Tchepone and withdraw, despite facing four-times larger numbers.
During the withdrawal the PAVN counterattack had forced a panicked rout.
Half of the ARVN troops involved were either captured or killed, half of the ARVN/US support helicopters were downed by anti-aircraft fire and the operation was considered a fiasco, demonstrating operational deficiencies still present within the ARVN.
Nixon and Thieu had sought to use this event to show-case victory simply by capturing Tchepone, and it was spun off as an "operational success".
===
Easter Offensive and Paris Peace Accords, 1972 ==
=
Vietnamization was again tested by the Easter Offensive of 1972, a massive conventional PAVN invasion of South Vietnam.
The PAVN quickly overran the northern provinces and in coordination with other forces attacked from Cambodia, threatening to cut the country in half.
U.S. troop withdrawals continued, but American airpower responded, beginning Operation Linebacker, and the offensive was halted.

The war was central to the 1972 U.S. presidential election as Nixon's opponent, George McGovern, campaigned on immediate withdrawal.
Nixon's National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, had continued secret negotiations with North Vietnam's Lê Đức Thọ and in October 1972 reached an agreement.
President Thieu demanded changes to the peace accord upon its discovery, and when North Vietnam went public with the agreement's details, the Nixon administration claimed they were attempting to embarrass the president.
The negotiations became deadlocked when Hanoi demanded new changes.
To show his support for South Vietnam and force Hanoi back to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a massive bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong 18–29 December 1972.
Nixon pressured Thieu to accept the terms of the agreement, threatening to conclude a bilateral peace deal and cut off American aid while promising an air-response in case of invasion.

On 15 January 1973, all U.S. combat activities were suspended.
Lê Đức Thọ and Henry Kissinger, along with the PRG Foreign Minister Nguyễn Thị Bình and a reluctant President Thiệu, signed the Paris Peace Accords on 27 January 1973.
This officially ended direct U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, created a ceasefire between North Vietnam/PRG and South Vietnam, guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam under the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for elections or a political settlement between the PRG and South Vietnam, allowed 200,000 communist troops to remain in the south, and agreed to a POW exchange.
There was a sixty-day period for the total withdrawal of U.S. forces. "
This article", noted Peter Church, "proved… to be the only one of the Paris Agreements which was fully carried out.
"
All US forces personnel were completely withdrawn by March 1973.

== U.S. exit and final campaigns, 1973–1975 ==
In the lead-up to the ceasefire on 28 January, both sides attempted to maximize the land and population under their control in a campaign known as the War of the flags.
Fighting continued after the ceasefire, this time without US participation, and continued throughout the year.
North Vietnam was allowed to continue supplying troops in the South but only to the extent of replacing expended material.
Later that year the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Thọ, but the North Vietnamese negotiator declined it saying that a true peace did not yet exist.

On 15 March 1973, Nixon implied the US would intervene again militarily if the North launched a full offensive and Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger re-affirmed this position during his June 1973 confirmation hearings.
Public and congressional reaction to Nixon's statement was unfavorable, prompting the U.S. Senate to pass the Case–Church Amendment to prohibit any intervention.

PAVN/VC leaders expected the ceasefire terms would favor their side, but Saigon, bolstered by a surge of U.S. aid received just before the ceasefire went into effect, began to roll back the Viet Cong.
The PAVN/VC responded with a new strategy hammered out in a series of meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Trần Văn Trà.
With U.S. bombings suspended, work on the Ho Chi Minh trail and other logistical structures could proceed unimpeded.
Logistics would be upgraded until the North was in a position to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for the 1975–1976 dry season.
Tra calculated that this date would be Hanoi's last opportunity to strike before Saigon's army could be fully trained.
The PAVN/VC resumed offensive operations when the dry season began in 1973, and by January 1974 had recaptured territory it lost during the previous dry season.

Within South Vietnam, the departure of the US military and the global recession that followed the 1973 oil crisis hurt an economy that was partly dependent on U.S. financial support and troop presence.
After two clashes that left 55 ARVN soldiers dead, President Thieu announced on 4 January 1974, that the war had restarted and that the Paris Peace Accords were no longer in effect.
This was despite there being over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period.

The success of the 1973–1974 dry season offensive inspired Trà to return to Hanoi in October 1974 and plead for a larger offensive the next dry season.
This time, Trà could travel on a drivable highway with regular fueling stops, a vast change from the days when the Ho Chi Minh trail was a dangerous mountain trek.
Giáp, the North Vietnamese defence minister, was reluctant to approve of Trà's plan since a larger offensive might provoke U.S. reaction and interfere with the big push planned for 1976.
Trà appealed over Giáp's head to first secretary Lê Duẩn, who approved of the operation.
Trà's plan called for a limited offensive from Cambodia into Phước Long Province.
The strike was designed to solve local logistical problems, gauge the reaction of South Vietnamese forces, and determine whether the U.S. would return.

At the start of 1975, the South Vietnamese had three times as much artillery and twice the number of tanks and armoured cars as the PAVN.
They also had 1,400 aircraft and a two-to-one numerical superiority in combat troops over the PAVN/VC.
However, the rising oil prices meant that much of this could not be used, and the rushed nature of Vietnamization, intended to cover the US retreat, saw a lack of spare parts, ground-crew and maintenance personnel, rendering most of the equipment given inoperable.
Gerald Ford took over as U.S. president on 9 August 1974 after President Nixon resigned due to the Watergate scandal and Congress cut financial aid to South Vietnam from $1 billion a year to $700 million.
Congress also voted in further restrictions on funding to be phased in through 1975 and to culminate in a total cutoff in 1976.On 13 December 1974, North Vietnamese forces attacked Phước Long.
Phuoc Binh, the provincial capital, fell on 6 January 1975.
Ford desperately asked Congress for funds to assist and re-supply the South before it was overrun.
Congress refused.
The fall of Phuoc Binh and the lack of an American response left the South Vietnamese elite demoralized.

The speed of this success led the Politburo to reassess its strategy.
It was decided that operations in the Central Highlands would be turned over to General Văn Tiến Dũng and that Pleiku should be seized, if possible.
Before he left for the South, Dũng was addressed by Lê Duẩn: "Never have we had military and political conditions so perfect or a strategic advantage as great as we have now."
===
Campaign 275 ===
On 10 March 1975, General Dung launched Campaign 275, a limited offensive into the Central Highlands, supported by tanks and heavy artillery.
The target was Buôn Ma Thuột, in Đắk Lắk Province.
If the town could be taken, the provincial capital of Pleiku and the road to the coast would be exposed for a planned campaign in 1976.
The ARVN proved incapable of resisting the onslaught, and its forces collapsed on 11 March.
Once again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of their success.
Dung now urged the Politburo to allow him to seize Pleiku immediately and then turn his attention to Kon Tum.
He argued that with two months of good weather remaining until the onset of the monsoon, it would be irresponsible to not take advantage of the situation.
President Thiệu, a former general, was fearful that his forces would be cut off in the north by the attacking communists; Thieu ordered a retreat, which soon turned into a bloody rout.
While the bulk of ARVN forces attempted to flee, isolated units fought desperately.
ARVN general Phu abandoned Pleiku and Kon Tum and retreated toward the coast, in what became known as the "column of tears".
On 20 March, Thieu reversed himself and ordered Huế, Vietnam's third-largest city, be held at all costs, and then changed his policy several times.
As the PAVN launched their attack, panic set in, and ARVN resistance withered.
On 22 March, the PAVN opened the siege of Huế.
Civilians flooded the airport and the docks hoping for any mode of escape.
As resistance in Huế collapsed, PAVN rockets rained down on Da Nang and its airport.
By 28 March 35,000 PAVN troops were poised to attack the suburbs.
By 30 March 100,000 leaderless ARVN troops surrendered as the PAVN marched victoriously through Da Nang.
With the fall of the city, the defense of the Central Highlands and Northern provinces came to an end.

===
Final North Vietnamese offensive ===
With the northern half of the country under their control, the Politburo ordered General Dung to launch the final offensive against Saigon.
The operational plan for the Ho Chi Minh Campaign called for the capture of Saigon before
1 May. Hanoi wished to avoid the coming monsoon and prevent any redeployment of ARVN forces defending the capital.
Northern forces, their morale boosted by their recent victories, rolled on, taking Nha Trang, Cam Ranh and Da Lat.
On 7 April, three PAVN divisions attacked Xuân Lộc, 40 miles (64 km)  east of Saigon.
For two bloody weeks, severe fighting raged as the ARVN defenders made a last stand to try to block the PAVN advance.
On 21 April, however, the exhausted garrison was ordered to withdraw towards Saigon.
An embittered and tearful president Thieu resigned on the same day, declaring that the United States had betrayed South Vietnam.
In a scathing attack, he suggested that Kissinger had tricked him into signing the Paris peace agreement two years earlier, promising military aid that failed to materialize.
Having transferred power to Trần Văn Hương on 21 April, he left for Taiwan on 25 April.
After having appealed unsuccessfully to Congress for $700 million in emergency aid for South Vietnam, President Ford had given a televised speech on 23 April, declaring an end to the Vietnam War and all U.S. aid.

By the end of April, the ARVN had collapsed on all fronts except in the Mekong Delta.
Thousands of refugees streamed southward, ahead of the main communist onslaught.
On 27 April 100,000 PAVN troops encircled Saigon.
The city was defended by about 30,000 ARVN troops.
To hasten a collapse and foment panic, the PAVN shelled Tan Son Nhut Airport and forced its closure.
With the air exit closed, large numbers of civilians found that they had no way out.

===
Fall of Saigon ===
Chaos, unrest, and panic broke out as hysterical South Vietnamese officials and civilians scrambled to leave Saigon.
Martial law was declared.
American helicopters began evacuating South Vietnamese, U.S. and foreign nationals from various parts of the city and from the U.S. embassy compound.
Operation Frequent Wind had been delayed until the last possible moment, because of U.S. Ambassador Graham Martin's belief that Saigon could be held and that a political settlement could be reached.
Frequent Wind was the largest helicopter evacuation in history.
It began on 29 April, in an atmosphere of desperation, as hysterical crowds of Vietnamese vied for limited space.
Frequent Wind continued around the clock, as PAVN tanks breached defenses near Saigon.
In the early morning hours of 30 April, the last U.S. Marines evacuated the embassy by helicopter, as civilians swamped the perimeter and poured into the grounds.
On 30 April 1975, PAVN troops entered the city of Saigon and quickly overcame all resistance, capturing key buildings and installations.
A tank from the 304th Division crashed through the gates of the Independence Palace at 11:30 am local time and the Viet Cong flag was raised above it.
President Dương Văn Minh, who had succeeded Huong two days earlier, surrendered to Colonel Bùi Tín.

==
Opposition to U.S. involvement, 1964–1973 ==
During the course of the Vietnam War a large segment of the American population came to be opposed to U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia.
Public opinion steadily turned against the war following 1967 and by 1970 only a third of Americans believed that the U.S. had not made a mistake by sending troops to fight in Vietnam.

Early opposition to U.S. involvement in Vietnam drew its inspiration from the Geneva Conference of 1954.
American support of Diệm in refusing elections was seen as thwarting the democracy America claimed to support.
John F. Kennedy, while senator, opposed involvement in Vietnam.
Nonetheless, it is possible to specify certain groups who led the anti-war movement at its peak in the late 1960s and the reasons why.
Many young people protested because they were the ones being drafted, while others were against the war because the anti-war movement grew increasingly popular among the counterculture.
Some advocates within the peace movement advocated a unilateral withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam.
Opposition to the Vietnam War tended to unite groups opposed to U.S. anti-communism and imperialism, and for those involved with the New Left, such as the Catholic Worker Movement.
Others, such as Stephen Spiro, opposed the war based on the theory of Just War.
Some wanted to show solidarity with the people of Vietnam, such as Norman Morrison emulating the self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức.

High-profile opposition to the Vietnam War increasingly turned to mass protests in an effort to shift U.S. public opinion.
Riots broke out at the 1968 Democratic National Convention during protests against the war.
After news reports of American military abuses, such as the 1968
My Lai Massacre, brought new attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
On 15 October 1969, the Vietnam Moratorium attracted millions of Americans.
The fatal shooting of four students at Kent State University in 1970 led to nationwide university protests.
Anti-war protests declined after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords and the end of the draft in January 1973, and the withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam in the months following.

==
Involvement of other countries ==


===
Pro-Hanoi ===
2,000 years of Chinese-Vietnamese enmity and hundreds of years of Chinese and Russian mutual suspicions were suspended when they united against us in Vietnam.

====
China ====
In 1950, China extended diplomatic recognition to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and sent heavy weapons, as well as military advisers led by Luo Guibo to assist the Viet Minh in its war with the French.
The first draft of the 1954 Geneva Accords was negotiated by French prime minister Pierre Mendès France and Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai who, seeing U.S. intervention coming, urged the Viet Minh to accept a partition at the 17th parallel.
China's support for North Vietnam when the U.S. started to intervene included both financial aid and the deployment of hundreds of thousands of military personnel in support roles.
In the summer of 1962, Mao Zedong agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge.
Starting in 1965, China sent anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions to North Vietnam to repair the damage caused by American bombing, man anti-aircraft batteries, rebuild roads and railroads, transport supplies, and perform other engineering works.
This freed North Vietnamese army units for combat in the South.
China sent 320,000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $180 million.
The Chinese military claims to have caused 38% of American air losses in the war.
China claimed that its military and economic aid to North Vietnam and the Viet Cong totaled $20 billion (approx.
$143 billion adjusted for inflation in 2015) during the Vietnam War.
Included in that aid were donations of 5 million tons of food to North Vietnam (equivalent to North Vietnamese food production in a single year), accounting for 10–15% of the North Vietnamese food supply by the 1970s.
Sino-Soviet relations soured after the Soviets invaded Czechoslovakia in August 1968.
In October, the Chinese demanded North Vietnam cut relations with Moscow, but Hanoi refused.
The Chinese began to withdraw in November 1968 in preparation for a clash with the Soviets, which occurred at Zhenbao Island in March 1969.

In 1967, the Chinese government launched a secret military program named "Project 523".
which intended to find a treatment for malaria to provide the assistance to the PAVN who suffered malaria.
As a result, Chinese scientist Youyou Tu and her collaborators discovered artemisinin.
Tu was awarded the Nobel Prize in 2015 for her contribution on the anti-malaria treatment.

The Chinese also began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to North Vietnam at this time.
China "armed and trained" the Khmer Rouge during the civil war and continued to aid them for years afterward.
The Khmer Rouge launched ferocious raids into Vietnam in 1975–1978.
When Vietnam responded with an invasion that toppled the Khmer Rouge, China launched a brief, punitive invasion of Vietnam in 1979.

====
Soviet Union ====
Soviet ships in the South China Sea gave vital early warnings to PAVN/VC forces in South Vietnam.
The Soviet intelligence ships would pick up American B-52 bombers flying from Okinawa and Guam.
Their airspeed and direction would be noted and then relayed to COSVN, North Vietnam's southern headquarters.
Using airspeed and direction, COSVN analysts would calculate the bombing target and tell any assets to move "perpendicularly to the attack trajectory.
"
These advance warnings gave them time to move out of the way of the bombers, and, while the bombing runs caused extensive damage, because of the early warnings from 1968 to 1970 they did not kill a single military or civilian leader in the headquarters complexes.
The Soviet Union supplied North Vietnam with medical supplies, arms, tanks, planes, helicopters, artillery, anti-aircraft missiles and other military equipment.
Soviet crews fired Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles at U.S. F-4 Phantoms, which were shot down over Thanh Hóa in 1965.
Over a dozen Soviet soldiers lost their lives in this conflict.
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russian officials acknowledged that the Soviet Union had stationed up to 3,000 troops in Vietnam during the war.

Some Russian sources give more specific numbers: Between 1953 and 1991, the hardware donated by the Soviet Union included 2,000 tanks, 1,700 APCs, 7,000 artillery guns, over 5,000 anti-aircraft guns, 158 surface-to-air missile launchers, 120 helicopters.
During the war, the Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450 million.
From July 1965 to the end of 1974, fighting in Vietnam was observed by some 6,500 officers and generals, as well as more than 4,500 soldiers and sergeants of the Soviet Armed Forces.
In addition, Soviet military schools and academies began training Vietnamese soldiers—in all more than 10,000 military personnel.
The KGB had also helped develop the signals intelligence (SIGINT) capabilities of the North Vietnamese, through an operation known as Vostok (also known as Phương Đông, meaning "Orient" and named after the Vostok 1).
The Vostok program was a counterintelligence and espionage program.
These programs were pivotal in detecting and defeating CIA and South Vietnamese commando teams sent into North Vietnam, as they were detected and captured.
The Soviets helped the Ministry of Public Security recruit foreigners within high-level diplomatic circles among the Western-allies of the US, under a clandestine program known as "B12,MM" which produced thousands of high-level documents for nearly a decade, including targets of B-52 strikes.
In 1975, the SIGINT services had broken information from Western US-allies in Saigon, determining that the US would not intervene to save South Vietnam from collapse.

====
Czechoslovakia ====
The Czechoslovak Socialist Republic was a member of the Warsaw Pact and sent significant aid to North Vietnam, both prior to and after the Prague Spring.
The Czechoslovakian government created committees which sought to not only promote and establish peace, but also to promote victory for Viet Cong and PAVN forces.
Czech-made equipment and military aid would increase significantly following the Prague Spring.
Czechoslovakia continued to send tens of thousands of Czech-made rifles as well as mortar and artillery throughout the war.
In general, Czechoslovakia was aligned with European leftist movements, and there were simultaneous protests demonstrating against the Soviet intervention in Prague and the US intervention in Vietnam.
Cooperation with Czechoslovakia on the development of North Vietnamese air capabilities began as early as 1956.
Czechoslovak instructors and trainers instructed the VPAF in China and helped them develop a modernised air force, with the Czech-built Aero Ae-45 and Aero L-29 Delfín alongside Zlín Z 26 aircraft utilised significantly for training, and regarded as preferential to Soviet-built Yakovlev Yak-3 as training aircraft.

====
North Korea ====
As a result of a decision of the Korean Workers' Party in October 1966, in early 1967, North Korea (officially known as Democratic People's Republic of Korea) sent a fighter squadron to North Vietnam to back up the North Vietnamese 921st and 923rd Fighter Squadrons defending Hanoi.
The North Koreans stayed through 1968, and 200 pilots were reported to have served.
In addition, at least two anti-aircraft artillery regiments were sent as well.
====
Cuba ====
The contributions to North Vietnam by the Republic of Cuba under Fidel Castro have been recognized several times by representatives of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
Castro mentioned in his discourses the Batallón Girón (Giron Battalion) as comprising the Cuban contingent that served as military advisors during the war.
In this battalion, the Cubans were aided by Nguyễn Thị Định, founding member of the Viet Cong, who later became the first female major general in the PAVN.There are numerous allegations by former U.S. prisoners of war that Cuban military personnel were present at North Vietnamese prison facilities during the war and that they participated in torture activities.
Witnesses to this include Senator John McCain, the 2008 U.S. presidential candidate and a former Vietnam prisoner of war, according to his 1999 book Faith of My Fathers.

====
Other Eastern Bloc countries ====
The Ministry of Public Security of Vietnam (
Bộ Công An) states that there was special interest towards the Stasi of East Germany in establishing an intelligence and security apparatus, particularly since the Stasi was well-regarded and considered as "industrial, modern, and (with a) scientific working-style".
In official Vietnamese language histories on the Vietnamese Ministry of Public Security, the assistance provided by the Soviet and East German intelligence services to Vietnam is usually rated as the most important within the socialist bloc.
East Germany had also provided a substantial amount of aid to help North Vietnam duplicate "Green Dragon" identity cards, which were created by Saigon in order to identify North Vietnamese combatants and were difficult to duplicate.
East German authorities had also begun providing material and technical aid to help develop and modernise the North Vietnamese economy and military.
In addition, East Germany had also vigorously denounced the US war effort, and had reaped significant international and diplomatic standing as a result of its anti-war campaigns.
Romania was also among primary supporters of North Vietnam during the war in political, economic and military terms.
Contemporarily, the Eastern Bloc country was also known for its role in the mediation activities in the mid-1960s, resulting in what became known as the "Trinh Signal" in January 1967, in which Hanoi accepted the possibility of negotiation with Washington.
Bulgaria committed their charge-free military and economic supplies to North Vietnam in a bilateral agreement signed in 1972.
Bulgarian military aid had already been provided to the latter since 1967.
Similar conducts was undertaken by Hungary, which was reaffirmed in mutual visits of Hungary and North Vietnam in 1972 and 1973.
Hungary also expressed their support through their representatives at the International Commission of Control and Supervision, a body established to supervise the implementation of the Paris Peace Accords.

===
Pro-Saigon ===
As South Vietnam was formally part of a military alliance with the US, Australia, New Zealand, France, the UK, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines, the alliance was invoked during the war.
The UK, France and Pakistan declined to participate, and South Korea and Taiwan were non-treaty participants.

====
South Korea ====
On the anti-communist side, South Korea (a.k.a.
the Republic of Korea, ROK) had the second-largest contingent of foreign troops in South Vietnam after the United States.
In November 1961, President Park Chung-hee proposed South Korean participation in the war to John F. Kennedy, but Kennedy disagreed as they were not SEATO treaty members.
On 1 May 1964, Lyndon Johnson agreed to permit South Korean participation under the Many Flags Program in return for monetary compensation.
The first South Korean troops began arriving in 1964 and large combat formations began arriving a year later.
The ROK Marine Corps dispatched their 2nd Marine Brigade, while the ROK Army sent the Capital Division and later the 9th Infantry Division.
In August 1966, after the arrival of the 9th Division, the Koreans established a corps command, the Republic of Korea Forces Vietnam Field Command, near I Field Force at Nha Trang.
State Department reports publicly questioned the usefulness of ROK forces in the conflict, as they have "appeared to have been reluctant to undertake offensive operations, and are only useful in guarding a small sector of the populated area".
State department reports furthermore state that ROK forces engaged in systemic, well-organised corruption in diverting US-equipment, and that actual security was often provided by South Vietnamese Regional Forces, which lacked organic firepower and heavy artillery but served as a buffer between Korean units and the PAVN/VC.
In addition, a RAND author conducting studies in South Vietnam in 1970 alleged that ROK forces had a "deliberate, systematic policy of committing atrocities", prompting civilians to leave ROK-controlled sectors.
The conduct of ROK forces often emboldened and strengthened the Viet Cong, adding ranks from an otherwise neutral population and undermining efforts to defeat the insurgency overall.
Approximately 320,000 South Korean soldiers were sent to Vietnam, each serving a one-year tour of duty.
Maximum troop levels peaked at 50,000 in 1968, however all were withdrawn by 1973.
About 5,099 South Koreans were killed and 10,962 wounded during the war.
South Korea claimed to have killed 41,000 Viet Cong.
The United States paid South Korean soldiers 236 million dollars for their efforts in Vietnam, and South Korean GNP increased five-fold during the war.
====
Thailand ====
Thai Army formations, including the Royal Thai Volunteer Regiment (Queen's Cobras) and later the Royal Thai Army Expeditionary Division (Black Panthers), saw action in South Vietnam between 1965 and 1971.
Thai forces saw much more action in the covert war in Laos between 1964 and 1972, though Thai regular formations there were heavily outnumbered by the irregular "volunteers" of the CIA-sponsored Police Aerial Reconnaissance Units or PARU, who carried out reconnaissance activities on the western side of the Ho Chi Minh trail.

====
Australia and New Zealand ====
Australia and New Zealand, close allies of the United States and members of the SEATO and the ANZUS military cooperation treaty, sent ground troops to Vietnam.
Both nations had gained experience in counterinsurgency and jungle warfare during the Malayan Emergency and World War II, and their governments subscribed to the domino theory.
New Zealand was, however, a reluctant participant.
Officials expected a foreign intervention to fail, were concerned that they would be supporting a corrupt regime, and did not want to further stretch their country's small military (which was already deployed to Malaysia).
In the end, though, a desire to prove their commitment to the ANZUS alliance and discourage an American withdrawal from Southeast Asia necessitated a military commitment.
Australia began by sending advisors to Vietnam in 1962, and combat troops were committed in 1965.
New Zealand began by sending a detachment of engineers and an artillery battery, later sending special forces and regular infantry, which were attached to Australian formations.
Australia's peak commitment was 7,672 combat troops and New Zealand's 552.
Around 50,190 Australian personnel were involved during the war, of which 521 were killed and more than 3,000 wounded.
Approximately 3,500 New Zealanders served in Vietnam, with 37 killed and 187 wounded.
Most Australians and New Zealanders served in the 1st Australian Task Force in Phước Tuy Province.
Australia, with decades of experience from both the Malayan Emergency and its AATTV role in 1962, recognised the necessity of a true counter-insurgency, which relied on providing village-level security, establishing civilian trust and economic incentives and improving ARVN capabilities.
This brought Australian commanders into conflict with Westmoreland's conventional attrition warfare approach, since Australian ground forces were required to follow US doctrine.
Nevertheless, Australian forces were generally the most capable at counter-insurgency, and they helped to train Regional Forces despite being under significant doctrinal constraints.

====
Philippines ====
Some 10,450 Filipino troops were dispatched to South Vietnam and primarily supported medical and other civilian pacification projects.
These forces operated under the designation a or Philippine Civic Action Group-Vietnam.
The naval base at Subic Bay was used for the U.S. Seventh Fleet from 1964 until the end of the war in 1975.
Subic Bay and Clark Air Base achieved maximum functionality during the war, as well as supporting an estimated 80,000 locals in allied tertiary businesses that ranged from shoe making to prostitution.

====
Taiwan ====
Beginning in November 1967, Taiwan secretly operated a cargo transport detachment to assist the United States and South Vietnam.
Taiwan also provided military training units for the South Vietnamese diving units, later known as the Lien
Doi Nguoi Nhai (LDMN) or "Frogman unit" in English.
Military commandos from Taiwan were captured by North Vietnamese forces three times trying to infiltrate North Vietnam.

===
Neutral and non-belligerent nations ===


====
Canada ====
Contributor to the three-nation monitoring-force, the International Control Commission (ICC/ICSC) [1954–1973] and, briefly, its successor: the International Commission for Control and Supervision (ICCS)
[1973-1973].
Officially, Canada did not have state-sanctioned combat involvement in the Vietnam War, and diplomatically, it was "non-belligerent", though the sympathies of the state and many of its citizens were well-understood by both sides.
The Vietnam War entry in The Canadian Encyclopedia asserts that Canada's record on the truce commissions was a pro-Saigon partisan one.

====
Poland ====
Contributor to the three-nation monitoring-force, the International Control Commission (ICC/ICSC)
[1954–1973] and its successor: the International Commission for Control and Supervision (ICCS)
[1973–1975].
The Polish People's Republic had played a substantive role in brokering and serving as an intermediary for peace-talks between Hanoi and Saigon, as part of a delegation under the International Control Commission established under the Geneva Accords.
Recent evidence has emerged that Poland played an early role in attempting to broker talks between Ngô Đình Nhu and the Diem regime and Hanoi in 1963 in an effort to prevent the expansion of the war, given that Polish representatives were the only communist nation present in Saigon and had acted as a broker and representative for Hanoi.
====
Spain ====
President Johnson had asked General Francisco Franco to contribute a military contingent to the war effort.
After lengthy debate between his ministers, Franco took the advice of veteran General Agustín Muñoz Grandes.
Franco was even more cautious in committing himself to the US cause and finally decided to send a medical team of around thirty people, and under strict secrecy.
The first group of medical soldiers, including four doctors, seven nurses and one officer in charge of military supplies, arrived in Vietnam in 1966 and worked at Truong Cong Dinh hospital in the Gò Công district.
From 1966 to 1971 three other groups, totalling nearly 100 Spaniards, worked at the hospital.

====
Brazil
====
Brazil, under a U.S.-backed military regime, officially supported the United States' position in South Vietnam and contributed a medical team and supplies to the country.
It was the only Latin American country with a presence in the region.

==
United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (FULRO) ==
The ethnic minority peoples of South Vietnam, like the Montagnards (Degar) in the Central Highlands, the Hindu and Muslim Cham, and the Buddhist Khmer Krom, were actively recruited in the war.
There was an active strategy of recruitment and favorable treatment of Montagnard tribes for the Viet Cong, as they were pivotal for control of infiltration routes.
Some groups had split off and formed the United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (French:
Front Uni de Lutte des Races Opprimées, acronym: FULRO) to fight for autonomy or independence.
FULRO fought against both the South Vietnamese and the Viet Cong, later proceeding to fight against the unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam after the fall of South Vietnam.

During the war, the South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem began a program to settle ethnic Vietnamese Kinh on Montagnard lands in the Central Highlands region.
This provoked a backlash from the Montagnards, some joining the Viet Cong as a result.
The Cambodians under both the pro-China King Sihanouk and the pro-American Lon Nol supported their fellow co-ethnic Khmer Krom in South Vietnam, following an anti-ethnic Vietnamese policy.
Following Vietnamization many Montagnard groups and fighters were incorporated into the Vietnamese Rangers as border sentries.

==
War crimes ==
A large number of war crimes took place during the Vietnam War.
War crimes were committed by both sides during the conflict and included rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, the widespread use of torture, and the murder of prisoners of war.
Additional common crimes included theft, arson, and the destruction of property not warranted by military necessity.

===
South Vietnamese, Korean and American ===
In 1968, the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) was established by the Pentagon task force set up in the wake of the My Lai Massacre, to attempt to ascertain the veracity of emerging claims of war crimes by U.S. armed forces in Vietnam, during the Vietnam War period.

Of the war crimes reported to military authorities, sworn statements by witnesses and status reports indicated that 320 incidents had a factual basis.
The substantiated cases included 7 massacres between 1967 and 1971 in which at least 137 civilians were killed; seventy eight further attacks targeting non-combatants resulting in at least 57 deaths, 56 wounded and 15 sexually assaulted; and 141 cases of U.S. soldiers torturing civilian detainees or prisoners of war with fists, sticks, bats, water or electric shock.
Rummel estimated that American forces committed around 5,500 democidal killings between 1960 and 1972, from a range of between 4,000 and 10,000 killed.
Journalism in the ensuing years has documented other overlooked and uninvestigated war crimes involving every army division that was active in Vietnam, including the atrocities committed by Tiger Force.

U.S. forces established numerous free-fire zones as a tactic to prevent Viet Cong fighters from sheltering in South Vietnamese villages.
Such practice, which involved the assumption that any individual appearing in the designated zones was an enemy combatant that could be freely targeted by weapons, is regarded by journalist Lewis M. Simons as "a severe violation of the laws of war".
Nick Turse, in his 2013 book, Kill Anything that Moves, argues that a relentless drive toward higher body counts, a widespread use of free-fire zones, rules of engagement where civilians who ran from soldiers or helicopters could be viewed as Viet Cong and a widespread disdain for Vietnamese civilians led to massive civilian casualties and endemic war crimes inflicted by U.S. troops.
One example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, an operation by the 9th Infantry Division, which was described by John Paul Vann as, in effect, "many My Lais".
A report by Newsweek magazine suggested that at least 5,000 civilians may have been killed during six months of the operation, and there were approximately 748 recovered weapons.
R.J. Rummel estimated that 39,000 were killed by South Vietnam during the Diem-era in democide from a range of between 16,000 and 167,000 South Vietnamese civilians; for 1964 to 1975, Rummel estimated 50,000 people were killed in democide, from a range of between 42,000 and 128,000.
Thus, the total for 1954 to 1975 is 81,000, from a range of between 57,000 and 284,000 deaths caused by South Vietnam.
Benjamin Valentino attributes possibly 110,000–310,000 "counter-guerrilla mass killings" of non-combatants to U.S. and South Vietnamese forces during the war.
An estimated 26,000 to 41,000 civilian members of the PRG/Viet Cong termed "VC Infrastructure" were killed during the Phoenix Program, by US and South Vietnamese intelligence and security, with an unknown number being innocent civilians.

Torture and ill-treatment were frequently applied by the South Vietnamese to POWs as well as civilian prisoners.
During their visit to the Con Son Prison in 1970, U.S. congressmen Augustus F. Hawkins and William R. Anderson witnessed detainees either confined in minute "tiger cages" or chained to their cells, and provided with poor-quality food.
A group of American doctors inspecting the prison in the same year found many inmates suffering symptoms resulting from forced immobility and torture.
During their visits to transit detention facilities under American administration in 1968 and 1969, the International Red Cross recorded many cases of torture and inhumane treatment before the captives were handed over to South Vietnamese authorities.
Torture was conducted by the South Vietnamese government in collusion with the CIA.South Korean forces were also accused of war crimes.
One documented event was the Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade reportedly killed between 69 and 79 civilians on 12 February 1968 in Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất village, Điện Bàn District, Quảng Nam Province.
South Korean forces are also accused of perpetrating other massacres, namely:
Bình Hòa massacre, Binh Tai Massacre and
Hà
My massacre.
===
North Vietnamese and Viet Cong ===
Ami Pedahzur has written that "the overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century", based on the definition of terrorists as a non-state actor, and examining targeted killings and civilian deaths which are estimated at over 18,000 from 1966 to 1969.
The US Department of Defense estimates the VC/PAVN had conducted 36,000 murders and almost 58,000 kidnappings from 1967 to 1972, c. 1973.
Statistics for 1968–1972 suggest that "about 80 percent of the terrorist victims were ordinary civilians and only about 20 percent were government officials, policemen, members of the self-defence forces or pacification cadres.
"
Benjamin Valentino attributes 45,000–80,000 "terrorist mass killings" of non-combatants to the Viet Cong during the war.
Viet Cong tactics included the frequent mortaring of civilians in refugee camps, and the placing of mines on highways frequented by villagers taking their goods to urban markets.
Some mines were set only to go off after heavy vehicle passage, causing extensive slaughter aboard packed civilian buses.
Notable Viet Cong atrocities include the massacre of over 3,000 unarmed civilians at Huế during the Tet Offensive and the killing of 252 civilians during the Đắk Sơn massacre.
155,000 refugees fleeing the final North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed or abducted on the road to Tuy Hòa in 1975.
According to Rummel, PAVN and Viet Cong troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954 and 1975 in South Vietnam, from a range of between 106,000 and 227,000 (50,000 of which were reportedly killed by shelling and mortar on ARVN forces during the retreat to Tuy Hoa).
North Vietnam was also known for its abusive treatment of American POWs, most notably in Hỏa Lò Prison (aka the Hanoi Hilton), where torture was employed to extract confessions.

==
Women ==


===
American nurses ===
American women served on active duty performing a variety of jobs.
Early in 1963, the Army Nurse Corps (ANC) launched Operation Nightingale, an intensive effort to recruit nurses to serve in Vietnam.
First Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only female military nurse to be killed by enemy gunfire during the war, on 8 June 1969.
One civilian doctor, Eleanor Ardel Vietti, who was captured by Viet Cong on 30 May 1962, in Buôn Ma Thuột, remains the only American woman unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.

Although a small number of women were assigned to combat zones, they were never allowed directly in the field of battle.
Unlike the men, the women who served in the military were solely volunteers.
They faced a plethora of challenges, one of which was the relatively small number of female soldiers.
Living in a male-dominated environment created tensions between the sexes.
By 1973, approximately 7,500 women had served in Vietnam in the Southeast Asian theater.
American women serving in Vietnam were subject to societal stereotypes.
To address this problem, the ANC released advertisements portraying women in the ANC as "proper, professional and well protected.
"
This effort to highlight the positive aspects of a nursing career reflected the feminism of the 1960s–1970s in the United States.
Although female military nurses lived in a heavily male environment, very few cases of sexual harassment were ever reported.

===
Vietnamese soldiers ===
Unlike the American women who went to Vietnam, both South and North Vietnamese women were enlisted and served in combat zones.
Women were enlisted in both the PAVN and the Viet Cong, many joining due to the promises of female equality and a greater social role within society.
Some women also served for the PAVN and Viet Cong intelligence services.
The deputy military commander of the Viet Cong, was a female general, Nguyễn Thị Định.
All-female units were present throughout the entirety of the war, ranging from front-line combat troops to anti-aircraft, scout and reconnaissance units.
Female combat squads were present in the Cu Chi theatre.
They also fought in the Battle of Hue.
In addition, large numbers of women served in North Vietnam, manning anti-aircraft batteries, providing village security and serving in logistics on the Ho Chi Minh trail.
Other women were embedded with troops on the front-lines, serving as doctors and medical personnel.
Đặng Thùy Trâm became renowned after her diary was published following her death.
The Foreign Minister for the Viet Cong and later the PRG was also a woman, Nguyễn Thị Bình.

In South Vietnam, many women voluntarily served in the ARVN's Women's Armed Force Corps (WAFC) and various other Women's corps in the military.
Some, like in the WAFC, served in combat with other soldiers.
Others served as nurses and doctors in the battlefield and in military hospitals, or served in South Vietnam or America's intelligence agencies.
During Diệm's presidency, his sister-in-law Madame Nhu was the commander of the WAFC.
Many women joined provincial and voluntary village-level militia in the People's Self-Defense Force especially during the ARVN expansions later in the war.

During the war more than one million rural people migrated or fled the fighting in the South Vietnamese countryside to the cities, especially Saigon.
Among the internal refugees were many young women who became the ubiquitous "bar girls" of wartime South Vietnam, "hawking her wares—be that cigarettes, liquor, or herself" to American and allied soldiers.
American bases were ringed by bars and brothels.8,040 Vietnamese women came to the United States as war brides between 1964 and 1975.
Many mixed-blood Amerasian children were left behind when their American fathers returned to the United States after their tour of duty in South Vietnam; 26,000 of them were permitted to immigrate to the United States in the 1980s and 1990s.

===
Journalists ===
Women also played a prominent role as front-line reporters in the conflict, directly reporting on the conflict as it occurred.
A number of women volunteered on the North Vietnamese side as embedded journalists, including author Lê Minh Khuê embedded with PAVN forces, on the Ho Chi Minh trail as well as on combat fronts.
A number of prominent Western journalists were also involved in covering the war, with Dickey Chapelle being among the first as well as the first American female reporter killed in a war.
The French-speaking Australian journalist Kate Webb was captured along with a photographer and others by the Viet Cong in Cambodia and travelled into Laos with them; they were released back into Cambodia after 23 days of captivity.
Webb would be the first Western journalist to be captured and released, as well as cover the perspective of the Viet Cong in her memoir On The Other Side.
Another French-speaking journalist, Catherine Leroy, was briefly captured and released by North Vietnamese forces during the Battle of Huế, capturing some famous photos from the battles that would appear on the cover of Life Magazine.

==
Black servicemen ==
The experience of American military personnel of African ancestry during the Vietnam War had received significant attention.
For example, the website "African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War" compiles examples of such coverage, as does the print and broadcast work of journalist Wallace Terry whose book Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans (1984), includes observations about the impact of the war on the black community in general and on black servicemen specifically.
Points he makes on the latter topic include: the higher proportion of combat casualties in Vietnam among African American servicemen than among American soldiers of other races, the shift toward and different attitudes of black military careerists versus black draftees, the discrimination encountered by black servicemen "on the battlefield in decorations, promotion and duty assignments" as well as their having to endure "the racial insults, cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades"—and
the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside, during the war and after America's withdrawal.
Civil rights leaders protested the disproportionate casualties and the overrepresentation in hazardous duty and combat roles experienced by African American servicemen, prompting reforms that were implemented beginning in 1967–68.
As a result, by the war's completion in 1975, black casualties had declined to 12.5% of US combat deaths, approximately equal to percentage of draft-eligible black men, though still slightly higher than the 10% who served in the military.

==
Weapons ==
During the early stages of the war, the Viet Cong mainly sustained itself with captured arms; these were often of American manufacture or were crude, makeshift weapons used alongside shotguns made of galvanized pipes.
Most arms were captured from poorly defended ARVN militia outposts.
In 1967, all Viet Cong battalions were reequipped with arms of Soviet design such as the AK-47 assault rifle, carbines and the RPG-2 anti-tank weapon.
Their weapons were principally of Chinese or Soviet manufacture.
In the period up to the conventional phase in 1970, the Viet Cong and PAVN were primarily limited to 81 mm mortars, recoilless rifles, and small arms and had significantly lighter equipment and firepower in comparison with the US arsenal.
They relied on ambushes, superior stealth, planning, marksmanship, and small-unit tactics to face the disproportionate US technological advantage.

After the Tet Offensive, many PAVN units incorporated light tanks such as the Type 62 Type 59 tank.
,
BTR-60, Type 60 artillery, amphibious tanks (such as the PT-76) and integrated into new war doctrines as a mobile combined-arms force.
The PAVN started receiving experimental Soviet weapons against ARVN forces, including MANPADS 9K32 Strela-2 and anti-tank missiles, 9M14 Malyutka.
By 1975, they had fully transformed from the strategy of mobile light-infantry and using the people's war concept used against the United States.
The US service rifle was initially the M14.
The M14 was a powerful, accurate rifle, but it was heavy, hard-recoiling, and especially unwieldy in jungle fighting, as it was unsuited for the combat conditions, often suffering from feed failure.
It was gradually replaced by the M16 rifle, designed by Eugene Stoner, between 1964 and 1970.
When first deployed, the M16 also suffered from a propensity to jam in combat, leaving the soldier defenseless and potentially killing him.
According to a congressional report, the jamming was not related to operator error or to an inherent flaw in the rifle, but instead due to a change in the gunpowder to be used in the rifle's cartridges, which led to rapid powder fouling of the action and failures to extract or feed cartridges.
This decision, made after "inadequate testing", proved that "the safety of soldiers was a secondary consideration."
The issue was solved in early 1968 with the issuance of the M16A1, featuring a chrome-plated bore, which reduced fouling, and the introduction of a cleaner-burning powder.
Incorporating features from the German FG-42 and MG-42, the U.S. replaced their earlier M1919
Browning in most roles with the M60 machine gun, including on helicopters where it was used for suppressive fire.
While its issues were not as severe as they were in the M14 or M16, the M60 still could fail to fire at crucial times – spent casings could get stuck inside of the chamber, meaning the barrel would have to be replaced before it could fire again.

The AC-130 "Spectre" Gunship and the UH-1 "Huey" gunship were used frequently during the war.
The AC-130 was a heavily armed ground-attack aircraft variant of the C-130 Hercules transport plane, while the Huey is a military helicopter powered by a single, turboshaft engine; approximately 7,000 UH-1 aircraft saw service in Vietnam.
The U.S. heavily armored, 90 mm
M48A3 Patton tank saw extensive action during the Vietnam War, and over 600 were deployed with US Forces.
Ground forces also had access to B-52 and F-4 Phantom II and other aircraft to launch napalm, white phosphorus, tear gas, chemical weapons, precision-guided munition and cluster bombs.

===
Radio communications ===
The Vietnam War was the first conflict where U.S. forces had secure voice communication equipment available at the tactical level.
The National Security Agency ran a crash program to provide U.S. forces with a family of security equipment, codenamed NESTOR, fielding 17,000 units initially; eventually 30,000 units were produced.
However, limitations of the units, including poor voice quality, reduced range, annoying time delays and logistical support issues, led to only one unit in ten being used.
While many in the U.S. military believed that the Viet Cong and PAVN would not be able to exploit insecure communications, interrogation of captured communication intelligence units showed they could understand the jargon and codes used in real time and were often able to warn their side of impending U.S. actions.

===
Extent of U.S. bombings ===
The U.S. dropped over 7 million tons of bombs on Indochina during the war, more than triple the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II and more than ten times the amount dropped by the U.S. during the Korean War.
500 thousand tons were dropped on Cambodia, 1 million tons were dropped on North Vietnam, and 4 million tons were dropped on South Vietnam.
On a per capita basis, the 2 million tons dropped on Laos
make it the most heavily bombed country in history; The New York Times noted this was "nearly a ton for every person in Laos.
"
Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons, and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010.Former
U.S. Air Force official Earl Tilford has recounted "repeated bombing runs of a lake in central Cambodia.
The B-52s literally dropped their payloads in the lake."
The Air Force ran many missions of this kind to secure additional funding during budget negotiations, so the tonnage expended does not directly correlate with the resulting damage.

==
Aftermath ==


===
Events in Southeast Asia ===
On 2 July 1976, North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would, in President Nixon's words, "massacre the civilians there [South Vietnam] by the millions," there is a widespread consensus that no mass executions took place.
However, in the years following the war, a vast number of South Vietnamese were sent to re-education camps where many endured torture, starvation, and disease while being forced to perform hard labor.
According to Amnesty International Report 1979, this figure varied considerably depend on different observers: "[...
] included such figures as "50,000 to 80,000" (Le Monde, 19 April 1978), "150,000" (Reuters from Bien Hoa, 2 November 1977), "150,000 to 200,000" (Washington Post, 20 December 1978), and "300,000" (Agence France Presse from Hanoi, 12 February 1978).
"
Such variations may be because "Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside."
According to a native observer, 443,360 people had to register for a period in re-education camps in Saigon alone, and while some of them were released after a few days, others stayed there for more than a decade.

Gabriel García Márquez, a Nobel Prize winning writer, described South Vietnam as a "False paradise" after the war, when he visited in 1980: "The cost of this delirium was stupefying: 360,000 people mutilated, a million widows, 500,000 prostitutes, 500,000 drug addicts, a million tuberculous and more than a million soldiers of the old regime, impossible to rehabilitate into a new society.
Ten percent of the population of Ho Chi Minh City was suffering from serious venereal diseases when the war ended, and there were 4 million illiterates throughout the South."
The US used its security council veto to block Vietnam's recognition by the United Nations three times, an obstacle to the country receiving international aid.
By 1975, the North Vietnamese had lost influence over the Khmer Rouge.
Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia, fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975.
Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge would eventually kill 1–3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million, in one of the bloodiest genocides in history.

The relationship between Vietnam and Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) escalated right after the end of the war.
In response to the Khmer Rouge taking over Phu Quoc on 17 April and Tho Chu on 4 May 1975 and the belief that they were responsible for the disappearance of 500 Vietnamese natives on Tho Chu, Vietnam launched a counterattack to take back these islands.
After several failed attempts to negotiate by both sides, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea in 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge, who were being supported by China, in the Cambodian–Vietnamese War.
In response, China invaded Vietnam in 1979.
The two countries fought a brief border war, known as the Sino-Vietnamese War.
From 1978 to 1979, some 450,000 ethnic Chinese left Vietnam by boat as refugees or were expelled.

The Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in December 1975, establishing the Lao People's Democratic Republic under the leadership of a member of the royal family, Souphanouvong.
The change in regime was "quite peaceful, a sort of Asiatic 'velvet revolution'"—although 30,000 former officials were sent to reeducation camps, often enduring harsh conditions for several years.
The conflict between Hmong rebels and the Pathet Lao continued in isolated pockets.

The millions of cluster bombs the US dropped on Southeast Asia rendered the landscape hazardous.
In Laos alone, some 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country, rendering vast swathes of land impossible to cultivate and killing or maiming 50 Laotians every year.
It is estimated that the explosives still remaining buried in the ground will not be removed entirely for the next few centuries.
Over 3 million people left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the Indochina refugee crisis.
Most Asian countries were unwilling to accept these refugees, many of whom fled by boat and were known as boat people.
Between 1975 and 1998, an estimated 1.2 million refugees from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries resettled in the United States, while Canada, Australia, and France resettled over 500,000.
China accepted 250,000 people.
Of all the countries of Indochina, Laos experienced the largest refugee flight in proportional terms, as 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million crossed the border into Thailand.
Included among their ranks were "about 90 percent" of Laos's "intellectuals, technicians, and officials.
"
An estimated 200,000 to 400,000 Vietnamese boat people died at sea, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

===
Effect on the United States ===


====
Views on the war ====
In the post-war era, Americans struggled to absorb the lessons of the military intervention.
As General Maxwell Taylor, one of the principal architects of the war, noted, "First, we didn't know ourselves.
We thought that we were going into another Korean War, but this was a different country.
Secondly, we didn't know our South Vietnamese allies…
And we knew less about North Vietnam.
Who was Ho Chi Minh?
Nobody really knew.
So, until we know the enemy and know our allies and know ourselves, we'd better keep out of this kind of dirty business.
It's very dangerous."
President Ronald Reagan coined the term "Vietnam Syndrome" to describe the reluctance of the American public and politicians to support further military interventions abroad after Vietnam.
According to a 2004 Gallup poll, 62 percent of Americans believed it was an unjust war.
US public polling in 1978 revealed that nearly 72% of Americans believed the war was "fundamentally wrong and immoral.
"
Nearly a decade later, the number fell to 66%.
In the past three decades, surveys have consistently shown that only around 35% of Americans believe that the war was fundamentally wrong and immoral.
When surveyed in 2000, one third of Americans believed that the war was a noble cause.
Failure of the war is often placed at different institutions and levels.
Some have suggested that the failure of the war was due to political failures of U.S. leadership.
The official history of the United States Army noted that "tactics have often seemed to exist apart from larger issues, strategies, and objectives.
Yet in Vietnam the Army experienced tactical success and strategic failure...
success rests not only on military progress but on correctly analysing the nature of the particular conflict, understanding the enemy's strategy, and assessing the strengths and weaknesses of allies.
A new humility and a new sophistication may form the best parts of a complex heritage left to the Army by the long, bitter war in Vietnam."

Others point to a failure of U.S. military doctrine.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that "the achievement of a military victory by U.S. forces in Vietnam was indeed a dangerous illusion.
"
The inability to bring Hanoi to the bargaining table by bombing also illustrated another U.S. miscalculation, and demonstrated the limitations of U.S. military abilities in achieving political goals.
As Army Chief of Staff Harold Keith Johnson noted, "if anything came out of Vietnam, it was that air power couldn't do the job.
"
Even General William Westmoreland admitted that the bombing had been ineffective.
As he remarked, "I still doubt that the North Vietnamese would have relented.
"
U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger wrote in a secret memo to President Gerald Ford that "in terms of military tactics, we cannot help draw the conclusion that our armed forces are not suited to this kind of war.
Even the Special Forces who had been designed for it could not prevail.
"Hanoi had persistently sought unification of the country since the Geneva Accords, and the effects of U.S. bombings had negligible impact on the goals of the North Vietnamese government.
The effects of U.S. bombing campaigns had mobilised the people throughout North Vietnam and mobilised international support for North Vietnam due to the perception of a super-power attempting to bomb a significantly smaller, agrarian society into submission.
The Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, concerning the fate of U.S. service personnel listed as missing in action, persisted for many years after the war's conclusion.
The costs of the war loom large in American popular consciousness; a 1990 poll showed that the public incorrectly believed that more Americans lost their lives in Vietnam than in World War II.

====
Cost of the war ====
Between 1953 and 1975, the United States was estimated to have spent $168 billion on the war (equivalent to $1.38 trillion in 2019).
This resulted in a large federal budget deficit.
Other figures point to $138.9 billion from 1965 to 1974 (not inflation-adjusted), 10 times all education spending in the US and 50 times more than housing and community development spending within that time period.
General record-keeping was reported to have been sloppy for government spending during the war.
It was stated that war-spending could have paid off every mortgage in the US at that time, with money leftover.
More than 3 million Americans served in the Vietnam War, some 1.5 million of whom actually saw combat in Vietnam.
James E. Westheider wrote that "At the height of American involvement in 1968, for example, 543,000 American military personnel were stationed in Vietnam, but only 80,000 were considered combat troops."
Conscription in the United States had been controlled by the president since World War II, but ended in 1973.

As of 2013, the U.S. government is paying Vietnam veterans and their families or survivors more than $22 billion a year in war-related claims.

====
Impact on the U.S. military ====
By the war's end, 58,220 American soldiers had been killed, more than 150,000 had been wounded, and at least 21,000 had been permanently disabled.
The average age of the U.S. troops killed in Vietnam was 23.11 years.
According to Dale Kueter, "Of those killed in combat, 86.3 percent were white, 12.5 percent were black and the remainder from other races.
"
Approximately 830,000 Vietnam veterans suffered some degree of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Vietnam veterans suffered from PTSD in unprecedented numbers, as many as 15.2% of Vietnam veterans, because the U.S. military had routinely provided heavy psychoactive drugs, including amphetamines, to American servicemen, which left them unable to process adequately their traumas at the time.
An estimated 125,000 Americans left for Canada to avoid the Vietnam draft, and approximately 50,000 American servicemen deserted.
In 1977, United States president Jimmy Carter granted a full and unconditional pardon to all Vietnam-era draft dodgers with Proclamation 4483.

As the Vietnam War continued inconclusively and became more unpopular with the American public, morale declined and disciplinary problems grew among American enlisted men and junior, non-career officers.
Drug use, racial tensions, and the growing incidence of fragging—attempting to kill unpopular officers and non-commissioned officers with grenades or other weapons—created severe problems for the U.S. military and impacted its capability of undertaking combat operations.
By 1971, a U.S. Army colonel writing in the Armed Forces Journal declared: "By every conceivable indicator, our army that now remains in Vietnam is in a state approaching collapse, with individual units avoiding or having refused combat, murdering their officers and non commissioned officers, drug-ridden, and dispirited where not near mutinous....
The morale, discipline, and battle-worthiness of the U.S. Armed Forces are, with a few salient exceptions, lower and worse than at any time in this century and possibly in the history of the United States."
Between 1969 and 1971
the U.S. Army recorded more than 900 attacks by troops on their own officers and NCOs with 99 killed.

The Vietnam War called into question the U.S. Army doctrine.
Marine Corps general Victor H. Krulak heavily criticised Westmoreland's attrition strategy, calling it "wasteful of American lives… with small likelihood of a successful outcome."
In addition, doubts surfaced about the ability of the military to train foreign forces.
Furthermore, throughout the war there was found to be considerable flaws and dishonesty by officers and commanders due to promotions being tied to the body count system touted by Westmoreland and McNamara.
And behind the scenes Secretary of Defense McNamara wrote in a memo to President Johnson his doubts about the war: "
The picture of the world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one.
"Ron
Milam has questioned the severity of the "breakdown" of the U.S. armed forces, especially among combat troops, as reflecting the opinions of "angry colonels" who deplored the erosion of traditional military values during the Vietnam War.
Although acknowledging serious problems, he questions the alleged "near mutinous" conduct of junior officers and enlisted men in combat.
Investigating one combat refusal incident, a journalist declared, "A certain sense of independence, a reluctance to behave according to the military's insistence on obedience, like pawns or puppets...
The grunts [infantrymen] were determined to survive...
they insisted of having something to say about the making of decisions that determined whether they might live or die.
"
The morale and discipline problems and resistance to conscription were important factors leading to the creation of an all-volunteer military force by the United States and the termination of conscription.
The last conscript was inducted into the army in 1973.
The all-volunteer military moderated some of the coercive methods of discipline previously used to maintain order in military ranks.

===
Effects of U.S. chemical defoliation ===
One of the most controversial aspects of the U.S. military effort in Southeast Asia was the widespread use of chemical defoliants between 1961 and 1971.
They were used to defoliate large parts of the countryside to prevent the Viet Cong from being able to hide their weapons and encampments under the foliage.
These chemicals continue to change the landscape, cause diseases and birth defects, and poison the food chain.
Agent Orange and similar chemical substances used by the U.S. have also caused a considerable number of deaths and injuries in the intervening years, including among the US Air Force crews that handled them.
Scientific reports have concluded that refugees exposed to chemical sprays while in South Vietnam continued to experience pain in the eyes and skin as well as gastrointestinal upsets.
In one study, ninety-two percent of participants suffered incessant fatigue; others reported monstrous births.
Meta-analyses of the most current studies on the association between Agent Orange and birth defects have found a statistically significant correlation such that having a parent who was exposed to Agent Orange at any point in their life will increase one's likelihood of either possessing or acting as a genetic carrier of birth defects.
The most common deformation appears to be spina bifida.
There is substantial evidence that the birth defects carry on for three generations or more.
In 2012, the United States and Vietnam began a cooperative cleaning up of the toxic chemical on part of Danang International Airport, marking the first time Washington has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam.

Vietnamese victims affected by Agent Orange attempted a class action lawsuit against Dow Chemical and other U.S. chemical manufacturers, but the District Court dismissed their case.
They appealed, but the dismissal was cemented in February 2008 by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
As of 2006, the Vietnamese government estimates that there are over 4,000,000 victims of dioxin poisoning in Vietnam, although the United States government denies any conclusive scientific links between Agent Orange and the Vietnamese victims of dioxin poisoning.
In some areas of southern Vietnam, dioxin levels remain at over 100 times the accepted international standard.
The U.S. Veterans Administration has listed prostate cancer, respiratory cancers, multiple myeloma, Diabetes mellitus type 2, B-cell lymphomas, soft-tissue sarcoma, chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, peripheral neuropathy and spina bifida in children of veterans exposed to Agent Orange.
===
Casualties ===
Estimates of the number of casualties vary, with one source suggesting up to 3.8 million violent war deaths in Vietnam for the period 1955 to 2002.
A detailed demographic study calculated 791,000–1,141,000 war-related deaths during the war for all of Vietnam, for both military and civilians.
Between 195,000 and 430,000 South Vietnamese civilians died in the war.
Extrapolating from a 1969 US intelligence report, Guenter Lewy estimated 65,000 North Vietnamese civilians died in the war.
Estimates of civilian deaths caused by American bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder range from 30,000 to 182,000.
A 1974 US Senate subcommittee estimates nearly 1.4 million civilians killed and wounded between 1965 and 1974, and attributed over half as resulting from US and South Vietnamese military action.
The military forces of South Vietnam suffered an estimated 254,256 killed between 1960 and 1974 and additional deaths from 1954 to 1959 and in 1975.
Other estimates point to higher figures of 313,000 casualties.
The official US Department of Defense figure was 950,765 PAVN/VC forces killed in Vietnam from 1965 to 1974.
Defense Department officials believed that these body count figures need to be deflated by 30 percent.
Guenter Lewy asserts that one-third of the reported "enemy" killed may have been civilians, concluding that the actual number of deaths of PAVN/VC military forces was probably closer to 444,000.

According to figures released by the Vietnamese government there were 849,018 military deaths on the PAVN/VC side during the war.
The Vietnamese government released its estimate of war deaths for the more lengthy period of 1955 to 1975.
This figure includes battle deaths of Vietnamese soldiers in the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, in which the PAVN was a major participant.
Non-combat deaths account for 30 to 40% of these figures.
However, the figures do not include deaths of South Vietnamese and allied soldiers.
It is unclear whether the Vietnamese government figures includes the 300–330,000 PAVN/VC missing in action.
US reports of "enemy KIA", referred to as body count were thought to have been subject to "falsification and glorification", and a true estimate of PAVN/VC combat deaths may be difficult to assess, as US victories were assessed by having a "greater kill ratio".
It was difficult to distinguish between civilians and military personnel on the Viet Cong side as many persons were part-time guerrillas or impressed labourers who did not wear uniforms and civilians killed were sometimes written off as enemy killed because high enemy casualties was directly tied to promotions and commendation.
Between 275,000 and 310,000 Cambodians were estimated to have died during the war including between 50,000 and 150,000 combatants and civilians from US bombings.
20,000–62,000 Laotians also died, and 58,318 U.S. military personnel were killed, of which 1,587 are still listed as missing as of July 2019.Unexploded ordnance, mostly from U.S. bombing, continues to detonate and kill people today.
According to the Vietnamese government, ordnance has killed some 42,000 people since the war officially ended.
According to the government of Laos, unexploded ordnance has killed or injured over 20,000 Laotians since the end of the war.

===
In popular culture ===
The Vietnam War has been featured extensively in television, film, video games, music and literature in the participant countries.
In Vietnam, one notable film set during Operation Linebacker II was the film Girl from Hanoi (1975) depicting war-time life in Hanoi.
Another notable work was the diary of Đặng Thùy Trâm, a Vietnamese doctor who enlisted in the Southern battlefield, and was killed at the age of 27 by US forces near Quảng Ngãi.
Her diaries were later published in Vietnam as Đặng Thùy Trâm's Diary (
Last Night I Dreamed Of Peace), where it became a best-seller and was later made into a film
Don't Burn (Đừng Đốt).
In Vietnam the diary has often been compared to The Diary of Anne Frank and both are used in literary education.
Another Vietnamese film produced was The Abandoned Field: Free Fire Zone (Cánh đồng hoang) in 1979 which weaves the narrative of living on the ground in a US "free-fire zone" as well as perspectives from US helicopters.

In American popular culture, the "Crazy Vietnam Veteran", who was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder, became a common stock character after the war.

One of the first major films based on the Vietnam War was John Wayne's pro-war The Green Berets (1968).
Further cinematic representations were released during the 1970s and 1980s, some of the most noteworthy examples being Michael Cimino's The Deer Hunter (1978), Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now (1979), Oliver Stone's Platoon (1986) – based on his service in the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War, Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket (1987).
Other Vietnam War films include Hamburger Hill (1987), Casualties of War (1989), Born on the Fourth of July (1989)
The Siege of Firebase Gloria (1989), Forrest Gump (1994)
, We Were Soldiers (2002) and Rescue Dawn (2007).The war also influenced a generation of musicians and songwriters in Vietnam and the United States, both anti-war and pro/anti-communist.
The band Country Joe and the Fish recorded The "Fish" Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag in 1965, and it became one of the most influential anti-Vietnam protest anthems.
Many songwriters and musicians supported the anti-war movement, including Pete Seeger, Joan Baez, Bob Dylan, Peggy Seeger, Ewan MacColl, Barbara Dane, The Critics Group, Phil Ochs, John Lennon, John Fogerty, Nina Simone, Neil Young, Tom Paxton, Jimmy Cliff and Arlo Guthrie.
The modern classical composer George Crumb composed a string quartet, a threnody, regarding the war in 1970 titled Black Angels.

The war is also depicted in popular video games, especially in the first-person shooter war genre, such as Line of Sight: Vietnam (2003), Vietcong (2003), Battlefield Vietnam (2004), Vietcong:
Fist Alpha (2004), Vietcong 2 (2005), Elite Warriors: Vietnam (2005),
The Hell in Vietnam (2008), Battlefield:
Bad Company 2: Vietnam (2010), Call of Duty: Black Ops (2010), Call of Duty: Black Ops:
Declassified (2012), Rising Storm 2: Vietnam (2017), and in Far Cry 5 (2018) as an additional content.
The war also saw depiction in another genre, in the form of third-person shooters, MMORPG, real-time strategy and role-playing, such as Rambo: First Blood Part II (1985), Caliber .50 (1989), Made Man (2006), Gunboat (1990) and Strike Fighters 2: Vietnam (2009).

====
Myths ====
Myths play a central role in the historiography of the Vietnam War, and have become a part of the culture of the United States.
Much like the general historiography of the war, discussion of myth has focused on U.S. experiences, but changing myths of war have also played a role in Vietnamese and Australian historiography.

Recent scholarship has focused on "myth-busting", attacking the previous orthodox and revisionist schools of American historiography of the Vietnam War.
This scholarship challenges myths about American society and soldiery in the Vietnam War.
Kuzmarov in The Myth of the Addicted Army: Vietnam and the Modern War on Drugs challenges the popular and Hollywood narrative that US soldiers were heavy drug users, in particular the notion that the My Lai massacre was caused by drug use.
According to Kuzmarov, Richard Nixon is primarily responsible for creating the drug myth.
Michael Allen in Until
The Last Man Comes Home also accuses Nixon of myth making, by exploiting the plight of the League of Wives of American Prisoners in Vietnam and the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia to allow the government to appear caring as the war was increasingly considered lost.
Allen's analysis ties the position of potential missing or prisoner Americans into post-war politics and recent presidential elections, including the Swift boat controversy in US electoral politics.

===
Commemoration ===
On 25 May 2012, President Barack Obama issued a proclamation of the commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War.
On 10 November 2017, President Donald Trump issued an additional proclamation commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War.

==
See also ==
History of Cambodia
History of Laos
History of Vietnam
List of conflicts in Asia
Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War
U.S. news media and the Vietnam War
Third Indochina War
Sino-Vietnamese War
The Vietnam War (TV series)
Soviet–
Afghan War


==
Annotations ==


==
References ==
The references for this article are grouped in three sections.

Citations: references for the in-line, numbered superscript references contained within the article.

Primary sources: the main works used to build the content of the article, but not referenced as in-line citations.

Secondary sources:
additional works used to build the article


===
Citations ===


===
Works cited ===


===
Primary sources ===


===
Secondary sources ===


=== Historiography and memory ===


==
Further reading ==
Berry, Jan (1976).
Demilitarized Zones – Veterans after Vietnam.
Perkasie, PA:
East River Anthology.
ISBN 0-917238-01-X.
Conboy, Ken & Morrison, James (November–December 1999). "
Plausible Deniability: US-Taiwanese Covert Insertions into North Vietnam".
Air Enthusiast (84)
: 29–34.
ISSN 0143-5450.

Hammond, William (1987).
Public Affairs:
The Military and the Media, 1962–1968.

Kolbert, Elizabeth, "
This Close; The day the Cuban missile crisis almost went nuclear" (a review of Martin J. Sherwin's Gambling with Armageddon: Nuclear Roulette from Hiroshima to the Cuban Missile Crisis, New York, Knopf, 2020), The New Yorker, 12 October 2020, pp.
70–73.
Kolbert writes: "[On taking office as President, Lyndon]
Johnson wasn't informed that...
President [Kennedy] had traded away American [nuclear] warheads [in Turkey in order to resolve the Cuban Missile Crisis].
The lesson
L.B.J. seems to have drawn...
was that Kennedy had succeeded by refusing to compromise [with the Soviets].
This would have deeply unfortunate consequences when it came time for Johnson to deal with North Vietnam."
(
p. 72.)

Mullin, Chris (18 July 2019).
"
Terror Was Absolute".
London Review of Books.
Vol.
41
no.
14.
pp.
35–36.
(
Review of Max Hastings, Vietnam:  An Epic Tragedy, 1945–75, Collins, 2019, 722 pp.,
ISBN 978 0 00 813301 6)
——— (1995).
Public Affairs:
The Military and the Media, 1968–1973.
Full-scale history of the war by U.S. Army; much broader than title suggests.

The Vietnam War:
The Definitive Illustrated History.
DK.
2017.

==
External links ==
A Vietnam Diary's Homecoming Video produced by the PBS Series History Detectives
Detailed bibliography of Vietnam War
Documents Relating to American Foreign Policy–Vietnam primary sources on U.S. involvement
Fallout of the War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
Glossary of Military Terms & Slang from the Vietnam War
Impressions of Vietnam and descriptions of the daily life of a soldier from the oral history of Elliott Gardner,
U.S. Army Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine
Stephen H. Warner Southeast Asia Photograph Collection at Gettysburg College
Timeline US – Vietnam (1947–2001) in Open-Content project
The U.S. Army in Vietnam
the official history of the United States Army
The Vietnam War at The History Channel
UC Berkeley Library Social Activism Sound Recording Project:
Anti-Vietnam War Protests
Vietnam war timeline comprehensive timeline of the Vietnam War
Virtual Vietnam Archive – Texas Tech University
1965–1975 Another Vietnam; Unseen images of the war from the winning side – Mashable
Archival collections about the Vietnam War, University Archives and Special Collections, Joseph P. Healey Library, University of Massachusetts Boston
The Syrian Army, officially the Syrian Arab Army (SAA) (Arabic: الْجَيْشُ
الْعَرَبيُّ
السُّورِيُّ‎, romanized: al-Jayš al-ʿArabī as-Sūrī), is the land force branch of the Syrian Armed Forces.
It is the dominant military service of the four uniformed services, controlling the most senior posts in the armed forces, and has the greatest manpower, approximately 80 percent of the combined services.
The Syrian Army originated in local military forces formed by the French after World War I, after France obtained a mandate over the region.
It officially came into being in 1945, before Syria obtained full independence the following year.

Since 1946, it has played a major role in Syria's governance, mounting six military coups: two in 1949, including the March 1949 Syrian coup d'état and the August 1949 coup by Colonel Sami al-Hinnawi, and one each in 1954, 1963, 1966, and 1970.
It has fought four wars with Israel (1948, the Six-Day War in 1967, the October War of 1973, and 1982 in Lebanon) and one with Jordan (Black September in Jordan, 1970).
An armored division was also deployed to Saudi Arabia in 1990–91 during the Persian Gulf War, but saw little action.
From 1976 to 2005 it was the major pillar of the Syrian occupation of Lebanon.
Internally, it played a major part in suppressing the 1979–82 Islamist uprising in Syria, and since early 2011 has been heavily engaged in fighting the Syrian Civil War, the most violent and prolonged war the Syrian Army has taken part in since its establishment in the 1940s.

==
History ==
In 1919, the French formed the Troupes spéciales du Levant as part of the Army of the Levant in the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon.
The former with 8,000 men later grew into both the Syrian and Lebanese armies.
This force was used primarily as auxiliaries in support of French troops, and senior officer posts were held by Frenchmen, although Syrians were allowed to hold commissions below the rank of major.

As Syria gained independence in 1946, its leaders envisioned a division-sized army.
On June 19, 1947, the Syrian Army took the survivors of Pan Am Flight 121 to the Presbyterian mission hospital at Deir ez-Zor.
The 1st Brigade was ready by the time of the Syrian war against Israel on May 15, 1948.
It consisted of two infantry battalions and one armored battalion.
The 2nd Brigade was organized during the 1948 Arab–Israeli War and also included two infantry battalions and one armored battalion.
At the time of the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the army was small, poorly armed, and poorly trained. "
Paris had relied primarily on French regulars to keep the peace in Syria and had neglected indigenous forces.
Consequently, training was lackadaisical, discipline lax, and staff work almost unheard of. ...
there were about 12,000 men in the Syrian army.
These troops were mostly grouped into three infantry brigades and an armored force of about battalion size" writes Pollack.
Between 1948 and 1967, a series of military coups destroyed the stability of the government and any remaining professionalism within the army.
In March 1949, the chief of staff, General Husni al-Za'im, installed himself as president.
Two more military dictators followed by December 1949.
General Adib Shishakli then held power until deposed in the 1954 Syrian coup d'etat.
Further coups followed, each attended by a purge of the officer corps to remove supporters of the losers from the force. '
Discipline in the army broke down across the board as units and their commanders pledged their allegiance to different groups and parties.
Indeed, by the late 1950s, the situation had become so bad that Syrian officers regularly disobeyed the orders of superiors who belonged to different ethnic or political groups' writes Pollack.
The 1963 Syrian coup d'état had as one of its key objectives the seizure of the Al-Kiswah military camp, home to the 70th Armored Brigade.
There was another 1966 Syrian coup d'etat.

However, in 1967 the army did appear to have some strength.
It had around 70,000 personnel, roughly 550 tanks and assault guns, 500 APCs, and nearly 300 artillery pieces.
The army had sixteen brigades: twelve infantry, two armored (probably including the 70th Armored), and two mechanized.
The Syrian government deployed twelve of the sixteen brigades to the Golan, including both armored brigades and one mechanized brigade.
Three 'brigade groups', each comprising four brigades, were deployed: the 12th in the north, holding the sector from the B'nat Ya'acov bridge to the slopes of Mount Hermon, the 35th in the south from the B'nat Ya'acov bridge to the Yarmuk River border with Jordan, and the 42nd in reserve, earmarked for a theater-level counterattack role.
During the Six-Day War Israeli assault of the Golan heights, the Syrian army failed to counterattack the Israelis as the Israelis breached the Syrian positions.
While Syrian units fought hard whenever the Israelis entered their fields of fire, no attempts appear to have been made to exploit Israeli disorientation and confusion during the initial assault.
Judging from reports of 1967–1970, including the reporting of the 5th Infantry Division in 1970, the Army appears to have formed its first divisions during this period.
The 1st and 3rd Armored Division, and 5th, 7th, and 9th Mechanized Infantry Divisions were all formed prior to 1973.
Samuel M. Katz writes that after Hafez al-Assad gained power in November 1970, the army expanded to the five divisions listed above, plus ten independent brigades, an artillery rocket brigade (the 69th), and "a reinforced brigade variously termed the 70th Armored Brigade or the Assad Republican Guard.
It is today known as the Armored Defense Force; as Assad's praetorian guard it is stationed in and around Damascus and subordinate to the Defense Companies under the command of Assad's brother Rifa'at."
===
1970–2010 ===
On 18 September 1970, the Syrian government became involved in Black September in Jordan when it sent a reinforced armored brigade to aid the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Syrian armored units crossed the border and overran Irbid with the help of local Palestinian forces.
They encountered several Jordanian Army detachments, but rebuffed them without major difficulty.
Two days later, the 5th Infantry Division, heavily reinforced, was also sent into Jordan.
Two armored brigades were attached to the division, bringing its tank strength up to over 300 T-55s and its manpower to over 16,000.
The division entered Jordan at ar-Ramtha, destroyed a company of Jordanian Centurion tanks there, and continued directly towards Amman.
Pollack says it is likely that they intended to overthrow the Jordanian monarchy itself.
Despite defeating the Jordanian Army at al-Ramtha on 21 September, after fierce air attacks on 22 September, the Syrians stopped the attack and began to retreat.

After 1970 further Syrian engagements included:

Yom Kippur War against Israel
Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990), (against Lebanese militias, the PLO and Israel)The Syrian armed forces have also been involved in suppressing dissident movements within Syria, for example the Islamist uprising in Syria in 1979–1982.
In March 1980 the 3rd Armored Division and detachments from the Defense Companies arrived in Aleppo.
The division was under the command of General Shafiq Fayadh, Hafiz Assad's first cousin.
The troops sealed "off whole quarters and carr[ied] out house-to-house searches, often preceded by tank fire."
Hundreds of suspects were rounded up.
Only two conventional Army brigades deployed to Hama in 1982, the 3rd Armored Division's 47th Armored and 21st Mechanized Brigades.
Three quarters of the officers and one third of the soldiers in the two brigades were Alawites.
Most of the repression was carried out by the Defense Companies and the Special Forces.
Meanwhile, the Special Forces were isolating and combing through Hama, killing and capturing suspected government opponents.
Syrian forces fought Israel during the 1982 Lebanon War.

In 1984, Major General Ali Haidar's Special Forces were instrumental in blocking an abortive attempt by Rifaat Assad and his Defense Companies to seize the capital.
Fayadh's 3rd Armored Division moved into the capital to join Haidar's forces in the confrontation with the Defense Companies.
The 3rd Armored Division, it seems, had historically been based at al-Qutayfah, near Damascus.
Bennett dates the establishment of corps in the Syrian Army to 1985.
Writing forty years later, Tom Cooper says they were established 'during the 1980s' but "..despite the establishment of.. corps.. most division commanders continued reporting directly to the President.
Correspondingly, not only the Chief of Staff of the Syrian Armed Forces but also the Corps HQ exercised only a limited operational control over the Army's divisions."

The 9th Armored Division served in the 1991 Persian Gulf War as the Arab Joint Forces Command North reserve and saw little action.
In 1994, Haidar expressed objections to the Syrian president's decision to bring Bashar home from his studies in Britain and groom him for the succession after the death of Basil, the eldest Assad son.
Soon afterwards, on 3 September 1994, Jane's Defence Weekly reported that then-President Hafez Assad had dismissed at least 16 senior military commanders.
Among them was Haidar, then commander of the Special Forces, and General Shafiq Fayadh, a cousin of the President who had commanded the "crack" 3rd Armored Division for nearly two decades.
The 3rd Armored Division was "deployed around Damascus."
JDW commented that "the Special Forces and the 3rd Armored Division, along with the 1st Armored Division are key elements in the security structure that protects Assad's government.
Any command changes involving those formations have considerable political significance.
"
Post-uprising reporting indicated the 1st Armored Division had historically been at al-Kiswah.
On 29 September 2004, Jane's Defence Weekly reported that Syria had begun to redeploy elements of one or more Syrian Army special forces regiments based in the coastal hills a few kilometres south of Beirut in Lebanon.
A senior Lebanese Army officer told JDW that the 3,000 troops involved would return to Syria.
Cordesman wrote that in 2006 the Syrian Army had "organized two corps that reported to the Land Forces General Staff and the Commander of the Land Force."

In 2009 and 2010, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London, the Syrian army comprised 220,000 regular personnel, and the entire armed forces (including the navy, air force and air defenses) had 325,000 regular troops.
Additionally, it had about 290,000 reservists.
In 2013, Agence France Press wrote on 'Syria's diminished security forces.'
===
Syrian Civil War ===


====
Defections ====
At October 1, 2011, according to high-ranking defected Syrian Colonel Riad Assaad, 10,000 soldiers, including high-ranking officers, had deserted the Syrian Army.

Some of these defectors had formed the Free Syrian Army, engaging in combat with security forces and soldiers in what would turn into the Syrian Civil War.

At 16 November 2011, Rami Abdel Rahman, the head of the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, however estimated that less than 1,000 soldiers had deserted the Syrian Army; at the same moment, an FSA battalion commander claimed that the FSA embraced 25,000 army deserters.
Also in November 2011, the Free Syrian Army or the website of France 24 estimated the Syrian Army at 200,000 troops.
According to General Mustafa al-Sheikh, one of the most senior defectors, however, in January 2012 the Syrian forces were estimated at 280,000 including conscripts.
By March 15, 2012, many more soldiers, unhappy with crackdowns on pro-democracy protesters, switched sides and a Turkish official said that 60,000 soldiers had deserted the Syrian army, including 20,000 since February 20.
It was added that most of the deserters were junior officers and soldiers.
By 5 July 2012, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights estimated "tens of thousands" soldiers to have defected.
By August 2012, 40 Brigadier generals from the Army had defected to the opposition army, out of a total of 1,200 generals.
On June 14, 2013, 73 Syrian Army officers and their families, some 202 people in total, sought refuge in Turkey.
Amongst their number were seven generals and 20 colonels.
By August 2013, the strength of the Syrian army had, compared with 2010, roughly been cut in half, due to defections, desertions and casualties, according to the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London: it now counted 110,000 troops.

====
Strength impaired ====
Up until July 2012, the scale of defections from the Syrian Army, though hard to quantify, was too small to make an impact on the strength of that army, according to Aram Nerguizian from the Washington-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Strategically important units of the Syrian armed forces are always controlled by Alawite officers; defecting soldiers – by July 2012 "tens of thousands" according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights – are mainly Sunni without access to vital command and control, Nerguizian said, however the formed Syrian Minister of Defense General Dawoud Rajiha killed in the 18 July 2012 Damascus bombing was a Christian.

Analyst Joseph Holliday wrote in 2013 that "the Assad government has from the beginning of the conflict been unable to mobilize all of its forces without risking largescale defections.
The single greatest liability that the Assad regime has faced in employing its forces has been the challenge of relying on units to carry out orders to brutalize the opposition.
"
This has resulted in Bashar's following his father's precedent by attaching regular army units to more reliable forces (Special Forces, Republican Guard, or 4th Armored Division).
When Hafez al-Assad directed the suppression of revolts in Hama in 1982, this technique was also used.

The Syrian Arab Army suffers from serious recruitment issues as the Syrian Civil War drags on, with military age men across sectarian lines no longer willing to join or serve their conscription terms.
These issues are especially notable among the Druze population, who have clashed with regime security forces and broken Druze youths out of regime imprisonment to avoid them serving in the army.
Increasingly, Assad's Alawite base of support refuse to send their sons to the military due to massive casualty rates among military age men in their community; according to pro oppositions sources a third of 250,000 Alawite men of fighting age have been killed in the Syrian Civil War, leading to major tensions between the sect and the Syrian government.
As of mid-2018, then-Israeli Defence Minister Avigdor Lieberman said that the Syrian Arab Army had regained its pre-2011 strength levels, recovering from manpower shortages earlier in the Syrian Civil War.

====
Roles of 3rd, 11th, 17th and 18th Divisions ====
The 3rd Armored Division has deployed elements of three brigades from its bases around Qutayfah to Deraa, Zabadani, and Hama, while the 11th Armored Division has stayed close to its bases in Homs and Hama.
The European Council named Major General Wajih Mahmud as commander of the 18th Armored Division in the Official Journal of the European Union on 15 November 2011, sanctioning him for violence committed in Homs.
Henry Boyd of the IISS noted that "in Homs, the 18th Armored Division was reinforced by Special Forces units and ... by elements of the 4th Division under Maher's de facto command.
"Information
from Holliday 2013 suggests that the reserve armored division is the 17th (rather than any other designation), which was responsible for eastern Syria.
The division's 93rd Brigade left Idlib to secure Raqqa Governorate in early 2012.
Following the reported capture of Raqqa on 3–6 March 2013, elements of the 17th Division remained under siege to the north of the city in October 2013.

===
Relationship with National Defense Force ===
The National Defense Force is under the control and supervision of the Syrian Army and acts in an infantry role, directly fighting against rebels on the ground and running counter-insurgency operations in co-ordination with the army which provides them logistical and artillery support.

Struggling with reliability issues and defections, officers of the SAA increasingly prefer the part-time volunteers of the NDF, who they regard as more motivated and loyal, over regular army conscripts to conduct infantry operations and act as support for advancing tanks.
An officer in Homs, who asked not to be identified, said the army was increasingly playing a logistical and directive role, while NDF fighters act as combatants on the ground.
In October 2015, the 4th Assault Army Corps (Arabic: 4 فيلق اقتحام) was established in the northeast.
The NDF continues to play a significant role in military operations across Syria despite the formation of other elite units, many of which receive direct assistance from Russia.

==
Demographics ==
Sunni Muslims make up the majority of the Syrian Arab Army and many hold high governmental positions.
From the start of the Syrian Civil War till now, the Syrian Arab Army has been composed mainly of Sunni Syrians (for example, the 4th Mechanized Division is entirely composed and led by Sunnis), with mixed religious leadership at higher military positions.
the Minister of Defense and also Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Army and the Armed Forces (previously Special Forces)
General Major Fahd Jassem al-Freij, and Major General Mohammad al-Shaar, an Interior Minister, are some of the Sunni Muslims in the positions of power.
There also operate pro-Assad Sunni militias composed of a Baathist loyalists, such as the Ba'ath Brigades.
Brigades are made up of Sunni Syrians and other Arab Sunnis from the Middle Eastern region that adhere to pan-Arab ideals.
Liwa al-Quds is a pro-government, Sunni Palestinian militia that operates in Aleppo.

==
Structure in 2001 ==
Richard Bennett wrote in 2001 that "three corps [were] formed in 1985 to give the Army more flexibility and to improve combat efficiency by decentralizing the command structure, absorbing at least some of the lessons learned during the Israeli invasion of the Lebanon in 1982.
"
The organization and military doctrine of the army followed the Soviet model.
Richard Bennett's estimate of the 2001 order of battle was:

1st Corps HQ Damascus, which covered from Golan Heights, the fortified zone and south to Der'a near the Jordanian border.

5th
Armored Division, which included the 17th and 96th Armored Brigades and the 112th Mechanized Brigade
6th Armored Division, with the 12th and 98th Armored Brigades and the 11th Mechanized Brigades
7th Mechanized Division, with the 58th and 68th Armored Brigades and the 78th Mechanized Brigade
8th Armored Division, which included the 62nd and 65th Armored Brigades and the 32nd Mechanized Brigade
9th Armored Division, with the 43rd and 91st Armored Brigades and the 52nd Mechanized Brigade.
Bennett said the 1st Corps also [had] four independent special forces regiments, including two trained for heliborne commando operations against the Israeli signals intelligence & observation posts on Mount Hermon and elsewhere in the Golan Heights.

2nd Corps (Syria)
HQ Zabadani, covers north of Damascus, to Homs and includes Lebanon.

Bennett said in 2001 that the corps' principal units were believed to include:
1st Armored Division, with the 44th and 46th Armored Brigades and the 42nd Mechanized Brigade
3rd Armored Division, with the 47th and 82nd Armored Brigades and the 132nd Mechanized Brigade
11th Armored Division, with the 60th and 67th Armored Brigades and the 87th Mechanized Brigade
4th Mechanized Division with the 1st Armored Brigade and the 61st and 89th Mechanized Brigades
10th Mechanized Division, headquartered in Shtoura, Lebanon.
Its main units [were in 2001] deployed to control the strategic Beirut-Damascus highway with the 123rd Mechanized Brigade near Yanta, the 51st Armored Brigade near Zahle in the Beqaa Valley and the 85th Armored Brigade, deployed around the complex of positions at Dahr al-Baidar.

three other heavy brigades from the 3rd and 11th Armored Divisions [were] known to be regularly deployed to eastern Lebanon.

there [were] five special forces regiments in the Lebanon.

3rd Corps HQ Aleppo,  based in the north and covered Hama, the Turkish and Iraqi borders, the Mediterranean coastline and was tasked with protecting the complex of chemical and biological warfare and missile production and launch facilities.

The 2nd Reserve Armored Division, with the 14th and 15th Armored Brigades and the 19th Mechanized Brigade.
The 2nd [was] also believed to operate as the main armored forces training formation.
It seems likely that the "2nd" designation, reported in 2001, was incorrect, as it has not been reported during the Syrian Civil War.

Other units under the control of this corps included four independent infantry brigades, one border guard brigade, one independent armored regiment, effectively a brigade group, and one special forces regiment.

the Coastal Defense Brigade, which [operated] largely as an independent unit within the 3rd Corps area, [was]
headquartered in the naval base of Latakia with four Coastal Defense Battalions in Latakia, Banias, Hamidieh and Tartous.
Each Battalion has four batteries of both the short range
SSC-3 Styx and long range SSC-1B Sepal missile systems.
The IISS listed smaller formations in 2006 as:
Four independent Infantry Brigades
Ten independent Airborne Special Forces Regiments (Seven regiments attached to 2nd Corps)
Two independent Artillery Brigades
Two independent Anti-tank Brigades
Surface-to-surface Missile Command with three SSM Brigades (each with three SSM battalions),
One brigade with FROG-7,
One brigade with Scud-B/C/D.
One brigade with SS-21 Scarab,
Three coastal defense missile brigades
One brigade with 4
SS-C-1B Sepal launchers,
One brigade with 6 P-15 Termit launchers, alternative designation SS-C-3 'Styx'
One brigade with 6+
P-800 Oniks launchers,
One Border Guard BrigadeProtecting Damascus:
4th Mechanized Division (The Defense companies were transformed into the armored division equivalent Unit 569, which in 1984 became the 4th Armored Division.)

The Republican Guard Armored Division, with three Armored brigades, one Mechanized brigade, and one artillery regiment.

==
Structure in 2013 ==
According to Joseph Holliday, as of February 2013 the order of battle (at full strength) was:
3 Corps (Falaq): 50,000 men in 3–4 divisions
14 Divisions (Firqa): 5,000–15,000 men in 5–6 brigades/regiments
each
More than 40 Brigades (Liwa):
2,500–3,500 men in 5–6 battalions (1–3 armored/mechanized + artillery/ADA/engineers)
each
Mechanized:
105 IFVs in 3 mechanized battalions
41 Tanks in 1 armored battalion
3,500 soldiers
Armored:
105 Tanks in 3 armored battalions
31 IFVs in 1 mechanized battalion
2,500 soldiers
More than 20 Regiments (Fawj): 1,500 men
Light Infantry: 1,500 soldiers in 3 infantry battalions
Artillery: 45 howitzers and 1,500 soldiers in 3 artillery battalions
Battalion (Katiba): 300–500 men in 4–5 companies
Company (Sariya):
60–80 men


===
Units reporting to the Chief of Staff ===
 Republican Guard
Lionesses of Defense Armored Battalion (as of 2015)
100th Artillery Regiment  (equipped with 122 mm howitzer 2A18 (D-30) howitzers and  BM-21 "Grad" rocket launchers, is able to repel any attack by enemy forces in the city and its suburbs.)

101st and
102nd "Security" Regiments (whose task is to provide security to the President, government ministers, senior government officials and the Army headquarters and other government institutions)
103rd Commando Brigade
104th Airborne Brigade (merged with the 800th Regiment)
105th
Mechanized Brigade
800th
Regiment
30th Division - serves as an administrative command
18th Brigade - formerly of the 10th Mechanised Division
106th Mechanized Brigade
123th Brigade
124th
Brigade
47th Regiment
147th
Regiment
Popular Security and Support Forces
4th Armoured Division
40th Armored Brigade
41st Armored Brigade
42nd Armored Brigade
138th Mechanized Brigade
154th Artillery Regiment
555th Special Forces (Airborne) Regiment
Protective Lions (Commandos), formed in May 2014.

Special Forces CommandNote
: "Special Forces" in the Syrian Arab Army denotes specialized "light" infantry (airborne, air assault) and are "elite" only in relation to the conventional mechanized, armored units of the SAA.
According to a declassified CIA report the stated Special Forces regiments were created to conduct counter-insurgency operations.
Special Forces units include the: 41st, 45th, 46th, 47th, 53rd and 54th independent special forces regiments.
Special Forces were heavily used from the early stage of the Syrian Civil War and as a result suffered heavy casualties, possibly up to three regiments (41st, 46th, 54th)
may have been destroyed during the Syrian Civil War, the surviving three regiments were merged to other formations such as the Republican Guard, Tiger Forces and 4th Corps.
Later reports state that two battalions from the 54th regiment serve within the 17th Division.

14th
Special Forces Division - Appears not to be taking on any more recruits.

36th, 554th and 556th Special Forces Regiments
15th Special Forces Division -
Some elements still surviving.
Appears not to be taking on any more recruits.

35th and 127 Special Forces Regiments
404th
Armored RegimentSpecial Forces units formed during the Syrian Civil War

25th Special Forces Division
Cheetah Forces Brigade
Cheetah Forces Team 3
Cheetah Forces Team 6
Panther Forces Brigade
Desert Hawks Brigade
(Liwa Suqur al-Sahara).
Formed in 2013, disbanded in 2017.

===
1st Corps ===
5th
Mechanized Division
112th, 132nd and 15th Mechanized Brigades
12th Armored Brigade
175th Artillery Regiment
6th Division
45th Regiment
85th Brigade
76th Armored Brigade - now defunt.
Formerly part of 1st Division
7th Mechanized Division
68th, 121st and 88th Mechanized Brigades
78th Armored Brigade
(an unspecified) Artillery Regiment
 9th Armored Division
34th and 43rd Armored Brigades
52nd Mechanized Brigade.
The 52nd Armored Brigade was reported in Der'aa in southern Syria in May 2013.

90th Brigade
89th Artillery RegimentIn
addition
the 1st Corps included the 61st and 90th independent Infantry Brigades.

===
2nd Corps ===
1st Armored Division
91st and 153rd Armored Brigades
58th Mechanized Brigade
61st Infantry Brigade
141st Artillery Regiment
10th
Mechanized Division
85th and 62nd Mechanized brigades
56th Armored Brigade -
no longer active


===
3rd Corps ===
3rd Armored Division
65th and 81st Armored Brigade
21st Mechanized Brigade
(an unspecified) Artillery Regiment (
both 67th and 123rd Artillery Regiments listed with the division in 2011 by Cooper 2015.)

8th Armoured Division
33rd Armored Brigade - transferred from 9th Division
45th Brigade - newly formed
47th Armored Brigade - transferred from 3rd Division
11th Armored Division – involved in Abu al-Duhur and second siege of Wadi Deif
60th, 67th Armored Brigades
87th Mechanized Brigade
(an unspecified) Artillery Regiment (89th Artillery Regt listed with the division by Cooper 2015.)On February 24, 2016
, abna24.com reported that "Last Spring, the Syrian Arab Army's 87th Brigade of 11th Tank Division began their massive retreat across the Idlib Governorate, conceding the provincial capital and the strategic cities of Ariha and Jisr Al-Shughour to Jaysh Al-Fateh (the Army of Conquest) en route to their embarrassing exit from this province in northern Syria.
"Other
divisions in the north and northeast included the 17th Division (HQ Dayr az-Zawyr)
and the 18th Armoured Division (HQ Aleppo), nominally independent but supervised by the 3rd Corps.

===
4th Corps ===
Two new corps have been established since the civil war began in 2011.
The "4th Corps", "4th Assault Corps", or "4th Volunteer Assault Corps", also called the Fourth Legion - Assault  is a new formation of the Syrian Army, organized with Russian help since 2015.
The original plan for the 4th Corps was to reorganize the weakened regular army units as well as irregular pro-government militias, including some National Defence Forces (NDF) units, in the governorates of Latakia as well as Tartus, and on the al-Ghab Plain.
These forces would be trained, organized and armed by the Russian Armed Forces, so that they could become "special" ground forces which would retake northernwestern Syria with Russian air support.
When the 4th Corps was subsequently organized in summer and fall 2015, forces of widely different origins were included: Among these were the 103rd Republican Guard Brigade which would serve as HQ for the new corps, along with troops drawn from the 3rd and 4th Divisions, as well as Ba'ath Party, NDF, and Alawite militias.
The Alawite fighters were organized into 12 units which fought under the joint command of Russian, Syrian, and Iranian officers.
The remained was grouped into four "volunteer brigades", while several smaller Russian units were assigned to it in a support role.
Directly paid by the Republican Guard and the government, the 4th Corps was described by Carnegie Middle East Center's expert Kheder Khaddour a formation that "blends army and militia forces".
Although the 4th Corps' initial operations such as during the 2015–16 Latakia offensive and Northwestern Syria offensive (October–November 2015) were relatively successful, the inclusion of more militias into the corps remained elusive.
This was probably due to the fact that Iran remained unwilling to allow Syrian units under its control to be integrated to a primarily Russian-led formation, while many militias generally resisted any attempts to reduce their autonomy by including them in the 4th Corps.
As result, the 4th Corps remained mostly limited to Latakia, where it continues to be active.
As its performance during the 2016 Latakia offensive was lacking, however, its overall commander Maj.
Gen. Shuqi Yusuf was dismissed in July 2016.
Overall, the 4th Corps did not "live up to Moscow's expectations" and its Syrian commanders "demonstrated poor performance", despite the fact that the corps had actually succeeded in reforming the included militias into a "disciplined, organized military force".
Gregory Waters wrote via Twitter in November 2017 that '..
the 6th Division [was] one of two divisions created under the Russian-built 4th Corps back in 2015.
The 4th Corps project largely failed & the 6th & 2nd Divisions have remained in Latakia since.'
===
5th Corps ===
Fifth Attack Troop Corps, also called the Fifth Legion, is an all-volunteer force, part of Syrian Army involved in the Syrian Civil War fighting against the Syrian opposition, Al-Qaeda in Syria, and ISIS.
The task of the corps is "eliminating terrorism" and was formed "in response to the rapid development of events, to support the successes of armed forces and to meet people's wishes to put an end to terrorist acts in the Syrian Arab Republic," according to the statement announced on 22 November 2016 by the General Command of the Armed Forces of Syria.
The Fifth Corps of Volunteers will recruit from over age 18 from across the country "not already eligible for military service or deserters".
According to Abdullah Soleiman Ali in al-Safir paper, formation of 'Fifth Attack Troop Corps' is the apex point of cooperation among members of Russia–Syria–Iran–Iraq coalition.
5th Corps soldiers are trained, equipped and advised by Russian military personnel since their intervention in 2015.
Most main battle tanks of the 5th Assault Corps are modernized Soviet tanks, including the T-62M and T-72B3.The 5th Corps unit, The Ba'ath Legion, was formed from Ba'ath Brigades volunteers.
According to the Russian International Affairs Council, the Qalamoun Shield Forces also joined the Fifth Corps, though no other sources confirmed this.
In February 2018, 20 members of the ISIS Hunters (a 5th Corps subunit) died in a US airstrike.
In March 2021, the 5th Corps unit supported by the Russians managed to control Tuenan gas plant and Al-Thawrah oilfield in Raqqa Governorate, previously held by Liwa Fatemiyoun.

==
Military equipment in April 2011 (including storage) ==
The vast majority of Syrian military equipment was Soviet manufactured.

≈ 9,300 armoured fighting vehicles (including in storage):
≈ 4,800 main battle tanks
≈ 4,500 infantry fighting vehicles and armored personnel carriers
≈ 6,400 towed artillery pieces:
1,900 guns/howitzers
≈ 1,500 anti-aircraft guns
≈ 850 self-propelled artillery pieces:
≈ 450 self-propelled howitzers
≈ 400 self-propelled anti-aircraft guns
2,190+ anti-tank guided weapon launchers
500 multiple launch rocket systems
84
tactical ballistic missile launchers
4,235
+ surface-to-air missile launchers:
4,000
+
MANPADS
235 self-propelled air-defense systems


== Uniforms and rank insignia (1987) ==


===
Uniforms and personnel equipment ===
Service uniforms for Syrian officers generally follow the British Army style, although army combat clothing follows the Soviet model.
Each uniform has two coats: a long one for dress and a short jacket for informal wear.
Army officer uniforms are khaki in summer, olive in winter.
Certain Army (paratroops and special forces) and Air Defense Force personnel may wear camouflage uniforms.
Among the camouflage are Red Lizard, and Syrian Leaf pattern; a locally-made copy of the ERDL.
Officers have a variety of headgear, including a service cap, garrison cap, and beret (linen in summer and wool in winter).
The color of the beret varies according to the officer's unit.
The most common beret color is black, for infantry, Engineering, Signals and supporting arms personnel, followed by Green, for Armored, Mechanized and Artillery personnel, Red for the Republican Guard and Military Police, and Maroon for the Special Forces.

In 2011, the standard issue combat helmets were the olive Chinese QGF-02, and the Soviet SSh-68 for the reserve forces.
Both of them can be equipped with the "Syrian Leaf" camouflage helmet covers.
The Republican Guard and Special Forces were the only units equipped with TAT-BA-7 bullet-proof vests.
With the late 2015 arrival of Russian military advisors, many army units were equipped with new Russian 6B45 ballistic bullet-proof vests and Kevlar 6B7 helmets.

===
Ranks ===
Commissioned officers' rank insignia are identical for the army and air force.
These are gold on a bright green or black shoulder board for the army and gold on a bright blue board for the air force.
Officer ranks are standard, although the highest is the equivalent of Colonel General, a rank held in 1986 only by the commander in chief and the minister of defense.
Navy officer rank insignia are gold stripes worn on the lower sleeve.
The highest-ranking officer in Syria's navy is the equivalent of lieutenant general.
Army and air force rank for warrant officers is indicated by gold stars on an olive green shield worn on the upper left arm.
Lower noncommissioned ranks are indicated by upright and inverted chevrons worn on the upper left arm.

===
Awards ===
Although some twenty-five orders and medals are authorized, generally only senior officers and warrant officers wear medal ribbons.
The following are some important Syrian awards: Order of Umayyad, Medal of Military Honor, the War Medal, Medal for Courage, Yarmuk Medal, Wounded in Action Medal, and Medal of March 8, 1963.

==
Chief of the General Staff of the Army ==
Abdullah Atfeh:
1947–1948
Husni al-Za'im: 1948 –
Sami al-Hinnawi:  – 1950
Anwar Bannud: 2 January 1950 – 23 April 1951
Fawzi Selu: 1951 –
Shawkat Shuqayr:
Tawfiq Nizam al-Din: – 1957
Afif al-Bizri:
1957–1959
Jamal al-Faisal: 1959 –
Abd al-Karim Zahr al-Din: – 8 March 1963
Ziad al-Hariri: 8 March 1963 – 8 July 1963
Salah Jadid: 11 November 1963 – 1966
Ahmad Suwaydani: 1966 – 1968
Mustafa Tlass: 1968–1972
Yusuf Shakkur: 1972 – 1974
Hikmat al-Shihabi: 1974 – 1998
Ali Aslan: 1998–2002
Hasan Turkmani: 2002–2004
Ali Habib Mahmud: 3 June 2004 – 3 June 2009
Dawoud Rajiha: 3 June 2009 – 8 August 2011
Fahd Jassem al-Freij: 8 August 2011 – 18 July 2012
Ali Abdullah Ayyoub: 18 July 2012 – 1 January 2018


== Anniversary ==
August 1 is nationally considered Army Day.
In 2013, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad visited soldiers in Darayya.
He gave the army a message saying he was sure of victory over the rebels.

== Notes ==
This article incorporates public domain material from the Library of Congress Country Studies website http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/.


==
References ==
Richard M. Bennett, The Syrian Military:
A Primer, Middle East Intelligence Bulletin, August/September 2001.

Cooper, Tom (2015).
Syrian Conflagration: The Civil War 2011-2013.
Middle East@War Volume 1.
Helion & Co. ISBN 978-1-910294-10-9.[1]
Joseph Holliday, 'The Assad Regime:
From Counterinsurgency to Civil War,' Institute for the Study of War, March 2013.
The best concise description and analysis of the Syrian Army and its involvement in the current Syrian Civil War until Cooper 2015.

International Institute for Strategic Studies (2019).
"
The Military Balance 2019".
Military Balance.
London: Routledge.
doi:10.1080/04597222.2018.1561033.
ISSN 1479-9022.

Pollack, Kenneth M. (2002).
Arabs at War:
Military Effectiveness
1948–91.
Lincoln and London: University of Nebraska Press.
Reviewed in Brooks, Risa A.
"Making Military Might: Why Do States Fail and Succeed?
A Review Essay."
International Security 28, no.
2
(Fall 2003): 149-191.

==
Further reading ==
Department of the Army, Area Handbook for Syria, Washington, For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Govt.
Print.
Off.,
1965, "Department of the Army pamphlet
no.
550-47.
"
Revision of the 1958 edition.

Pesach Melovany, Out of the North an Evil shall break forth, Tel-Aviv: Contento de Semrik, 2014.

Hicham Bou Nassif, 'Second Class:
the Grievances of Sunni Officers in the Syrian Armed Forces'
History of the Syrian Arab Army: Prussianization of the Arab Army, the Arab Revolt of 1916–1918, and the cult of nationalization of Arabs in the Levant after World War I, Infantry Magazine, Nov-Dec 2005.

General Mustafa Tlas (ed.)
,
History of the Syrian Arab Army
/Al-Tareekh Al-Jaish Al-Arabi Al-Soori, Volume 1: 1901–1948, Center for Military Studies.
Damascus, 2000.
Volume 1 is 568 pages long and covers the Arab Revolt, the short-lived monarchy under King Feisal bin Hussein, the French Mandate, the 1948 Arab-Israeli War and finally Syrian independence in 1949.

==
External links ==
Video:
ISIS secret sniper precisely targeted with Syrian Army's missile
Gregory Waters
The Lion and The Eagle: The Syrian Arab Army’s Destruction and Rebirth, July 18, 2019
The list of equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces can be subdivided into: infantry weapons, vehicles, aircraft, watercraft, and clothing.

==
Small arms ==
== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Infantry fighting vehicles ===


===
Armored personnel carriers ===


===
Artillery ===


===
Anti-aircraft ===
Long and Medium air defense is under the authority of the Air Defense Forces of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Engineering vehicles ===


===
Utility vehicles ===


===
Cargo vehicles ===


===
Electronic warfare and communication ===
Communication equipment
Jammers
Eavesdropping equipment


===
Radars ==
=
Radar for long and medium air defense are under Radiolocation Forces authority of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Helicopters ===


===
Unmanned aerial vehicles and autonomous vehicles ===


===
Field kitchen units ===


==
See also ==
Ukrainian Ground Forces
Equipment of the National Guard of Ukraine
Equipment of the Ukrainian Air Force
List of armoured fighting vehicles of Ukraine


==
References ==
List of military equipment used by Syrian opposition forces in the Syrian Civil War.
This list does not include equipment used by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant and the Syrian Democratic Forces.

==
Sources ==
Large equipment like tanks and vehicles are generally captured from Syrian Army supplies, but small arms are likely a mixture of captured Syrian Army weapons, weapons imported by foreign combatants joining the opposition forces, or other sources.
These include funding by private donors (notably from the Gulf region) and equipment supplied by friendly nations.

The U.S. supplied a considerable amount of weapons and ammunition, of both American and Soviet-type from Eastern Europe, to Syrian rebel groups under operation Timber Sycamore.
For example, Jane's Defence Weekly reported that in December 2015 the U.S. shipped 994 tonnes of weapons and ammunition (including packaging and container weight).

==
Small arms ==
== Grenades, grenade launchers and explosives ==


==
Anti-tank weapons ==


==
Anti-aircraft weapons ==


==
Artillery and Mortars ==


==
Tanks and armoured vehicles ==


==
References ==
This is a list of flags used in Russia.

==
Flag of the Russian Federation ==


==
Flags of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation ==
A majority of the flags of the Russian Armed Forces mimic the flag designs of the Imperial Russian Army and Navy, while some flags are directly based on Soviet-era flags.
Most notably, the flag of the Russian Airborne troops is based on the flag of the Soviet Airborne troops, and the flag of the Russian Aerospace forces is based on the Soviet Air Force flag.
Many Russian military flags and regiment banners employ the Cross of Saint George within their design, which was heavily in use by the Imperial Russia Army up to the early 20th century.
These military banners shared many similarities to the regiment banners of the Prussian Army, which in some cases looked almost identical to each other.
Around 2006, many traditional Russian banners replaced Soviet-era regiment banners in favor of moving away from Communist oriented iconography.

===
Flags of service branches ===


===
Flags of the Ground Forces ===
Flags of the arms of the Ground Forces of the Russian Federation


===
Flags of the Aerospace Forces ===
The Aerospace Forces are a branch of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, it has three arms, the Russian Air Force, the Air Defense Forces, and the Russian Space Forces.
The Air Defense Forces does not have a flag.

===
Flags of the Rear of the Russian Armed Forces (1992–2010) ===


===
Military district flags ===


===
Banners of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation ===
Each branch of the Armed Forces has a representative banner, one for the Ground Forces, the Aerospace Forces, the Navy, and one to represent the entire Armed Forces as a whole.

===
Victory Banner ===
The Victory Banner was a historical banner raised atop of the Reichstag building in Berlin, by the Red Army, on May 1, 1945.
It signified the victory over Nazi Germany, and served as the main symbol of victory of the Soviet people.
It was amended in Russian law in 1996, but with a new design to distance the new Russian state from any usage of Communist iconography.
In 2007, following pressure from Red Army veterans, the original Victory Banner design replaced the 1996 variant, and has since then served its usage in virtually every single Victory Day parade held across Russia.

===
Command Standards ===


==
Flags of paramilitary organizations ==


===
Flags of special services ===


==
Historical flags of Russia ==


==
Historical banners of Russia ==


==
Historical standards of Russia ==


==
Flags of Russian cities ==


==
Historical flags of the short-lived states during the Russian Civil War
==
==
Historical flags of the Soviet Union
==


=
=
See also ==
Flags of the federal subjects of Russia
List of Sakha flags
List of Russian navy flags
List of Soviet navy flags
Flag of the Russian-American Company


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Flags of Russia at Wikimedia Commons
Flags of Russia:
Флаги России-VEXILLOGRAPHIA
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to war:
War – organised and often prolonged armed conflict that is carried out by states or non-state actors – is characterised by extreme violence, social disruption, and economic destruction.
War should be understood as an actual, intentional and widespread armed conflict between political communities, and therefore is defined as a form of political violence or intervention.
Warfare – refers to the common activities and characteristics of types of war, or of wars in general.

== Types of war ==


===
Types of warfare ===
Asymmetric warfare
Expeditionary warfare
Expeditionary maneuver warfare


====
Warfare by objective ====
Defensive warfare
Offensive warfare


====
Warfare by strategic doctrine ====
====
Warfare by terrain ====
====
Warfare by equipment or weapon type ====


====
Warfare by era ====
====
Warfare by stages ====
First-generation warfare – refers to battles fought with massed manpower, using line and column tactics with uniformed soldiers governed by the state.
It includes the earliest stages of organized, state-controlled armed forces waging war in the modern era.

Second-generation warfare – tactics of warfare used after the invention of the rifled musket and breech-loading weapons and continuing through the development of the machine gun and indirect fire.

Third-generation warfare – focuses on using speed and surprise to bypass the enemy's lines and collapse their forces from the rear.
Essentially, this was the end of linear warfare on a tactical level, with units seeking not simply to meet each other face to face but to outmaneuver each other to gain the greatest advantage.

Fourth-generation warfare – conflict characterized by a blurring of the lines between war and politics, soldier and civilian.
It includes any war in which one of the major participants is not a state but rather a violent non-state actor.
Fourth-generation warfare is characterized by the nation states' loss of their near-monopoly on combat forces, returning to modes of conflict common in pre-modern times.

====
Other ====
Champion warfare
Underwater warfare


== History of war ==


===
Warfare by era ==
=
See:
Warfare by era, above
===
Wars ===


====
Wars by death toll ====
List of wars by death toll


====
Wars by date ====


====
Wars by region ====


====
Wars by type of conflict ====


===
Battles ===
Lists of battles
List of battles by casualties
List of orders of battle
List of sieges


===
Factions and forces ===


== Weapons of war ==


==
Military theory ==
Military theory
Philosophy of war
Principles of war
War cycles


===
Military organization ===


====
Operational level of war ====
Blitzkrieg
Soviet deep battle
Maneuver warfare
Operational manoeuvre group


=====
Military operations =====
List of military operations
Military operation plan
Military operations other than war


=====
=
Types of military operations ======
Types of military operations, by scope:

Theater
– operation over a large, often continental area of operation and represents a strategic national commitment to the conflict such as Operation Barbarossa, with general goals that encompass areas of consideration outside of the military such as the economic and political impacts.

Campaign – subset of the theatre operation, or a more limited geographic and operational strategic commitment such as Battle of Britain, and need not represent total national commitment to a conflict, or have broader goals outside of the military impacts.

Battle – subset of a campaign that will have specific military goals and geographic objectives, as well as clearly defined use of forces such as the Battle of Gallipoli, which operationally was a combined arms operation originally known as the "Dardanelles landings" as part of the Dardanelles Campaign, where about 480,000 Allied troops took part.

Engagement – tactical combat event of contest for specific area or objective by actions of distinct units.
For example, the Battle of Kursk, also known from its German designation as Operation Citadel, included many separate engagements, several of which were combined into the Battle of Prokhorovka.
The "Battle of Kursk" in addition to describing the initial German offensive operation (or simply an offensive), also included two Soviet counter-offensive operations Operation Kutuzov and Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev.

Strike – single attack, upon a specified target.
This often forms part of a broader engagement.
Strikes have an explicit goal, such as, rendering facilities inoperable (e.g. airports), to assassinating enemy leaders, or to limit supply to enemy troops.

===
Military strategy ===
Attrition warfare
Battlespace
Military deception
Strategic defence
Offensive (military)
Strategic goal (military)
Naval strategy


====
Grand strategy ====
Containment
Economic warfare
Military science
Philosophy of war
Strategic studies
Total war
====
Military tactics ====


==
Politics of war ==
Casus belli – Latin expression meaning the justification for acts of war.
In theory, present international law allows only three situations as legal cause to go to war: out of self-defense, defense of an ally under a mutual defense pact, or sanctioned by the UN.

Declaration of war
War effort
War economy
Surrender
Capitulation an agreement in time of war for the surrender to a hostile armed force of a particular body of troops, a town or a territory.

Strategic surrender – surrender to avoid a last, chaotic round of fighting that would have the characteristics of a rout, allowing the victor to obtain his objective without paying the costs of a last battle.

Unconditional surrender – surrender without conditions, except for those provided by international law.

Victory
Debellatio – when a war ends because of the complete destruction of a belligerent state.

No quarter – when a victor shows no clemency or mercy and refuses to spare the life of the vanquished when they surrender at discretion.
Under the laws of war "... it is especially forbidden ... to declare that no quarter will be given".

Pyrrhic victory – victory with such a devastating cost
that it carries the implication that another such victory will ultimately lead to defeat.

===
Philosophy of war ===
Philosophy of war – examines war beyond the typical questions of weaponry and strategy, inquiring into such things as the meaning and etiology of war, the relationship between war and human nature, and the ethics of war.

Militarism – belief that war is not inherently bad but can be a beneficial aspect of society.

Realism – its core proposition is a skepticism as to whether moral concepts such as justice can be applied to the conduct of international affairs.
Proponents of realism believe that moral concepts should never prescribe, nor circumscribe, a state's behaviour.
Instead, a state should place an emphasis on state security and self-interest.
One form of realism – descriptive realism – proposes that states cannot act morally, while another form – prescriptive realism – argues that the motivating factor for a state is self-interest.
Just wars that violate Just Wars principles effectively constitute a branch of realism.

Revolution and Civil War – Just War Theory states that a just war must have just authority.
To the extent that this is interpreted as a legitimate government, this leaves little room for revolutionary war or civil war, in which an illegitimate entity may declare war for reasons that fit the remaining criteria of Just War Theory.
This is less of a problem if the "just authority" is widely interpreted as "the will of the people" or similar.
Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions side-steps this issue by stating that if one of the parties to a civil war is a High Contracting Party (in practice, the state recognised by the international community,) both Parties to the conflict are bound "as a minimum, the following [humanitarian] provisions."
Article 4 of the Third Geneva Convention also makes clear that the treatment of prisoners of war is binding on both parties even when captured soldiers have an "allegiance to a government or an authority not recognized by the Detaining Power."

Absolutism – holds that there are various ethical rules that are absolute.
Breaking such moral rules is never legitimate and therefore is always unjustifiable.

Pacifism – belief that war of any kind is morally unacceptable or pragmatically not worth the cost.
Pacifists extend humanitarian concern not just to enemy civilians but also to combatants, especially conscripts.
For example, Ben Salmon believed all war to be unjust.
He was sentenced to death during World War I (later commuted to 25 years hard labor) for desertion and spreading propaganda.

Right of self-defence – maintains (based on rational self-interest) that the use of retaliatory force is justified against repressive nations that break the zero aggression principle.
In addition, if a free country is itself subject to foreign aggression, it is morally imperative for that nation to defend itself and its citizens by whatever means necessary.
Thus, any means to achieve a swift and complete victory over the enemy is imperative.
This view is prominently held by Objectivists.

Consequentialism – moral theory most frequently summarized in the words "the end justifies the means," which tends to support the just war theory (unless the just war causes less beneficial means to become necessary, which further requires worst actions for self-defense with bad consequences).
=== Laws of war ===
Laws of war
War crimes
List of war crimes


===
Prisoners of war ===
===
Effects of war ===
Effects of war

Casualties
Casualty
Casualty classifications
KIA –
Killed In Action
DOW - Died Of Wounds
MIA –
Missing In Action
WIA – Wounded in action
Assassination
List of genocides by death toll


==
War and culture ==


==
War-related media ==


===
War publications ===
The Art of War
On War


===
War films ===
List of war films and TV specials – lists movies and shows by the war depicted in them, the sections arranged chronologically


==
Persons influential in war ==
List of military writers


==
See also ==


===
War ===
===
Wars ===


==
References ==
Charles Phillips and Alan Axelrod: Encyclopedia of Wars.
Facts On File, Inc., 2005, ISBN 0-8160-2851-6.
(
With about 1,800 wars, this is probably the most complete overview in English language).

R. Ernest Dupuy, Trevor N. Dupuy:
The Harper Encyclopedia of Military History.
From 3500 B.C. to the Present.
4th Edition, HarperCollins Publisher, 1993, ISBN 978-0062700568.
(
With about 1,300 wars this is probably the second most complete overview in English language, with the added value to summarize about 4,500 battles).

Vittorio Ferretti:
Weltchronik der Kriege und Demozide - Ein Abriss der Ursachen, Abläufe und Folgen von über 5.000 gewalttätig ausgetragenen Konflikten bis zum Jahr 2000.
Amazon, 2014, ISBN 978-3000403538.
(
With over 5,000 conflicts, this German book is by far the most complete overview published in any language till now.
Its added value is to include democides into its scope).

==
External links ==

World History Database Listing of all wars
Newspaper by Martin John Callanan translated into different languages listing all wars "[1]"
Correlates of War Project
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Complex Emergency Database (CE-DAT) –
A database on the human impact of conflicts and other complex emergencies.

World War
I primary source collection
International humanitarian law – International Committee of the Red Cross website
Customary international humanitarian law International Committee of the Red Cross
International humanitarian law database – Treaties and States Parties
Customary IHL Database
 War zone safety travel guide from Wikivoyage
This is a list of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces currently in service.

==
Individual equipment ==


==
Small arms ==


==
Artillery ==


== Vehicles ==


==
Unmanned vehicles ==


==
Future equipment ==


==
Future vehicles ==


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
GlobalSecurity
Warfare.be Russian Military Analysis
(Archived 18 May 2016)
Russian Army Military equipment and vehicles of Russia on armyrecognition.com
ЦАМТО /
Новости / Валерий Герасимов:
за
пятилетний период принято
на
вооружение более
300 новых образцов
ВиВТ
The Type 56 (Chinese: 56式自动步枪; literally; "Type 56 Automatic Rifle") also known as the AK-56, is a Chinese 7.62×39mm rifle.
It is a variant of the Soviet-designed AK-47 (specifically Type 3) and AKM rifles.
Production started in 1956 at State Factory 66 but was eventually handed over to Norinco and PolyTech, who continue to manufacture the rifle primarily for export.

==
Service history ==
During the Cold War period, the Type-56 was exported to many countries and guerrilla forces throughout the world.
Many of these rifles found their way to battlefields in Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Middle East and were used alongside other Kalashnikov pattern weapons from both the Soviet Union as well the Warsaw Pact nations of Eastern Europe.

Chinese support for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam before the mid-1960s meant that the Type-56 was frequently encountered by American soldiers in the hands of either Vietcong guerrillas or PAVN soldiers during the Vietnam war.
The Type-56 was discovered far more often than the original Russian-made AK-47s or AKMs.
When relations between China and North Vietnam crumbled in the 1970s and the Sino-Vietnamese War began, the Vietnamese government still possessed vast quantities of Type-56 rifles in its inventory.
The People's Liberation Army still used the Type 56 as its standard weapon during this time as well.
Thus, Chinese and Vietnamese forces fought each other using the same rifle.

The Type 56 was used extensively by Iranian forces during the Iran–Iraq War of the 1980s, with Iran purchasing large quantities of weapons from China for its armed forces.
During the war, Iraq also purchased a small quantity, despite them being a major recipient of Soviet weapons and assistance during the conflict.
This was done in conjunction with their purchasing of a large number of AKMs from Eastern Europe.
Consequently, the Iran–Iraq War became another conflict in which both sides utilized
the Type 56.

Since the end of the Cold War, the Type-56 has been used in many conflicts by various military forces.
During the Croatian War of Independence and the Yugoslav Wars, it was used by the armed forces of Croatia.
During the late 1990s, the Kosovo Liberation Army in Kosovo were also major users of the Type 56, with the vast majority of the weapons originating from People's Socialist Republic of Albania, which received Chinese support during much of the Cold War.

In the United Kingdom and United States, the Type-56 and its derivatives are frequently used in the filming of movies and television shows, standing in for Russian-made AK-47s due to their rarity among Kalashnikov style weapons.
Type-56s are oftentimes visually modified to resemble other AK variants.
In addition, versions of the Type-56 that have had their select fire ability removed (referred to as "sporter" rifles) are also available for civilian ownership in most parts of the United States.

In the mid-1980s, Sri Lanka began to replace their British L1A1 Self-Loading Rifle (SLR) and German HK G3s with the Type 56-2.
Currently, the side-folding stock variant (Type 56-2) issued as the standard primary firearm.

The Type 81, Type 95 and Type 03
replaced the Type 56 in PLA front line service, but the Type 56 remains in use with reserve and militia units.
Type 56s are still in production by Norinco for export customers.

During the Soviet–Afghan War in the 1980s, many Chinese Type 56 rifles were supplied to Afghan Mujahideen guerrillas to fight Soviet forces.
The rifles were supplied by China, Pakistan and the US who obtained them from third party arms dealers.
There is photographic evidence from Soviet/Russian sources where captured Chinese Type 56 rifles were utilized by Soviet Army soldiers in Afghanistan in lieu with their standard-issue Soviet AKM and AK-74 rifles.

Use of the Type 56 in Afghanistan also continued well into the early 21st century as the standard rifle of the Taliban such as when Taliban forces seized control of Kabul in 1996 (a majority of the Chinese small arms used by the Taliban were provided by Pakistan).Since the overthrow of the Taliban by U.S.-led Coalition forces in late 2001, the Type-56 assault rifle has been utilized by the Afghan National Army, serving alongside many other AK-47 and AKM variant rifles.

The Type-56 has been regularly seen in the hands of militants from the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades, the armed wing of Hamas in the Palestinian territories.

The Type-56 has been used by the Janjaweed in the Darfur region of Sudan with pictures and news footage showing members of the Janjaweed carrying the rifles (most of them provided by the Sudanese government).

In 1987, Michael Ryan used a legally owned Type-56 rifle, and two other firearms, in the Hungerford massacre in the United Kingdom, in which he shot 32 people, 17 of whom died.
The attack led to the passage of Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988, which bans ownership of semi-automatic centre-fire rifles and restricts the use of shotguns.
In the United States, a Type-56 rifle, purchased in Oregon under a false name, was used in the 1989 Stockton schoolyard shooting in which Patrick Purdy fired over 100 rounds to shoot one teacher and 34 children, killing five.
The shooting led to the passage of California's Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989.
A Type 56, along with a Type 56 S-1, were used by Larry Phillips, Jr. and Emil Mătăsăreanu during the 1997 North Hollywood shootout.
In the ongoing Syrian Civil War,  Type-56 assault rifles are typically seen in the hands of Free Syrian Army forces.

==
Compared to AK-47 and AKM ==
Originally, the Type-56 was a direct copy of the AK-47's final iteration, the Type 3 AK-47, and featured a milled receiver,  Starting in the mid-1960s, the guns were manufactured with stamped receivers much like the Soviet AKM.
Visually, most versions of the Type 56 are distinguished from the AK-47 and AKM by the fully enclosed hooded front sight (all other AK pattern rifles, including those made in Russia, have a partially open front sight).
Many versions also feature a folding bayonet attached to the barrel just aft of the muzzle.
There are three different types of bayonets made for Type 56 rifles.
The first Type-56s were near-identical copies of the Soviet milled
AK-47.
There is some speculation that the Chinese had to reverse engineer a copy of the AKM with the stamped receiver as they were not given a licence to produce the AKM and RPK by the Soviets because of failing relations after the Sino-Soviet split.

The Type 56 has a 1.6mm stamped receiver (like the RPK, although it lacks the reinforced trunnion of the RPK) versus the 1mm stamping of the AKM.
Also uses a different riveting pattern that is similar to the RPK.
Certain versions of the 56S/MAK-90 have a milled receiver.

The barrel on the Type 56 is similar to the AK-47 and heavier than that of the AKM though is pinned in like the AKM and unlike the AK-47.
Military issued versions of the Type-56
also lack the threaded muzzle found on the AK-47 and AKM
, this means they cannot use an AKM compensator or blank-firing device.
Commercial versions of the Type 56 may or may not have a threaded muzzle.

The front sights are fully enclosed with a hood, compared to the AKM and AK-47 which have partially opened "ears".
The front sight base has a shape similar to the AK-47 and may also have a SKS style folding spike bayonet (nicknamed the "pig sticker") as opposed to the lug for detachable knife bayonets on the AK-47 and AKM.
There are three different types of spike bayonets made for the Type-56 and the Type-56 assault rifle is the only AK variant that utilizes a spike bayonet.
Certain versions of the Type 56-II support standard AK-47 and AKM bayonets.

Has the double hook disconnector of the AK-47 rather than the single hook disconnector of the AKM.
As a result it also lacks the hammer release delay device of the AKM (a.k.a.
the "Rate Reducer").
The lack of hammer retarder is perhaps due to a preference of a slightly higher rate of fire, and simplicity.
And did not have anything to do with thickness of the receiver, as the RPK included the hammer retarder also.

Has "in the white" bolt carrier, while the AKM bolt carrier is blued.
Also lacks the various lightening cuts, though has a flat firing pin.
Many civilian/export versions have a firing pin spring to prevent possible slamfires when used with softer commercial primers as opposed to the original free floating type.
Some were added by importers rather than being a factory equipped part.

Has the flat/smooth handguards of the AK-47, with a storage slit underneath on versions equipped with the spike bayonet.
Uniquely, it lacks vent cuts on the upper gas tube heatguard.
Also retains a metal ferrule that sits between the lower handguard and the front of the receiver that the AK-47 had.

The pistol grip is the same kind as the AK-47 being made out of wood with a metal ferrule between it and the receiver instead of the later one piece bakelite like the AKM.
The Type 56-II uses the AKM style with slightly different shape.

The trigger guard is held in place with only three rivets (one on each side and one beneath the pistol grip) where as the AK-47 and AKM have five (two on each side and one beneath the pistol grip).

Has a smooth dust cover like the AK-47 and unlike the ribbed dust cover of the AKM.
However, it utilizes the simpler dual "U"-shaped recoil spring guide of the AKM instead of the telescoping rod of the AK-47.
Has a blued finish like the AK-47 and unlike the AKM, which has a black oxide finish or a parkerized finish.

Like the AK-47, sights will only adjust to 800 metres, whereas AKM sights adjust to 1000 metres.
It also retains the button on the right side.

Nearly all Type 56's lack the side mount plate that was featured on many variations of the AK-47 and AKM.

The gas relief ports are located on the gas tube like the AK-47, unlike the AKM which had the gas relief ports relocated forward to the gas block.
The gas block is also like the
AK-47 in that it has the forward sling loop (instead of the handguard) and a cleaning rod capture.

The fixed stock of a Type 56 has a less in-line stock like the AK-47, opposed to the AKM which has a straighter stock.
It, however, uses the AKM style single upper tang insert type attachment method and has the rear sling mount on the underside of the stock as opposed to the AK-47 dual tang type and receiver side sling mount.
Its rear trunnion is also very similar to the AKM, though the distance between the rivets are different.
Certain versions of the 56S/MAK-90 have an angled receiver back wall, though these are typically milled variants with a thumb hole stock.

The underfolders have stamped stocks like the AKMS but only lock on the left and are angled downwards like the AKS-47.
The stocks are also typically made out of thicker steel, thus have less reinforcing ribs and detents, and they also lack the pistol grip reinforcement plate and true rear trunnion of the AKMS, having a simple pseudo end-cap rear trunnion, likely due to the thicker receiver.
==
Variants ==
Type 56 –
Basic variant introduced in 1956.
A copy of the AK-47 with a fixed wooden stock and permanently attached spike bayonet.
In the mid-1960s production switched from machined to stamped receivers, mimicking the improved (and cheaper) Russian AKM, while the permanently attached bayonet became optional.
Still used by Chinese reserve and militia units.

Type 56-I –
Copy of the AKS, with an under-folding steel shoulder stock and the bayonet removed to make the weapon easier to carry.
As with the original Type 56, milled receivers were replaced by stamped receivers in the mid-1960s, making the Type 56-1 an equivalent to the Russian AKMS.
Civilian semi-auto versions (Type 56S-I) may have the spike bayonet added, though it is worth noting that this is not original military configuration.

Type 56-II – Improved variant introduced in 1980, with a side-folding stock and dark orange bakelite furniture.
The bakelite on the stock also houses a cleaning kit, which both underfolding AKs (all nations) and other sidefolding AKs lacked instead requiring a separate pouch.
It also allows a traditional detachable bayonet, both AK-47 and AKM styles, as an option in addition to the folding spike style.
Mainly manufactured for export and rare in China as the Type 81 was already in production by the time of conception.

RK 56 TP TÄYD –
Modified Type 56-II in China for Finnish use
, this is just an Type 56-II with a new hammer spring that allows for firing of Finnish 7.62x39.

Type 56-3 & Type 56-4 – Versions of the Type 56 and
Type 56-I with Type 56-II synthetic furniture and optional detachable bayonets.

Type 56C (QBZ-56C) – Short-barrel version, introduced in 1991 for the domestic and export market.
The QBZ-56C as it is officially designated in China, is a carbine variant of the Type 56-II and supplied in limited quantities to some PLA units.
The Chinese Navy is now the most prominent user.
Development began in 1988, after it was discovered that the Type 81 assault rifle was too difficult to shorten.
In order to further reduce weight the bayonet lug was removed.
The QBZ-56C is often carried with a twenty-round box magazine, although it is capable of accepting a standard Type 56 thirty-round magazine.
It also has a sidefolding stock in addition to a muzzle booster, giving it a similar appearance to the AKS-74U.
Type 56S or Type 56 Sporter, also known as the AK47S,
AKS-762 and MAK-90 (Model of the AK)-1990 – civilian version with only semiautomatic mode.
Later versions were modified to meet the requirements of a 1989 Executive Order by President George H. W. Bush prohibiting importation of certain 'assault rifle' configurations of military-style semi-automatic rifles such as the Norinco AKM/AK-47.
These modifications included a one-piece U.S.-made thumbhole stock to replace the separate Chinese-made buttstock and pistol grip of the original AK rifle and the inclusion of a rivet on the receiver preventing use of standard AK-47, RPK, or AKM magazines.

56S
Galil sidefolder – A special version of
the 56S/MAC-90 with an IMI Galil style side folding stock.
Was exclusive to the US market.

The Legend –
Another version of
the 56S/MAK-90 except configured to look like the Type 3 AK-47.
It is extremely faithful to the Type 3 design, even having a milled receiver and original AK-47 style bayonet lug, but does retain some manufacturing differences from the Type 56 such as the pinned in barrel, lack of vent cuts on the gas tube heat guard, only 3 rivets on the trigger guard, the stamped recoil guide rod, spring loaded firing pin and variance in machining such as on the receiver and lightening cuts.
Like the previous, US market only.

Type 56M or Type 56-5
– RPK style LMG version of the Type 56.
Utilizes a standard Type 56 stamped receiver and front trunnion, likely due to their rigidity, and its bi-pod is more RPD like then RPK, being tubular.
It seems to have two configurations with only minor cosmetic changes, one with standard AK-47/M open sights with "ears" and the bi-pod directly behind the front sight base, and a second configuration with typical Type 56 enclosed "hooded" sights and the bi-pod in front of the front sight base near the muzzle.
The latter version usually is seen with a birdcage flash hider or AK-74 style muzzle brake.
Like the Type 56-II, it was only made for export as the Type 81 LMG was selected for military service instead.
Civilian semi-auto sporter versions are known as the Type 87S (Type 86S-7) or NHM 91.
The semi-auto versions have also been sold with standard Type 56 stocks instead of the RPD "club foot" style as well as thumbhole variants after 1989.
A rare version known as the "National Match" was once sold with a milled receiver and scope and scope mount.

Type 84 –
An export version of the Type 56 rifle chambered for the 5.56×45mm NATO round.
Also has underfolder (Type 84-1) and sidefolder (Type 84-2) versions.
Civilian semi-auto version known as Type 84S and AKS-223.
Special matte black synthetic versions were also available as the Type 84-3, Type 84-4 (underfolder) and Type 84-5 (sidefolder).

Type 86S –
Semi automatic bullpup version.

KL-7.62 –
An unlicensed, reverse-engineered Iranian copy of the Type 56.
The original version of the KL-7.62 was indistinguishable from the Type 56, but in recent years DIO appears to have made some improvements to the Type 56 design, adding a plastic stock and handguards (rather than wood) and a ribbed receiver cover (featured on most AKM variants, but missing from the Type 56), as well as picatinny rails on newer versions.

MAZ – Sudanese licensed copy of the Type 56 made by Military Industry Corporation.

ASh78
(Automatiku Shqiptar 78) –
Albanian licensed copy of the Type 56.

TUL-1
- North Vietnamese-made variant, but with stock of an RPK, barrel sights from an RPD.
The TUL-1's body was thin, only 1 mm compared to the 1.5 mm of an RPK.
It was also heavier and had an inferior rate of fire compared to the RPK.
However, the firing rate and effective range of the weapon was better than an AK-47-based rifle.
The TUL-1s were manufactured between 1970–1974 and ended after Vietnam obtained production rights to the RPK itself.
They're known to use 30-round magazines from AK-47-based rifles with the occasional 40-round magazine.

==
Other Type 56 weapons ==
The "Type 56" designation was also used for Chinese versions of the SKS and of the RPD, known as the Type 56 carbine and Type 56 light machine gun respectively.
However, unlike the popular Type 56 rifle, all Type 56 carbines have been removed from military service, except a few used for ceremonial purposes and by local Chinese militia.

==
Users ==


==
See also ==
Type 63 assault rifle
Type 81 assault rifle
Type 88 assault rifle
Type 58/68 assault rifle, North Korean versions of the AK/AKM.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Sino Defence
Modern Firearms
Gun Violence Archive (GVA) is a nonprofit research group with accompanying website and social media delivery platforms which catalogs every incident of gun violence in the United States.
It was founded in 2013 by Michael Klein and Mark Bryant.
Klein is the founder of Sunlight Foundation, and Bryant is a retired systems analyst.

==
Website ==
GVA contains a database of known shootings in the United States, gleaned from 6,500 law enforcement, media and government sources.
GVA's methodology and definitions are found on the organization's website.

==
History ==
GVA was established in 2013, to provide verifiable gun violence data and statistics for the ongoing national [US] gun debate.
Gaps in both CDC and FBI data, as well as their lagging distribution, showed a need for near real-time data collection.

GVA has a staff of 20 professionals, with specialities from MSLS/MIS-degreed researchers and data archivists to systems architects and software engineers.

== See also ==
Crime in the United States
Firearm death rates in the United States by
state
Gun show loophole
Gunshot wound
Index of gun politics articles
Second Amendment to the United States Constitution
Armed violence reduction
List of countries by firearm-related death rate
Global gun cultures
Gunfire locator


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
A military, also known collectively as armed forces, is a heavily armed, highly organized force primarily intended for warfare.
It is typically officially authorized and maintained by a sovereign state, with its members identifiable by their distinct military uniform.
It may consist of one or more military branches such as an army, navy, air force, space force, marines, or coast guard.
The main task of the military is usually defined as defence of the state and its interests against external armed threats.

In broad usage, the terms armed forces and military are often treated as synonymous, although in technical usage a distinction is sometimes made in which a country's armed forces may include both its military and other paramilitary forces.
There are various forms of irregular military forces, not belonging to a recognized state; though they share many attributes with regular military forces, they are less often referred to as simply military.

A nation's military may function as a discrete social subculture, with dedicated infrastructure such as military housing, schools, utilities, logistics, hospitals, legal services, food production, finance, and banking services.
Beyond warfare, the military may be employed in additional sanctioned and non-sanctioned functions within the state, including internal security threats, population control, the promotion of a political agenda, emergency services and reconstruction, protecting corporate economic interests, social ceremonies and national honour guards.
The profession of soldiering as part of a military is older than recorded history itself.
Some of the most enduring images of  classical antiquity portray the power and feats of its military leaders.
The Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC was one of the defining points of Pharaoh Ramses II's reign, and his monuments commemorate it in bas-relief.
A thousand years later, the first emperor of unified China, Qin Shi Huang, was so determined to impress the gods with his military might that he had himself buried with an army of  terracotta soldiers.

The  Romans paid considerable attention to military matters, leaving to posterity many treatises and writings on the subject, as well as many lavishly carved triumphal arches and victory columns.

==
Etymology and definitions ==
The first recorded use of the word military in English, spelled militarie, was in 1582.
It comes from the Latin militaris (from Latin miles, meaning "soldier") through French, but is of uncertain etymology, one suggestion being derived from *mil-it- – going in a body or mass.
As a noun, the military usually refers generally to a country's armed forces, or sometimes, more specifically, to the senior officers who command them.
In general, it refers to the physicality of armed forces, their personnel, equipment, and the physical area which they occupy.

As an adjective, military originally referred only to soldiers and soldiering, but it soon broadened to apply to land forces in general, and anything to do with their profession.
The names of both the Royal Military Academy (1741) and United States Military Academy (1802) reflect this.
However, at about the time of the Napoleonic Wars, 'military' began to be used in reference to armed forces as a whole, such as 'military service', 'military intelligence', and 'military history'.
As such, it now connotes any activity performed by armed force personnel.

==
History ==
Military history is often considered to be the history of all conflicts, not just the history of the state militaries.
It differs somewhat from the history of war, with military history focusing on the people and institutions of war-making, while the history of war focuses on the evolution of war itself in the face of changing technology, governments, and geography.

Military history has a number of facets.
One main facet is to learn from past accomplishments and mistakes, so as to more effectively wage war in the future.
Another is to create a sense of military tradition, which is used to create cohesive military forces.
Still, another may be to learn to prevent wars more effectively.
Human knowledge about the military is largely based on both recorded and oral history of military conflicts (war), their participating armies and navies and, more recently, air forces.

== Organization ==


===
Personnel and units ===
Despite the growing importance of military technology, military activity depends above all on people.
For example, in 2000 the British Army declared: "Man is still the first weapon of war."
====
Rank and role ====
The military organization is characterized by a strict command hierarchy divided by military rank, with ranks normally grouped (in descending order of authority) as officers (e.g. Colonel), non-commissioned officers (e.g. Sergeant), and personnel at the lowest rank (e.g. Private Soldier).
While senior officers make strategic decisions, subordinated military personnel (soldiers, sailors, marines, or airmen) fulfil them.
Although rank titles vary by military branch and country, the rank hierarchy is common to all state armed forces worldwide.

In addition to their rank, personnel occupy one of many trade roles, which are often grouped according to the nature of the role's military tasks on combat operations:
combat roles (e.g. infantry), combat support roles (e.g. combat engineers), and combat service support roles (e.g. logistical support).
====
Recruitment ====
Personnel may be recruited or conscripted, depending on the system chosen by the state.
Most military personnel are males; the minority proportion of female personnel varies internationally
(approximately 3% in India, 10% in the UK, 13% in Sweden, 16% in the US, and 27% in South Africa).
While two-thirds of states now recruit or conscript only adults, as of 2017 50 states still relied partly on children under the age of 18 (usually aged 16 or 17) to staff their armed forces.
Whereas recruits who join as officers tend to be upwardly-mobile, most enlisted personnel have a childhood background of relative socio-economic deprivation.
For example, after the US suspended conscription in 1973, "the military disproportionately attracted African American men, men from lower-status socioeconomic backgrounds, men who had been in nonacademic high school programs, and men whose high school grades tended to be low".
However, a study released in 2020 on the socio-economic backgrounds of U.S. Armed Forces personnel suggests that they are at parity or slightly higher than the civilian population with respect to socio-economic indicators such as parental income, parental wealth and cognitive abilities.
The study found that technological, tactical, operational and doctrinal changes have led to a change in the demand for personnel.
Furthermore, the study suggests that the most disadvantaged socio-economic groups are less likely to meet the requirements of the modern U.S. military.

====
Obligations ====
The obligations of military employment are many.
Full-time military employment normally requires a minimum period of service of several years; between two and six years is typical of armed forces in Australia, the UK and the US, for example, depending on role, branch, and rank.
Some armed forces allow a short discharge window, normally during training, when recruits may leave the armed force as of right.
Alternatively, part-time military employment, known as reserve service, allows a recruit to maintain a civilian job while training under military discipline at weekends; he or she may be called out to deploy on operations to supplement the full-time personnel complement.
After leaving the armed forces, recruits may remain liable for compulsory return to full-time military employment in order to train or deploy on operations.
Military law introduces offences not recognised by civilian courts, such as absence without leave (AWOL), desertion, political acts, malingering, behaving disrespectfully, and disobedience (see, for example, offences against military law in the United Kingdom).
Penalties range from a summary reprimand to imprisonment for several years following a court martial.
Certain fundamental rights are also restricted or suspended, including the freedom of association (e.g. union organizing) and freedom of speech (speaking to the media).
Military personnel in some countries have a right of conscientious objection if they believe an order is immoral or unlawful, or cannot in good conscience carry it out.

Personnel may be posted to bases in their home country or overseas, according to operational need, and may be deployed from those bases on exercises or operations anywhere in the world.
During peacetime, when military personnel are generally stationed in garrisons or other permanent military facilities, they mostly conduct administrative tasks, training and education activities, technology maintenance, and recruitment.

====
Training ====
Initial training conditions recruits for the demands of military life, including preparedness to injure and kill other people, and to face mortal danger without fleeing.
It is a physically and psychologically intensive process which resocializes recruits for the unique nature of military demands.
For example:

Individuality is suppressed (e.g. by shaving the head of new recruits, issuing uniforms, denying privacy, and prohibiting the use of first names);
Daily routine is tightly controlled (e.g. recruits must make their beds, polish boots, and stack their clothes in a certain way, and mistakes are punished);
Continuous stressors deplete psychological resistance to the demands of their instructors (e.g. depriving recruits of sleep, food, or shelter, shouting insults and giving orders intended to humiliate)
Frequent punishments serve to condition group conformity and discourage poor performance;
The disciplined drill instructor is presented as a role model of the ideal soldier.

===
Intelligence ===
The next requirement comes as a fairly basic need for the military to identify possible threats it may be called upon to face.
For this purpose, some of the commanding forces and other military, as well as often civilian personnel participate in identification of these threats.
This is at once an organization, a system and a process collectively called military intelligence (MI).

The difficulty in using military intelligence concepts and military intelligence methods is in the nature of the secrecy of the information they seek, and the clandestine nature that intelligence operatives work in obtaining what may be plans for a conflict escalation, initiation of combat, or an invasion.

An important part of the military intelligence role is the military analysis performed to assess military capability of potential future aggressors, and provide combat modelling that helps to understand factors on which comparison of forces can be made.
This helps to quantify and qualify such statements as: "China and India maintain the largest armed forces in the World" or that "the U.S. Military is considered to be the world's strongest".

Although some groups engaged in combat, such as militants or resistance movements, refer to themselves using military terminology, notably 'Army' or 'Front', none have had the structure of a national military to justify the reference, and usually have had to rely on support of outside national militaries.
They also use these terms to conceal from the MI their true capabilities, and to impress potential ideological recruits.

Having military intelligence representatives participate in the execution of the national defence policy is important, because it becomes the first respondent and commentator on the policy expected strategic goal, compared to the realities of identified threats.
When the intelligence reporting is compared to the policy, it becomes possible for the national leadership to consider allocating resources over and above the officers and their subordinates military pay, and the expense of maintaining military facilities and military support services for them.

===
Economics ===
Defense economics is the financial and monetary efforts made to resource and sustain militaries, and to finance military operations, including war.

The process of allocating resources is conducted by determining a military budget, which is administered by a military finance organization within the military.
Military procurement is then authorized to purchase or contract provision of goods and services to the military, whether in peacetime at a permanent base, or in a combat zone from local population.

===
Capability development ===
Capability development, which is often referred to as the military 'strength', is arguably one of the most complex activities known to humanity; because it requires determining: strategic, operational, and tactical capability requirements to counter the identified threats; strategic, operational, and tactical doctrines by which the acquired capabilities will be used; identifying concepts, methods, and systems involved in executing the doctrines; creating design specifications for the manufacturers who would produce these in adequate quantity and quality for their use in combat; purchase the concepts, methods, and systems; create a forces structure that would use the concepts, methods, and systems most effectively and efficiently; integrate these concepts, methods, and systems into the force structure by providing military education, training, and practice that preferably resembles combat environment of intended use; create military logistics systems to allow continued and uninterrupted performance of military organizations under combat conditions, including provision of health services to the personnel, and maintenance for the equipment; the services to assist recovery of wounded personnel, and repair of damaged equipment; and finally, post-conflict demobilization, and disposal of war stocks surplus to peacetime requirements.

Development of military doctrine is perhaps the more important of all capability development activities, because it determines how military forces were, and are used in conflicts, the concepts and methods used by the command to employ appropriately military skilled, armed and equipped personnel in achievement of the tangible goals and objectives of the war, campaign, battle, engagement, action or a duel.
The line between strategy and tactics is not easily blurred, although deciding which is being discussed had sometimes been a matter of personal judgement by some commentators, and military historians.
The use of forces at the level of organization between strategic and tactical is called operational mobility.

There have been attempts to produce a military strength index
: this is an example taken from a Credit Suisse report in September 2015.
The factors under consideration for that military strength indicator and their total weights were: number of active personnel in the armed forces (5%), tanks (10%), attack helicopters (15%), aircraft (20%), aircraft carriers (25%), and submarines (25%).
It was practically impossible to make an estimation of the actual training of the armed forces.

These were the results:


===
Science ===
Because most of the concepts and methods used by the military, and many of its systems are not found in commercial branches, much of the material is researched, designed, developed, and offered for inclusion in arsenals by military science organizations within the overall structure of the military.
Military scientists are therefore found to interact with all Arms and Services of the armed forces, and at all levels of the military hierarchy of command.

Although concerned with research into military psychology, particularly combat stress and
how it affect troop morale, often the bulk of military science activities is directed at military intelligence technology, military communications, and improving military capability through research.
The design, development, and prototyping of weapons, military support equipment, and military technology in general, is also an area in which much effort is invested – it includes everything from global communication networks and aircraft carriers to paint and food.

===
Logistics ===
Possessing military capability is not sufficient if this capability cannot be deployed for, and employed in combat operations.
To achieve this, military logistics are used for the logistics management and logistics planning of the forces military supply chain management, the consumables, and capital equipment of the troops.

Although mostly concerned with the military transport, as a means of delivery using different modes of transport; from military trucks, to container ships operating from permanent military base, it also involves creating field supply dumps at the rear of the combat zone, and even forward supply points in specific unit's Tactical Area of Responsibility.

These supply points are also used to provide military engineering services, such as the recovery of defective and derelict vehicles and weapons, maintenance of weapons in the field, the repair and field modification of weapons and equipment; and in peacetime, the life-extension programmes undertaken to allow continued use of equipment.
One of the most important role of logistics is the supply of munitions as a primary type of consumable, their storage, and disposal.

==
In combat ==
The primary reason for the existence of the military is to engage in combat, should it be required to do so by the national defence policy, and to win.
This represents an organisational goal of any military, and the primary focus for military thought through military history.
How victory is achieved, and what shape it assumes, is studied by most, if not all, military groups on three levels.

===
Strategic victory ===
Military strategy is the management of forces in wars and military campaigns by a commander-in-chief, employing large military forces, either national and allied as a whole, or the component elements of armies, navies and air forces; such as army groups, naval fleets, and large numbers of aircraft.
Military strategy is a long-term projection of belligerents' policy, with a broad view of outcome implications, including outside the concerns of military command.
Military strategy is more concerned with the supply of war and planning, than management of field forces and combat between them.
The scope of strategic military planning can span weeks, but is more often months or even years.
===
Operational victory ===
Operational mobility is, within warfare and military doctrine, the level of command which coordinates the minute details of tactics with the overarching goals of strategy.
A common synonym is operational art.

The operational level is at a scale bigger than one where line of sight and the time of day are important, and smaller than the strategic level, where production and politics are considerations.
Formations are of the operational level if they are able to conduct operations on their own, and are of sufficient size to be directly handled or have a significant impact at the strategic level.
This concept was pioneered by the German army prior to and during the Second World War.
At this level, planning and duration of activities takes from one week to a month, and are executed by Field Armies and Army Corps and their naval and air equivalents.

===
Tactical victory ===
Military tactics concerns itself with the methods for engaging and defeating the enemy in direct combat.
Military tactics are usually used by units over hours or days, and are focused on the specific, close proximity tasks and objectives of squadrons, companies, battalions, regiments, brigades, and divisions, and their naval and air force equivalents.
One of the oldest military publications is The Art of War, by the Chinese philosopher Sun Tzu.
Written in the 6th century BCE, the 13-chapter book is intended as military instruction, and not as military theory, but has had a huge influence on Asian military doctrine, and from the late 19th century, on European and United States military planning.
It has even been used to formulate business tactics, and can even be applied in social and political areas.

The Classical Greeks and the Romans wrote prolifically on military campaigning.
Among the best-known Roman works are Julius Caesar's commentaries on the Gallic Wars, and the Roman Civil war – written about 50 BC.

Two major works on tactics come from the late Roman period:
Taktike Theoria by Aelianus Tacticus, and De Re Militari ('On military matters') by Vegetius.
Taktike Theoria examined Greek military tactics, and was most influential in the Byzantine world and during the Golden Age of Islam.

De Re Militari formed the basis of European military tactics until the late 17th century.
Perhaps its most enduring maxim is Igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum (let he who desires peace prepare for war).

Due to the changing nature of combat with the introduction of artillery in the European Middle Ages, and infantry firearms in the Renaissance, attempts were made to define and identify those strategies, grand tactics, and tactics that would produce a victory more often than that achieved by the Romans in praying to the gods before the battle.

Later this became known as military science, and later still, would adopt the scientific method approach to the conduct of military operations under the influence of the Industrial Revolution thinking.
In his seminal book On War, the Prussian Major-General and leading expert on modern military strategy, Carl von Clausewitz defined military strategy as 'the employment of battles to gain the end of war'.
According to Clausewitz: 
strategy forms the plan of the War, and to this end it links together the series of acts which are to lead to the final decision, that is to say, it makes the plans for the separate campaigns and regulates the combats to be fought in each.

Hence, Clausewitz placed political aims above military goals, ensuring civilian control of the military.
Military strategy was one of a triumvirate of 'arts' or 'sciences' that governed the conduct of warfare, the others being: military tactics, the execution of plans and manoeuvring of forces in battle, and maintenance of an army.

The meaning of military tactics has changed over time; from the deployment and manoeuvring of entire land armies on the fields of ancient battles, and galley fleets; to modern use of small unit ambushes, encirclements, bombardment attacks, frontal assaults, air assaults, hit-and-run tactics used mainly by guerrilla forces, and, in some cases, suicide attacks on land and at sea.
Evolution of aerial warfare introduced its own air combat tactics.
Often, military deception, in the form of military camouflage or misdirection using decoys, is used to confuse the enemy as a tactic.

A major development in infantry tactics came with the increased use of trench warfare in the 19th and 20th centuries.
This was mainly employed in World War I in the Gallipoli campaign, and the Western Front.
Trench warfare often turned to a stalemate, only broken by a large loss of life, because, in order to attack an enemy entrenchment, soldiers had to run through an exposed 'no man's land' under heavy fire from their opposing entrenched enemy.

==
Technology ==
As with any occupation, since the ancient times, the military has been distinguished from other members of the society by their tools, the military weapons, and military equipment used in combat.
When Stone Age humans first took a sliver of flint to tip the spear, it was the first example of applying technology to improve the weapon.

Since then, the advances made by human societies, and that of weapons, has been irretrievably linked.
Stone weapons gave way to Bronze Age weapons, and later, the Iron Age weapons.
With each technological change, was realized some tangible increase in military capability, such as through greater effectiveness of a sharper edge in defeating leather armour, or improved density of materials used in manufacture of weapons.

On land, the first really significant technological advance in warfare was the development of the ranged weapons, and notably, the sling.
The next significant advance came with the domestication of the horses and mastering of equestrianism.

Arguably, the greatest invention that affected not just the military, but all society, after adoption of fire, was the wheel, and its use in the construction of the chariot.
There were no advances in military technology, until, from the mechanical arm action of a slinger, the Greeks, Egyptians, Romans, Persians, Chinese, etc.,
developed the siege engines.
The bow was manufactured in increasingly larger and more powerful versions, to increase both the weapon range, and armour penetration performance.
These developed into the powerful composite and recurve bows, and crossbows of Ancient China.
These proved particularly useful during the rise of cavalry, as horsemen encased in ever-more sophisticated armour came to dominate the battlefield.

Somewhat earlier, in medieval China, gunpowder had been invented, and was increasingly used by the military in combat.
The use of gunpowder in the early vase-like mortars in Europe, and advanced versions of the long bow and cross bow, which all had armour-piercing arrowheads, that put an end to the dominance of the armoured knight.
After the long bow, which required great skill and strength to use, the next most significant technological advance was the musket, which could be used effectively, with little training.
In time, the successors to muskets and cannon, in the form of rifles and artillery, would become core battlefield technology.

As the speed of technological advances accelerated in civilian applications, so too warfare became more industrialized.
The newly invented machine gun and repeating rifle redefined firepower on the battlefield, and, in part, explains the high casualty rates of the American Civil War.
The next breakthrough was the conversion of artillery parks from the muzzle loading guns, to the quicker loading breech loading guns with recoiling barrel that allowed quicker aimed fire and use of a shield.
The widespread introduction of low smoke (smokeless) propellant powders since the 1880s also allowed for a great improvement of artillery ranges.

The development of breech loading had the greatest effect on naval warfare, for the first time since the Middle Ages, altering the way weapons are mounted on warships, and therefore naval tactics, now divorced from the reliance on sails with the invention of the internal combustion.
A further advance in military naval technology was the design of the submarine, and its weapon, the torpedo.

Main battle tanks, and other heavy equipment such as armoured fighting vehicles, military aircraft, and ships, are characteristic to organized military forces.

During World War I, the need to break the deadlock of trench warfare saw the rapid development of many new technologies, particularly tanks.
Military aviation was extensively used, and bombers became decisive in many battles of World War II, which marked the most frantic period of weapons development in history.
Many new designs, and concepts were used in combat, and all existing technologies of warfare were improved between 1939 and 1945.

During the war, significant advances were made in military communications through increased use of radio, military intelligence through use of the radar, and in military medicine through use of penicillin, while in the air, the guided missile, jet aircraft, and helicopters were seen for the first time.
Perhaps the most infamous of all military technologies was the creation of the atomic bomb, although the exact effects of its radiation were unknown until the early 1950s.
Far greater use of military vehicles had finally eliminated the cavalry from the military force structure.

After World War II, with the onset of the Cold War, the constant technological development of new weapons was institutionalized, as participants engaged in a constant 'arms race' in capability development.
This constant state of weapons development continues into the present, and remains a constant drain on national resources, which some blame on the military-industrial complex.

The most significant technological developments that influenced combat have been the guided missiles, which can be used by all branches of the armed services.
More recently, information technology, and its use in surveillance, including space-based reconnaissance systems, have played an increasing role in military operations.

The impact of information warfare that focuses on attacking command communication systems, and military databases, has been coupled with the new development in military technology, has been the use of robotic systems in intelligence combat, both in hardware and software applications.

Recently, there has also been a particular focus towards the use of renewable fuels for running military vehicles on.
Unlike fossil fuels, renewable fuels can be produced in any country, creating a strategic advantage.
The US military has committed itself to have 50% of its energy consumption come from alternative sources.

==
As part of society ==
For much of military history, the armed forces were considered to be for use by the heads of their societies, until recently, the crowned heads of states.
In a democracy or other political system run in the public interest, it is a public force.

The relationship between the military and the society it serves is a complicated and ever-evolving one.
Much depends on the nature of the society itself, and whether it sees the military as important, as for example in time of threat or war, or a burdensome expense typified by defence cuts in time of peace.

One difficult matter in the relation between military and society is control and transparency.
In some countries, limited information on military operations and budgeting is accessible for the public.
However transparency in the military sector is crucial to fight corruption.
This showed the Government Defence Anti-corruption Index Transparency International UK published in 2013.Militaries often function as societies within societies, by having their own military communities, economies, education, medicine, and other aspects of a functioning civilian society.
Although a 'military' is not limited to nations in of itself as many private military companies (or PMC's) can be used or 'hired' by organizations and figures as security, escort, or other means of protection; where police, agencies, or militaries are absent or not trusted.

===
Ideology and ethics ===
Militarist ideology is the society's social attitude of being best served, or being a beneficiary of a government, or guided by concepts embodied in the military culture, doctrine, system, or leaders.

Either because of the cultural memory, national history, or the potentiality of a military threat, the militarist argument asserts that a civilian population is dependent upon, and thereby subservient to the needs and goals of its military for continued independence.
Militarism is sometimes contrasted with the concepts of comprehensive national power, soft power and hard power.

Most nations have separate military laws which regulate conduct in war and during peacetime.
An early exponent was
Hugo Grotius, whose On the Law of War and Peace (1625) had a major impact of the humanitarian approach to warfare development.
His theme was echoed by Gustavus Adolphus.

Ethics of warfare have developed since 1945, to create constraints on the military treatment of prisoners and civilians, primarily by the Geneva Conventions; but rarely apply to use of the military forces as internal security troops during times of political conflict that results in popular protests and incitement to popular uprising.

International protocols restrict the use, or have even created international bans on some types of weapons, notably weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
International conventions define what constitutes a war crime, and provides for war crimes prosecution.
Individual countries also have elaborate codes of military justice, an example being the United States' Uniform Code of Military Justice that can lead to court martial for military personnel found guilty of war crimes.

Military actions are sometimes argued to be justified by furthering a humanitarian cause, such as disaster relief operations, or in defence of refugees.
The term military humanism is used to refer to such actions.

==
See also ==
Armed forces of the worldList of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel
List of countries by Military Strength Index
List of countries by level of military equipment
List of countries by Global Militarization Index
List of countries without armed forces
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by past military expenditure
List of countries by military expenditure per capita
List of air forces
List of armies
List of navies


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Military Expenditure % of GDP hosted by Lebanese economy forum, extracted from the World Bank public data.

Military at Curlie
The military funding of science has had a powerful transformative effect on the practice and products of scientific research since the early 20th century.

Particularly since World War I, advanced science-based technologies have been viewed as essential elements of a successful military.

World War
I is often called "the chemists’ war", both for the extensive use of poison gas and the importance of nitrates and advanced high explosives.

Poison gas, beginning in 1915 with chlorine from the powerful German dye industry, was used extensively by the Germans and the British ; over the course of the war, scientists on both sides raced to develop more and more potent chemicals and devise countermeasures against the newest enemy gases.

Physicists also contributed to the war effort, developing wireless communication technologies and sound-based methods of detecting U-boats, resulting in the first tenuous long-term connections between academic science and the military.
World War II marked a massive increase in the military funding of science, particularly physics.

In addition to the Manhattan Project and the resulting atomic bomb, British and American work on radar was widespread and ultimately highly influential in the course of the war; radar enabled detection of enemy ships and aircraft, as well as the radar-based proximity fuze.

Mathematical cryptography, meteorology, and rocket science were also central to the war effort, with military-funded wartime advances having a significant long-term effect on each discipline.

The technologies employed at the end—jet aircraft, radar and proximity fuzes, and the atomic bomb—were radically different from pre-war technology; military leaders came to view continued advances in technology as the critical element for success in future wars.

The advent of the Cold War solidified the links between military institutions and academic science, particularly in the United States and the Soviet Union, so that even during a period of nominal peace military funding continued to expand.

Funding spread to the social sciences as well as the natural sciences, and whole new fields, such as digital computing, were born of military patronage.

Following the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, military funding of science has decreased substantially, but much of the American military-scientific complex remains in place.

The sheer scale of military funding for science since World War II has instigated a large body of historical literature analyzing the effects of that funding, especially for American science.

Since Paul Forman’s 1987 article “
Behind quantum electronics
: National security as a basis for physical research in the United State, 1940-1960,” there has been an ongoing historical debate over precisely how and to what extent military funding affected the course of scientific research and discovery.

Forman and others have argued that military funding fundamentally redirected science—particularly physics—toward applied research, and that military technologies predominantly formed the basis for subsequent research even in areas of basic science; ultimately the very culture and ideals of science were colored by extensive collaboration between scientists and military planners.

An alternate view has been presented by Daniel Kevles, that while military funding provided many new opportunities for scientists and dramatically expanded the scope of physical research, scientists by-and-large retained their intellectual autonomy.

==
Science and military technology before the modern era ==
While there were numerous instances of military support for scientific work before the 20th century, these were typically isolated instances; knowledge gained from technology was generally far more important for the development of science than scientific knowledge was to technological innovation.

Thermodynamics, for example, is a science partly born from military technology: one of the many sources of the first law of thermodynamics was Count Rumford’s observation of the heat produced by boring cannon barrels.

Mathematics was important in the development of the Greek catapult and other weapons, but analysis of ballistics was also important for the development of mathematics, while Galileo tried to promote the telescope as a military instrument to the military-minded Republic of Venice before turning it to the skies while seeking the patronage of the Medici court in Florence.

In general, craft-based innovation, disconnected from the formal systems of science, was the key to military technology well into the 19th century.

Even craft-based military technologies were not generally produced by military funding.

Instead, craftsmen and inventors developed weapons and military tools independently and actively sought the interest of military patrons afterward.

Following the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, governments and military leaders did try to harness the methods of both science and engineering for more specific ends, but frequently without success.

In the decades leading up to the French Revolution, French artillery officers were often trained as engineers, and military leaders from this mathematical tradition attempted to transform the process of weapons manufacture from a craft-based enterprise to an organized and standardized system based on engineering principles and interchangeable parts (pre-dating the work of Eli Whitney in the U.S.).

During the Revolution, even natural scientists participated directly, attempting to create “weapons more powerful than any we possess” to aid the cause of the new French Republic, though there were no means for the revolutionary army to fund such work.

Each of these efforts, however, was ultimately unsuccessful in producing militarily useful results.

A slightly different outcome came from the longitude prize of the 18th century, offered by the British government for an accurate method of determining a ship's longitude at sea (essential for the safe navigation of the powerful British navy): intended to promote—and financially reward—a scientific solution, it was instead won by a scientific outsider, the clockmaker John Harrison.

However, the naval utility of astronomy did help increase the number of capable astronomers and focus research on developing more powerful and versatile instruments.

Through the 19th century, science and technology grew closer together, particularly through electrical and acoustic inventions and the corresponding mathematical theories.

The late 19th and early 20th centuries witnessed a trend toward military mechanization, with the advent of repeating rifles with smokeless powder, long-range artillery, high explosives, machine guns, and mechanized transport along with telegraphic and later wireless battlefield communication.

Still, independent inventors, scientists and engineers were largely responsible for these drastic changes in military technology (with the exception of the development of battleships, which could only have been created through organized large-scale effort).

==
World War I and the interwar years ==
World War
I marked the first large-scale mobilization of science for military purposes.

Prior to the war, the American military ran a few small laboratories as well as the Bureau of Standards, but independent inventors and industrial firms predominated.

Similarly in Europe, military-directed scientific research and development was minimal.

The powerful new technologies that led to trench warfare, however, reversed the traditional advantage of fast-moving offensive tactics; fortified positions supported by machine guns and artillery resulted in high attrition but strategic stalemate.

Militaries turned to scientists and engineers for even newer technologies, but the introduction of tanks and aircraft had only a marginal impact; the use of poison gas made a tremendous psychological impact, but decisively favored neither side.

The war ultimately turned on maintaining adequate supplies of materials, a problem also addressed by military-funded science—and, through the international chemical industry, closely related to the advent of chemical warfare.

The Germans introduced gas as a weapon in part because naval blockades limited their supply of nitrate for explosives, while the massive German dye industry could easily produce chlorine and organic chemicals in large amounts.

Industrial capacity was completely mobilized for war, and Fritz Haber and other industrial scientists were eager to contribute to the German cause; soon they were closely integrated into the military hierarchy as they tested the most effective ways of producing and delivering weaponized chemicals.

Though the initial impetus for gas warfare came from outside the military, further developments in chemical weapon technology might be considered military-funded, considering the blurring of lines between industry and nation in Germany.

Following the first chlorine attack by the Germans in May 1915, the British quickly moved to recruit scientists for developing their own gas weapons.

Gas research escalated on both sides, with chlorine followed by phosgene, a variety of tear gases, and mustard gas.

A wide array of research was conducted on the physiological effects of other gases, such and hydrogen cyanide, arsenic compounds, and a host of complex organic chemicals.

The British built from scratch what became an expansive research facility at Porton Down, which remains a significant military research institution into the 21st century.

Unlike many earlier military-funded scientific ventures, the research at Porton Down did not stop when the war ended or an immediate goal was achieved.

In fact, every effort was made to create an attractive research environment for top scientists, and chemical weapons development continued apace—though in secret—through the interwar years and into World War II.

German military-backed gas warfare research did not resume until the Nazi era, following the 1936 discovery of tabun, the first nerve agent, through industrial insecticide research.

In the United States, the established tradition of engineering was explicitly competing with the rising discipline of physics for World War
I military largess.

A host of inventors, led by Thomas Edison and his newly created Naval Consulting Board, cranked out thousands of inventions to solve military problems and aid the war effort, while academic scientists worked through the National Research Council (NRC) led by Robert Millikan.

Submarine detection was the most important problem that both the physicists and inventors hoped to solve, as German U-boats were decimating the crucial naval supply lines from the U.S. to England.

Edison's Board produced very few useful innovations, but NRC research resulted in a moderately successful sound-based methods for locating submarines and hidden ground-based artillery, as well as useful navigational and photographic equipment for aircraft.

Because of the success of academic science in solving specific military problems, the NRC was retained after the war's end, though it gradually decoupled from the military.
Many industrial and academic chemists and physicists came under military control during the Great War, but post-war research by the Royal Engineers Experimental Station at Porton Down and the continued operation of the National Research Council were exceptions to the overall pattern; wartime chemistry funding was a temporary redirection of a field largely driven by industry and later medicine, while physics grew closer to industry than to the military.

The discipline of modern meteorology, however, was largely built from military funding.

During World War I, the French civilian meteorological infrastructure was largely absorbed into the military.

The introduction of military aircraft during the war as well as the role of wind and weather in the success or failure of gas attacks meant meteorological advice was in high demand.

The French army (among others) created its own supplementary meteorological service as well, retraining scientists from other fields to staff it.

At war's end, the military continued to control French meteorology, sending weathermen to French colonial interests and integrating weather service with the growing air corps; most of the early-twentieth century growth in European meteorology was the direct result of military funding.

World War II would result in a similar transformation of American meteorology, initiating a transition from an apprenticeship system for training weathermen (based on intimate knowledge of local trends and geography) to the university-based, science-intensive system that has predominated since.
==
World War II ==
If World War
I was the chemists’ war, World War II was the physicists’ war.

As with other total wars, it is difficult to draw a line between military funding and more spontaneous military-scientific collaboration during World War II.

Well before the Invasion of Poland, nationalism was a powerful force in the German physics community (see Deutsche Physik); the military mobilization of physicists was all but irresistible after the rise of National Socialism.

German and Allied investigations of the possibility of a nuclear bomb began in 1939 at the initiative of civilian scientists, but by 1942 the respective militaries were heavily involved.

The German nuclear energy project had two independent teams, a civilian-controlled team under Werner Heisenberg and a military-controlled led by Kurt Diebner; the latter was more explicitly aimed at producing a bomb (as opposed to a power reactor) and received much more funding from the Nazis, though neither was ultimately successful.
In the U.S., the Manhattan Project and other projects of the Office of Scientific Research and Development resulted in a much more extensive military-scientific venture, the scale of which dwarfed previous military-funded research projects.

Theoretical work by a number of British and American scientists resulted in significant optimism about the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction.
As the physicists convinced military leaders of the potential of nuclear weapons, funding for actual development was ratcheted up rapidly.

A number of large laboratories were created across the United States for work on different aspects of the bomb, while many existing facilities were reoriented to bomb-related work; some were university-managed while others were government-run, but all were ultimately funded and directed by the military.

The May 1945 surrender of Germany, the original intended target for the bomb, did virtually nothing to slow the project's momentum.

After Japan's surrender immediately following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, many scientists returned to academia or industry, but the Manhattan Project infrastructure was too large—and too effective—to be dismantled wholesale; it became the model for future military-scientific work, in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Other wartime physics research, particularly in rocketry and radar technology, was less significant in popular culture but much more significant for the outcome of the war.

German rocketry was driven by the pursuit of Wunderwaffen, resulting in the V-2 ballistic missile; the technology as well as the personal expertise of the German rocketry community was absorbed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. rocket programs after the war, forming the basis of long-term military funded rocketry, ballistic missile, and later space research.

Rocket science was only beginning to make impact by the final years of the war.

German rockets created fear and destruction in London, but had only modest military significance, while air-to-ground rockets enhanced the power of American air strikes; jet aircraft also went into service by the end of the war.

Radar work before and during the war provided even more of an advantage for the Allies.

British physicists pioneered long-wave radar, developing an effective system for detecting incoming German air forces.

Work on potentially more precise short-wave radar was turned over to the U.S.; several thousand academic physicists and engineers not participating the Manhattan Project did radar work, particularly at MIT and Stanford, resulting in microwave radar systems that could resolve more detail in incoming flight formations.

Further refinement of microwave technology led to proximity fuzes, which greatly enhanced the ability of the U.S. Navy to defend against Japanese bombers.

Microwave production, detection and manipulation also formed the technical foundation to complement the institutional foundation of the Manhattan Project in much post-war defense research.

==
American Cold War science ==
In the years immediately following World War II, the military was by far the most significant patron of university science research in the U.S., and the national labs also continued to flourish.

After two years in political limbo (but with work on nuclear power and bomb manufacture continuing apace)
the Manhattan Project became a permanent arm of the government as the Atomic Energy Commission.

The Navy—inspired by the success of military-directed wartime research—created its own R&D organization, the Office of Naval Research, which would preside over an expanded long-term research program at Naval Research Laboratory as well as fund a variety of university-based research.

Military money following up the wartime radar research led to explosive growth in both electronics research and electronics manufacturing.

The Air Force became an independent service branch from the Army and established its own research and development system, and the Army followed suit (though it was less invested in academic science than the Navy or Air Force).

Meanwhile, the perceived communist menace of the Soviet Union caused tensions—and military budgets—to escalate rapidly.

The Department of Defense primarily funded what has been broadly described as “physical research,” but to reduce this to merely chemistry and physics is misleading.

Military patronage benefited a large number of fields, and in fact helped create a number of the modern scientific disciplines.

At Stanford and MIT, for example, electronics, aerospace engineering, nuclear physics, and materials science—all physics, broadly speaking—each developed in different directions, becoming increasingly independent of parent disciplines as they grew and pursued defense-related research agendas.

What began as interdepartmental laboratories became the centers for graduate teaching and research innovation thanks to the broad scope of defense funding.

The need to keep up with corporate technology research (which was receiving the lion's share of defense contracts) also prompted many science labs to establish close relationships with industry.

===
Computing ===
The complex histories of computer science and computer engineering were shaped, in the first decades of digital computing, almost entirely by military funding.

Most of the basic component technologies for digital computing were developed through the course of the long-running Whirlwind-SAGE program to develop an automated radar shield.

Virtually unlimited funds enabled two decades of research that only began producing useful technologies by the end of the 50s; even the final version of the SAGE command and control system had only marginal military utility.

More so than with previously-established disciplines receiving military funding, the culture of computer science was permeated with a Cold War military perspective.

Indirectly, the ideas of computer science also had a profound effect on psychology, cognitive science and neuroscience through the mind-computer analogy.

===
Geosciences and astrophysics ===
The history of earth science and the history of astrophysics were also closely tied to military purposes and funding throughout the Cold War.

American geodesy, oceanography, and seismology grew from small sub-disciplines in into full-fledged independent disciplines as for several decades, virtually all funding in these fields came from the Department of Defense.

A central goal that tied these disciplines together (even while providing the means for intellectual independence) was the figure of the Earth, the model of the earth's geography and gravitation that was essential for accurate ballistic missiles.

In the 1960s, geodesy was the superficial goal of the satellite program CORONA, while military reconnaissance was in fact a driving force.

Even for geodetic data, new secrecy guidelines worked to restrict collaboration in a field that had formerly been fundamentally international; the Figure of the Earth had geopolitical significance beyond questions of pure geoscience.

Still, geodesists were able to retain enough autonomy and subvert secrecy limitations enough to make use of the findings of their military research to overturn some of the fundamental theories of geodesy.

Like geodesy and satellite photography research, the advent of radio astronomy had a military purpose hidden beneath official astrophysical research agenda.

Quantum electronics permitted both revolutionary new methods of analyzing the universe and—using the same equipment and technology—the monitoring of Soviet electronic signals.
Military interest in (and funding of) seismology, meteorology and oceanography was in some ways a result of the defense-related payoffs of physics and geodesy.

The immediate goal of funding in these fields was to detect clandestine nuclear testing and track fallout radiation, a necessary precondition for treaties to limit the nuclear weapon technology earlier military research had created.

In particular, the feasibility of monitoring underground nuclear explosions was crucial to the possibility of a comprehensive rather than Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

But the military-funded growth of these disciplines continued even when no pressing military goals were driving them; as with other natural sciences, the military also found value in having ‘scientists on tap’ for unforeseen future R&D needs.

===
Biological sciences ===
The biological sciences were also affected by military funding, but, with the exception of nuclear physics-related medical and genetic research, largely indirectly.

The most significant funding sources for basic research before the rise of the military-industrial-academic complex were philanthropic organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation.

After World War II (and to some extent before), the influx of new industrial and military funding opportunities for the physical sciences prompted philanthropies to divest from physics research—most early work in high-energy physics and biophysics had been the product of foundation grants—and refocus on biological and medical research.

The social sciences also found limited military support from the 1940s to the 1960s, but much defense-minded social science research could be—and was—pursued without extensive military funding.

In the 1950s, social scientists tried to emulate the interdisciplinary organizational success of the physical sciences’ Manhattan Project with the synthetic behavioral science movement.

Social scientists actively sought to promote their usefulness to the military, researching topics related to propaganda (put to use in Korea), decision making, the psychological and sociological causes and effects of communism, and a broad constellation of other topics of Cold War significance.

By the 1960s, economists and political scientists offered up modernization theory for the cause of Cold War nation-building; modernization theory found a home in the military in the form of Project Camelot, a study of the process of revolution, as well as in the Kennedy administration’s approach to the Vietnam War.

Project Camelot was ultimately canceled because of the concerns it raised about scientific objectivity in the context of such a politicized research agenda; though natural sciences were not yet susceptible to implications of the corrupting influence of military and political factors, the social sciences were.

==
Historical debate ==
Historian Paul Forman, in his seminal 1987 article, proposed that not only had military funding of science greatly expanded the scope and significance of American physics, it also initiated "a qualitative change in its purposes and character."

Historians of science were beginning to turn to the Cold War relationship between science and the military for detailed study, and Forman's “distortionist critique” (as Roger Geiger has described it) served to focus the ensuing debates.

Forman and others (e.g., Robert Seidel, Stuart Leslie, and for the history of the social sciences, Ron Robin) view the influx of military money and the focus on applied rather than basic research as having had, at least partially, a negative impact on the course of subsequent research.

In turn, critics of the distortionist thesis, beginning with Daniel Kevles, deny that the military "seduced American physicists from, so to speak, a 'true basic physics'."

Kevles, as well as Geiger, instead view the effects of military funding relative to such funding simply being absent—rather than put to alternate scientific use.

Most recent scholarship has moved toward a tempered version of Forman's thesis, in which scientists retained significant autonomy despite the radical changes brought about by military funding.

== See also ==
History of weapons
Big Science
Funding of science
Historiography of science
History of radar
History of science and technology
History of technology
Military-industrial complex
Military science
Military technology
Military medicine
Military Wireless Museum in the Midlands


==
Notes and references ==
Military science is the study of military processes, institutions, and behavior, along with the study of warfare, and the theory and application of organized coercive force.
It is mainly focused on theory, method, and practice of producing military capability in a manner consistent with national defense policy.
Military science serves to identify the strategic, political, economic, psychological, social, operational, technological, and tactical elements necessary to sustain relative advantage of military force; and to increase the likelihood and favorable outcomes of victory in peace or during a war.
Military scientists include theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and other military personnel.

Military personnel obtain weapons, equipment, and training to achieve specific strategic goals.
Military science is also used to establish enemy capability as part of technical intelligence.

In military history, military science had been used during the period of Industrial Revolution as a general term to refer to all matters of military theory and technology application as a single academic discipline, including that of the deployment and employment of troops in peacetime or in battle.

In military education, military science is often the name of the department in the education institution that administers officer candidate education.
However, this education usually focuses on the officer leadership training and basic information about employment of military theories, concepts, methods and systems, and graduates are not military scientists on completion of studies, but rather junior military officers.

==
History ==
Even until the Second World War, military science was written in English starting with capital letters, and was thought of as an academic discipline alongside Physics, Philosophy and the Medical Science.
In part this was due to the general mystique that accompanied education in a World where as late as the 1880s 75% of the European population was illiterate.
The ability by the officers to make complex calculations required for the equally complex "evolutions" of the troop movements in linear warfare that increasingly dominated the Renaissance and later history, and the introduction of the gunpowder weapons into the equation of warfare only added to the veritable arcana of building fortifications as it seemed to the average individual.

Until the early 19th century, one observer, a British veteran of the Napoleonic Wars, Major John Mitchell thought that it seemed nothing much had changed from the application of force on a battlefield since the days of the Greeks.
He suggested that this was primarily so because as Clausewitz suggested, "unlike in any other science or art, in war the object reacts".
Until this time, and even after the Franco-Prussian War, military science continued to be divided between the formal thinking of officers brought up in the "shadow" of Napoleonic Wars and younger officers like Ardant du Picq who tended to view fighting performance as rooted in the individual's and group psychology and suggested detailed analysis of this.
This set in motion the eventual fascination of the military organisations with application of quantitative and qualitative research to their theories of combat; the attempt to translate military thinking as philosophic concepts into concrete methods of combat.

Military implements, the supply of an army, its organization, tactics, and discipline, have constituted the elements of military science in all ages; but improvement in weapons and accoutrements appears to lead and control all the rest.
The breakthrough of sorts made by Clausewitz in suggesting eight principles on which such methods can be based, in Europe, for the first time presented an opportunity to largely remove the element of chance and error from command decision making process.
At this time emphasis was made on the Topography (including Trigonometry), Military art (Military science), Military history, Organisation of the Army in the field, Artillery and Science of Projectiles, Field fortifications and Permanent fortifications, Military legislation, Military administration and Manoeuvres.
The military science on which the model of German combat operations was built for the First World War remained largely unaltered from the Napoleonic model, but took into the consideration the vast improvements in the firepower and the ability to conduct "great battles of annihilation" through rapid concentration of force, strategic mobility, and the maintenance of the strategic offensive better known as the Cult of the offensive.
The key to this, and other modes of thinking about war remained analysis of military history and attempts to derive tangible lessons that could be replicated again with equal success on another battlefield as a sort of bloody laboratory of military science.
Few were bloodier than the fields of the Western Front between 1914 and 1918.
Fascinatingly the man who probably understood Clausewitz better than most, Marshal Foch would initially participate in events that nearly destroyed the French Army.
It is not however true to say that military theorists and commanders were suffering from some collective case of stupidity; quite the opposite is true.
Their analysis of military history convinced them that decisive and aggressive strategic offensive was the only doctrine of victory, and feared that overemphasis of firepower, and the resultant dependence on entrenchment would make this all but impossible, and leading to the battlefield stagnant in advantages of the defensive position, destroying troop morale and willingness to fight.
Because only the offensive could bring victory, lack of it, and not the firepower, was blamed for the defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in the Russo-Japanese War.
Foch thought that "In strategy as well as in tactics one
attacks".
In many ways military science was born as a result of the experiences of the Great War. "
Military implements" had changed armies beyond recognition with cavalry to virtually disappear in the next 20 years.
The "supply of an army" would become a science of logistics in the wake of massive armies, operations and troops that could fire ammunition faster than it could be produced, for the first time using vehicles that used the combustion engine, a watershed of change.
Military "organisation" would no longer be that of the linear warfare, but assault teams, and battalions that were becoming multi-skilled with introduction of machine gun and mortar, and for the first time forcing military commanders to think not only in terms of rank and file, but force structure.

Tactics changed too, with infantry for the first time segregated from the horse-mounted troops, and required to cooperate with tanks, aircraft and new artillery tactics.
Perception of military discipline too had changed.
Morale, despite strict disciplinarian attitudes, had cracked in all armies during the war, but best performing troops were found to be those where emphasis on discipline had been replaced with display of personal initiative and group cohesiveness such as that found in the Australian Corps during the Hundred Days Offensive.
The military sciences' analysis of military history that had failed European commanders was about to give way to a new military science, less conspicuous in appearance, but more aligned to the processes of science of testing and experimentation, the scientific method, and forever "wed" to the idea of the superiority of technology on the battlefield.

Currently military science still means many things to different organisations.
In the United Kingdom and much of the European Union the approach is to relate it closely to the civilian application and understanding.
,
for example Belgium's Royal Military Academy, military science remains an academic discipline, and is studied alongside Social Sciences, including such subjects as Humanitarian law.
The United States Department of Defense defines military science in terms of specific systems and operational requirements, and include among other areas civil defense and force structure.

==
Employment of military skills ==
In the first instance military science is concerned with who will participate in military operations, and what sets of skills and knowledge they will require to do so effectively and somewhat ingeniously.
===
Military organization ===

Develops optimal methods for the administration and organization of military units, as well as the military as a whole.

In addition, this area studies other associated aspects as mobilization/demobilization, and military government for areas recently conquered (or liberated) from enemy control.
===
Force structuring ===
Force structuring is the method by which personnel and the weapons and equipment they use are organized and trained for military operations, including combat.
Development of force structure in any country is based on strategic, operational, and tactical needs of the national defense policy, the identified threats to the country, and the technological capabilities of the threats and the armed forces.

Force structure development is guided by doctrinal considerations of strategic, operational and tactical deployment and employment of formations and units to territories, areas and zones where they are expected to perform their missions and tasks.
Force structuring applies to all Armed Services, but not to their supporting organisations such as those used for defense science research activities.

In the United States force structure is guided by the table of organization and equipment (TOE or TO&E).
The TOE is a document published by the U.S. Department of Defense which prescribes the organization, manning, and equipage of units from divisional size and down, but also including the headquarters of Corps and Armies.

Force structuring also provides information on the mission and capabilities of specific units, as well as the unit's current status in terms of posture and readiness.
A general TOE is applicable to a type of unit (for instance, infantry) rather than a specific unit (the 3rd Infantry Division).
In this way, all units of the same branch (such as Infantry) follow the same structural guidelines which allows for more efficient financing, training, and employment of like units operationally.

===
Military education and training ===
Studies the methodology and practices involved in training soldiers, NCOs (non-commissioned officers, i.e. sergeants and corporals), and officers.

It also extends this to training small and large units, both individually and in concert with one another for both the regular and reserve organizations.

Military training, especially for officers, also concerns itself with general education and political indoctrination of the armed forces.

==
Military concepts and methods ==
Much of capability development depends on the concepts which guide use of the armed forces and their weapons and equipment, and the methods employed in any given theatre of war or combat environment.

===
Military history ===
Military activity has been a constant process over thousands of years, and the essential tactics, strategy, and goals of military operations have been unchanging throughout history.
As an example, one notable maneuver is the double envelopment, considered to be the consummate military maneuver, first executed by Hannibal at the Battle of Cannae in 216 BCE, and later by Khalid ibn al-Walid at the Battle of Walaja in 633 CE.

Via the study of history, the military seeks to avoid past mistakes, and improve upon its current performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical parallels during battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned.
The main areas military history includes are the history of wars, battles, and combats, history of the military art, and history of each specific military service.

===
Military strategy and doctrines ===
Main articles:
Military strategy, Military doctrineMilitary strategy is in many ways the centerpiece of military science.
It studies the specifics of planning for, and engaging in combat, and attempts to reduce the many factors to a set of principles that govern all interactions of the field of battle.
In Europe these principles were first defined by Clausewitz in his Principles of War.
As such, it directs the planning and execution of battles, operations, and wars as a whole.
Two major systems prevail on the planet today.
Broadly speaking, these may be described as the "Western" system, and the "Russian" system.
Each system reflects and supports strengths and weakness in the underlying society.

Modern Western military art is composed primarily of an amalgam of French, German, British, and American systems.

The Russian system borrows from these systems as well, either through study, or personal observation in the form of invasion (Napoleon's War of 1812, and The Great Patriotic War), and form a unique product suited for the conditions practitioners of this system will encounter.

The system that is produced by the analysis provided by Military Art is known as doctrine.

Western military doctrine relies heavily on technology, the use of a well-trained and empowered NCO cadre, and superior information processing and dissemination to provide a level of battlefield awareness that opponents cannot match.
Its advantages are extreme flexibility, extreme lethality, and a focus on removing an opponent's C3I (command, communications, control, and intelligence) to paralyze and incapacitate rather than destroying their combat power directly (hopefully saving lives in the process).
Its drawbacks are high expense, a reliance on difficult-to-replace personnel, an enormous logistic train, and a difficulty in operating without high technology assets if depleted or destroyed.

Soviet military doctrine (and its descendants, in CIS countries) relies heavily on masses of machinery and troops, a highly educated (albeit very small) officer corps, and pre-planned missions.
Its advantages are that it does not require well educated troops, does not require a large logistic train, is under tight central control, and does not rely on a sophisticated C3I system after the initiation of a course of action.
Its disadvantages are inflexibility, a reliance on the shock effect of mass (with a resulting high cost in lives and material), and overall inability to exploit unexpected success or respond to unexpected loss.

Chinese military doctrine is currently in a state of flux as the People's Liberation Army is evaluating military trends of relevance to China.
Chinese military doctrine is influenced by a number of sources including an indigenous classical military tradition characterized by strategists such as Sun Tzu, Western and Soviet influences, as well as indigenous modern strategists such as Mao Zedong.
One distinctive characteristic of Chinese military science is that it places emphasis on the relationship between the military and society as well as viewing military force as merely one part of an overarching grand strategy.

Each system trains its officer corps in its philosophy regarding military art.

The differences in content and emphasis are illustrative.
The United States Army principles of war are defined in the U.S. Army Field Manual FM 100–5.
The Canadian Forces principles of war/military science are defined by Land Forces Doctrine and Training System (LFDTS) to focus on principles of command, principles of war, operational art and campaign planning, and scientific principles.

Russian Federation armed forces derive their principles of war predominantly from those developed during the existence of the Soviet Union.
These, although based significantly on the Second World War experience in conventional war fighting, have been substantially modified since the introduction of the nuclear arms into strategic considerations.

The Soviet–Afghan War and the First and Second Chechen Wars further modified the principles that Soviet theorists had divided into the operational art and tactics.
The very scientific approach to military science thinking in the Soviet union had been perceived as overly rigid at the tactical level, and had affected the training in the Russian Federation's much reduced forces to instil greater professionalism and initiative in the forces.

The military principles of war of the People's Liberation Army were loosely based on those of the Soviet Union until the 1980s when a significant shift begun to be seen in a more regionally-aware, and geographically-specific strategic, operational and tactical thinking in all services.
The PLA is currently influenced by three doctrinal schools which both conflict and complement each other: the People's war, the Regional war, and the Revolution in military affairs that led to substantial increase in the defense spending and rate of technological modernisation of the forces.

The differences in the specifics of Military art notwithstanding, Military science strives to provide an integrated picture of the chaos of battle, and illuminate basic insights that apply to all combatants, not just those who agree with your formulation of the principles.

===
Military geography ===
Military geography encompasses much more than simple protestations to take the high ground.
Military geography studies the obvious, the geography of theatres of war, but also the additional characteristics of politics, economics, and other natural features of locations of likely conflict (the political "landscape", for example).

As an example, the Soviet–Afghan War was predicated on the ability of the Soviet Union to not only successfully invade Afghanistan, but also to militarily and politically flank the Islamic Republic of Iran simultaneously.

==
Military systems ==
How effectively and efficiently militaries accomplish their operations, missions and tasks is closely related not only to the methods they use, but the equipment and weapons they use.

===
Military intelligence ===
Military intelligence supports the combat commanders' decision making process by providing intelligence analysis of available data from a wide range of sources.
To provide that informed analysis the commanders information requirements are identified and input to a process of gathering, analysis, protection, and dissemination of information about the operational environment, hostile, friendly and neutral forces and the civilian population in an area of combat operations, and broader area of interest.
Intelligence activities are conducted at all levels from tactical to strategic, in peacetime, the period of transition to war, and during the war.

Most militaries maintain a military intelligence capability to provide analytical and information collection personnel in both specialist units and from other arms and services.

Personnel selected for intelligence duties, whether specialist intelligence officers and enlisted soldiers or non-specialist assigned to intelligence may be selected for their analytical abilities and intelligence before receiving formal training.

Military intelligence serves to identify the threat, and provide information on understanding best methods and weapons to use in deterring or defeating it.

===
Military logistics ===
The art and science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance of military forces.
In its most comprehensive sense, it is those aspects or military operations that deal with the design, development, acquisition, storage, distribution, maintenance, evacuation, and disposition of material; the movement, evacuation, and hospitalization of personnel; the acquisition or construction, maintenance, operation, and disposition of facilities; and the acquisition or furnishing of services.

===
Military technology and equipment ===
Military technology is not just the study of various technologies and applicable physical sciences used to increase military power.

It may also extend to the study of production methods of military equipment, and ways to improve performance and reduce material and/or technological requirements for its production.

An example is the effort expended by Nazi Germany to produce artificial rubbers and fuels to reduce or eliminate their dependence on imported POL (petroleum, oil, and lubricants) and rubber supplies.

Military technology is unique only in its application, not in its use of basic scientific and technological achievements.

Because of the uniqueness of use, military technological studies strive to incorporate evolutionary, as well as the rare revolutionary technologies, into their proper place of military application.

==
Military and Society ==
This speciality examines the ways that military and society interact and shape each other.
The dynamic intersection where military and society meet is influenced by trends in society and the security environment.
This field of study can be linked to works by Clausewitz ("War is the continuation of politics by other means") and Sun Tzu ("If not in the interest of the state, do not act" ).
The contemporary multi and interdisciplinary field traces its origin to World War II and works by sociologists and political scientists.
This field of study includes "all aspects of relations between armed forces, as a political, social and economic institution, and the society, state or political ethnic movement of which they are a part".

Topics often included within the purview of military and society include: veterans, women in the military, military families, enlistment and retention, reserve forces, military and religion, military privatization, Civil-military relations, civil-military cooperation, military and popular culture, military and the media, military and disaster assistance, military and the environment and the blurring of military and police functions.

===
Recruitment and Retention ===
In an all volunteer military, the armed forces relies on market forces and careful recruiting to fill its ranks.
It is thus, very important to understand factors that motivate enlistment and reenlistment.
Service members must have the mental and physical ability to meet the challenges of military service and adapt to the military's values and culture.
Studies show that enlistment motivation generally incorporates both self-interest (pay) and non-market values like adventure, patriotism, and comradeship.

===
Veterans ===
The study veterans or members of the military who leave and return to the society is one of the most important subfields of the military and society field of study.
Veterans and their issues represent a microcosm of the field.
Military recruits represent inputs that flow from the community into the armed forces, veterans are outputs that leave the military and reenter society changed by their time as soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen.
Both society and veteran face multiple layers of adaptation and adjustment upon their reentry.
The definition of veteran is surprisingly fluid across countries.
In the US veteran’s status is established after a service member has completed a minimum period of service.
Australia requires deployment to a combat zone.
In the UK “Everyone who has performed military service for at least one day and drawn a day’s pay is termed a veteran.”

The study of veterans focuses much attention on their, sometimes, uneasy transition back to civilian society.

“Veterans must navigate a complex cultural transition when moving between environments,” and they can expect positive and negative transition outcomes.

Finding a good job and reestablishing a fulfilling family life is high on their resettlement agenda.
Military life is often violent and dangerous.
The trauma of combat often results in post-traumatic stress disorder as well as painful physical health challenges  which often lead to homelessness, suicide, drug and alcohol abuse and family dysfunction.

Society recognizes its responsibilities to veterans by offering programs and policies designed to redress these problems.
Veterans also exert an influence on society often through the political process.
For example, how do veterans vote and establish party affiliation?
During the 2004 presidential election veterans were basically bipartisan.

Veterans who fought in Croatia
’s war of independence voted for the nationalist parties in greater numbers.

===
Reserve Forces ===
Reserve Forces are service members who serve the armed forces on a part-time basis.
These men and women constitute a “reserve” force that countries rely on for their defense, disaster support, and some day-to-day operations etc.
In the United States an active reservist spends a weekend a month and two weeks a year in training.
The size of a county’s reserve force often depends on the type of recruitment method.
Nations with a volunteer force tend to have a lower reserve percentage.
Recently the role of the reserves has changed.

In many countries it [has] gone from a strategic force, largely static, to an operational force, largely dynamic.
After WWII, relatively large standing forces took care of most operational needs.
Reserves were held back strategically and deployed in times of emergency for example during the Cuban missile crisis.
Subsequently, the strategic and budget situation changed and as a result the active duty military began to rely on reserve force, particularly for combat support and combat service support.
Further large-scale military operation, routinely mobilize and deploy reservists Lomsky-Feder et al
(2008p.
594) introduced the metaphor of reserve forces as Transmigrants who live “betwixt and between the civilian and military worlds”.
This metaphor captures “their structural duality” and suggests dynamic nature of reservist experience as they navigate commitments to their often conflicting civilian and military worlds.

Given their greater likelihood of lengthy deployment, reservists face many of the same stresses as active duty but often with fewer support services.

==
University studies ==
Universities (or colleges) around the world also offer a degree(s) in military science:
Belgium:
Royal Military Academy
(Belgium)- BA Social and Military Science;
MA Social and Military ScienceIsrael:
Tel Aviv University – MA in Security.

Bar-Ilan University – MA in Military, Security and Intelligence.
Finland:
National Defence University – Bachelor, Master, and PhD in Military scienceFrance:
Sciences Po, Paris School of International Affairs - Master in International Security.
New Zealand:
Massey University, Centre for Defence and Security Studies – BA in Defence Studies.

Victoria University of Wellington – Centre for Strategic Studies – Master of Strategic Studies
(MSS).Slovenia:University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Studies – BA, MA and PhD in Defence studies; PhD in Military-Social SciencesUnited Kingdom:King's College London – MA in International Security and Strategy; MA, MPhil/PhD in Defence Studies
University of Hull – MA in Strategy and International Security
University of St Andrews - MLitt in Strategic StudiesSri LankaSri Lanka Military Academy - (Bachelor and Masters degree in Military Studies) Military training school Diyatalawa, Sri LankaSouth AfricaSouth African Military Academy / University of Stellenbosch - Bachelor of Military Science (BMil), Master of Military Science (MMil), MPhil in Security Management United States:
United States Air Force Academy – Major in Military and Strategic Studies; Minor in Nuclear Weapons and Strategy
United States Military Academy – Major in Defense and Strategic Studies
Hawaii Pacific University –
Major in Diplomacy and Military Studies
Missouri State University –
Minor in Military Studies


==
International Military Sciences or Studies Associations ==
There are many international associations with the core purpose of bringing scholars in the field of Military Science together.
Some are inter-disciplinary and have a broad scope, whilst others are confined and specialized focusing on more specific disciplines or subjects.
Some are integrated in larger scientific communities like the International Sociological Association (ISA) and the American Psychological Association (APA) where others have grown out of military institutions or individuals who have had a particular interest in areas of military science and are military, defense or armed forces oriented.
Some of these associations are:

American Psychological Association; Division 19: Society for Military Psychology (APA-Div19)
European Research Group on Military and Society
(ERGOMAS)
Inter-University Seminar on Armed Forces and Society (IUS)
International Congress on Soldiers
Physical Performance (ICSPP) 
International Military Testing Association (IMTA)
International Society of Military Sciences (ISMS)
International Sociological Association; RC01 Armed Forces and Conflict Resolution


==
Military studies journals ==
The following are notable journals in the field:


==
See also ==
Military doctrine
Military theory
War
List of basic military science and technology topics
List of military inventions
List of military writers


==
References ==
Notes
Bibliography


== External links ==
Military TechnologyUS Military/Government Texts
The Logic of Warfighting Experiments by Kass (CCRP, 2006)
Complexity, Networking, and Effects Based Approaches to Operations by Smith (CCRP, 2006)
Understanding Command and Control by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2006)
The Agile Organization by Atkinson and Moffat (CCRP, 2005)
Power to the Edge by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2003)
Network Centric Warfare by Alberts et al.
(
CCRP, 1999)
The Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989 (AWCA) is a California law that bans the ownership and transfer of over 50 specific brands and models of semi-automatic firearms, which were classified as assault weapons.
Most were rifles, but some were pistols and shotguns.
The law was amended in 1999 to restrict acquisition and transfer of magazines that could hold more than 10 rounds of ammunition.
Firearms and magazines that were legally owned at the time the law was passed were grandfathered if they were registered with the California Department of Justice.

==
Proponents ==
The co-author of the legislation, California State Senate President pro tem David Roberti, found himself the subject of a recall attempt by the gun lobby in 1994.
He survived that, but later that year lost a Democratic primary election for the office of California State Treasurer.
The loss was considered a result of the immense campaign finance costs of defending against the recall, and the draining of those finances.
Assembly Speaker pro tem, Mike Roos who retired in 1991, was the other co-author.

==
California penal code categories ==
There are three categories of assault weapons under California law:
Category
I are those firearms specified on the original Roberti-Roos assault weapons list.
They are identified by make and model in Penal Code §30510.

Category II are those firearms specified in the AK and AR-15 series weapons list.
They are also listed in Penal Code §30510.

Category III are firearms defined as such based on specific generic characteristics, also referred to as "SB 23 assault weapons."

They are defined in Penal Code §12276.1 and §
30515.The '
Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989, was augmented in 1999.
It has also inspired follow-on legislation such as .50 Caliber BMG Regulation Act of 2004 and further restrictions on semi-automatic firearms.
From the website of the California Attorney General's office:

Effective January 1, 2000, Senate Bill 23, Statutes of 1999, establishes new criteria for defining assault weapons based on generic characteristics.
This bill allows and requires persons who own/possess firearms that fall under the new "assault weapon" definition to register those firearms with the Department of Justice during the one-year period between January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2000.
Effective January 1, 2000, this bill adds Penal Code Section 12276.1 to the Penal Code.

==
Firearms prohibited by make and model
(Category I & II) ==
The following designated semiautomatic firearms are defined as assault weapons by Penal Code section 30510:
(a)
The following specified rifles:
(1)
All AK series including, but not limited to, the models identified as follows:
(A)
Made in China AK, AKM, AKS, AK47, AK47S, AK56, AK56S, AK84S, and AK86S.
(B)
Norinco 56, 56S, 84S, and 86S.
(C) Poly Technologies AKS and AK47.

(D) MAADI AK47 and ARM.

(2) IMI UZI and Galil.

(3) Beretta AR-70.
(4) CETME Sporter.

(5) Colt AR-15 series.

(6)
Daewoo K-1, K-2, Max 1, Max 2, AR 100, and AR110C.
(7)
Fabrique Nationale FAL, LAR, FNC, 308 Match, and Sporter.

(8) MAS 223.

(9) Heckler & Koch HK-91, HK-93, HK-94, and HK-PSG-1.

(10)
The following MAC types:
(A) RPB Industries Inc, sM10
and sM11.

(B) SWD Incorporated M11.

(11) SKS with detachable magazine.

(12) SIG AMT, PE-57, SG 550, and SG 551.

(13)
Springfield Armory BM59 and SAR-48.

(14)
Sterling
MK-6.

(15) Steyr AUG.

(16)
Valmet M62S, M71S, and M78S.
(17) Armalite AR-180.

(18) Calico M-900.
(19)
J&R ENG M-68.

(20) Weaver Arms Nighthawk.

(b)
The following specified pistols:
(1) IMI UZI.

(2) Encom MP-9 and MP-45.

(3)
The following MAC types:
(A) RPB Industries Inc, sM10
and sM11.

(B) SWD
Incorporated M-11.

(C)
Advance Armament Inc. M-11.
(D)
Military Armament Corp. Ingram —11.

(4)
Intratec
TEC-9.

(5) Sites Spectre.

(6) Sterling MK-7.

(7) Calico M-950.

(8) Bushmaster Pistol.(c)
The following specified shotguns:
(1)
Franchi SPAS 12 and LAW 12.

(2) Striker 12.

(3)
The Streetsweeper type S/S Inc, SS/12.
(
see Striker)


==
Firearms prohibited by configuration (Category III) ==
Other firearms are banned from sale or possession by certain characteristics or configuration as determined by parts or features.
If an undefined firearm is modified with any of the following characteristics, it can subsequently be classified as a banned assault weapon.
These are as given in Penal Code section 12276.1 and 30515:
(1) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any one of the following:
(A)
A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon.

(B)
A thumbhole stock.

(C)
A folding or telescoping stock.

(D)
A grenade launcher or flare launcher.

(E)
A flash suppressor.

(F)
A forward pistol grip.

(2) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.

(3) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has an overall length of less than 30 inches [762 mm].

(4)
A semiautomatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any one of the following:
(A)
A threaded barrel, capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward handgrip, or silencer (suppressor).

(B) A second handgrip.

(C)
A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel that allows the bearer to fire the weapon without burning his or her hand, except a slide that encloses the barrel.

(D)
The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location outside of the pistol grip.

(5) A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.

(6)
A semiautomatic shotgun that has both of the following:
(A) A folding or telescoping stock.

(B)
A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon, thumbhole stock, or vertical handgrip.

(7)
A semiautomatic shotgun that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine.

(8) Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder.
The amended legislation included the following:

(A) "Assault weapon" does not include any antique firearm.

(B)
The following definitions shall apply under this section:
"Magazine" shall mean any ammunition feeding device.

"Capacity to accept more than 10 rounds" shall mean capable of accommodating more than 10 rounds, but shall not be construed to include a feeding device that has been permanently altered so that it cannot accommodate more than 10 rounds.

"Antique firearm" means any firearm manufactured prior to January 1, 1899.

==
Related Court Cases ==


===
Kasler v. Lockyer ===
The California Supreme Court handed down its decision in Kasler v. Lockyer in August 2000.

The original suit, in the mid-1990s, challenged the constitutionality of California's 1989 Roberti-Roos assault weapons ban.

The Court found in favor of the defendants, Attorney General Bill Lockyer and the State of California; one resulting aspect of this decision was that the AWCA '89 "series" terminology used for AR and AK type weapons applied to all similar weapons, regardless of nomenclature (manufacturer, model number, version, variant, etc.).The result of the Kasler v. Lockyer
was a list of AR and AK-style firearms that are banned in California by name.
These firearms include the Armalite AR-15, Bushmaster XM-15, Colt AR-15, Kalashnikov USA Hunter Rifle, MAADI CO AK-47, ARM, MISR, and MISTR, to name a few.
There are a total of 84 firearms that are banned by name on this list.

===
Harrott v. Kings County ===
In June 2001, the California Supreme Court handed down its decision in Harrott v. County of Kings (25 P.3d 649 (Cal.
2001) that contravened portions of the Kasler decision.
This determined the following:
a) Determination of "series" inclusion (series member) is difficult enough that owners and law enforcement should merely have to consult a list of specific makes and models (in California Code of Regulation) to know if their gun is a prohibited firearm.

b)
Trial courts cannot determine if a given firearm/receiver is of the AR or AK "series".
Prohibited weapons in AR/AK "series" must be specifically identified by make and model and the Department of Justice (DOJ) must promulgate this list.

c) DOJ has authority to 'identify' and promulgate new members of the AR & AK "series" itself.
This authority is limited to AR and AK series firearms/receivers.

d) DOJ cannot prohibit other firearms outside the AR/AK series and must begin an "add-on" procedure filed in certain superior courts, as specified in Penal Code 30520.
The DOJ can first seek a temporary declaration that given firearms are assault weapon before categorizing it permanently.

e)
DOJ determinations of AR/AK "series" membership are subject to challenge and verification.

== Rifles ==


=== Fixed-magazine rifle ===
This style of rifle is made by combining an AR-15 upper receiver with an AR-15 lower receiver which has not been banned by specific name, and which has a fixed, non-detachable 10-round (maximum, anything above 10 is a felony) magazine.
In such a configuration, otherwise prohibited features such as a telescoping stock, pistol grip, and flash hider may be present.
While formerly prohibited under the now-expired federal assault weapon ban of 1994–2004, the presence of a bayonet lug is not prohibited by California state law and can be present on firearms without violation.

However, the magazine cannot be detachable, so to load the rifle the shooter must "top load".
To top-load, the shooter pulls the rear takedown pin, hinges the upper receiver on the front pivot pin, and loads the now exposed magazine.
Alternatively, several "magazine lock" devices are available which replace the magazine release button with an inset pin that requires the use of a special tool to release the magazine, thereby, disallowing a readily "detachable magazine", to be compliant with California state firearms law.

===
Featureless rifle ===
If a rifle has none of the prohibited features (pistol grip, telescoping or folding stock, flash hider, grenade/flare launcher, forward pistol grip), There are several products available on the market to configure featureless rifles.
The California DOJ Bureau of Firearms has attested under oath that the U-15 stock, the Hammerhead Grip and the MonsterMan Grip do not constitute a pistol grip and are therefore legal when used on a detachable magazine semiautomatic centerfire rifle with none of the features listed in CA PC 30515(a)(1)(A-F).
===
Off-list lower receivers ===
Most AR-15 manufacturers now make lower receivers which qualify as "Off-List" Lower (OLL) receivers which are legal to possess and use in the state of California.

With regard to standard capacity magazine devices, after January 1, 2000, it is illegal to offer for sale, import, manufacture, give, or lend (although it is legal to possess and use) any detachable box magazine with a capacity exceeding 10 cartridges.

Individuals possessing such magazines at a lawful location such as a gun range may only allow use of their lawfully owned standard-capacity magazines by another if they are in the immediate vicinity of the person using such items.

== See also ==
Assault weapons legislation in the United States
Gun laws in California
Gun laws in the United States by state
Gun politics in the United States


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"CALIFORNIA PENAL CODE", Part 6, Title 4, Div.
10, Chap.
2.
ASSAULT WEAPONS AND .50 BMG RIFLES, California Legislative Counsel, 2019Article 1.
§
30500-30530
General Provisions
Article 2. §
30600
-30675 Unlawful Acts Relating to Assault Weapons and .50 BMG Rifles
Article 3.
§
30710-30735 SKS Rifles
Article 4. §
30800 Assault Weapon or .50 BMG Rifle
Constituting Nuisance
Article 5. §
30900-30965 Registration of Assault Weapons and .50 BMG Rifles and Related Rules
Article 6.
§
31000-31005 Permits for Assault Weapons and .50 BMG Rifles
Article 7. §
31050-31055 Licensed Gun Dealers
Article 8. §
31100-31115 Miscellaneous Provisions
The M141 Bunker Defeat Munition (BDM), or SMAW-D ("Disposable"), is a single-shot, shoulder-launched weapon designed to defeat hardened structures.
The weapon was designed as a modification of the United States Marine Corps Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) to fill the void in the United States Army inventory of a "bunker buster" weapon.

==
Service history ==
Two candidates were evaluated for the US Army's BDM program.

One candidate from McDonnell-Douglas (later Talley Defense Systems) which used the same warhead as the Marine Corps SMAW,
but with a rocket motor with a shorter burn time, and another developed by Sweden's FFV for Alliant Techsystems (later Honeywell), which replaced the standard HEAT warhead of the AT4/M136 with the same dual purpose warhead as used by the USMC SMAW.
FFV designated the bunker buster version of the AT4 as the FFV AT8.

In 1996 the McDonnell-Douglas candidate was chosen.

In a unique move, the US Army ordered one batch of 1,500 then a second batch of 4,500 which were placed in contingency storage for expedited issue to units in combat.
The SMAW-D was delivered to the Army in 1999.The conferees of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994
agreed that the Army's BDM and the Marine Corps' SRAW were too similar to justify separate long-term projects, and that the Army should pursue an interim BDM program.
Congress limited BDM procurement to 6,000 units.

CNN news footage showed US Army Rangers firing M141s at various fortified caves during the Tora Bora operations against the Afghan Taliban and al Qaeda, being mistaken by the CNN reporters for AT4/M136 projectiles.

== Design ==
The SMAW-D operates on the principle of a recoilless rifle, in that the recoil created by launching the projectile is counteracted by a "backblast" of gases fired from the rear of the weapon.
This makes the SMAW-D inherently dangerous, especially in confined, urban areas, as is with all weapons of this design.

The M141 has two configurations: A carry mode in which the launcher is 810 mm (32 in) long, and a ready to fire mode in which the launcher is extended to its full length of 1,400 mm (55 in).

The warhead is the same High Explosive, Dual Purpose (HEDP) as the USMC SMAW.
It is effective against masonry and concrete bunkers as well as lightly armored vehicles.
The projectile is capable of penetrating up to 200 mm (8 in) of concrete, 300 mm (12 in) of brick, or 2.1 m (6.9 ft) of sandbags.
The warhead is activated by a crush switch in its nose that is able to distinguish between hard and soft targets.
On soft targets, such as sandbags, the detonation is delayed until the projectile is buried in the target, producing a devastating effect.
The warhead detonates immediately on contact with hard targets.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
 Lebanon
United States


==
See also ==
SMAW
AT4


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SMAW-D - FAS
M141
Bunker Defeat Munition - Forecast International
A weapon, arm or armament is any implement or device that can be used with the intent to inflict damage or harm.
Weapons are used to increase the efficacy and efficiency of activities such as hunting, crime, law enforcement, self-defense, and warfare.
In broader context, weapons may be construed to include anything used to gain a tactical, strategic, material or mental advantage over an adversary or enemy target.

While ordinary objects – sticks, rocks, bottles, chairs, vehicles – can be used as weapons, many are expressly designed for the purpose; these range from simple implements such as clubs, axes and swords, to complicated modern firearms, tanks, intercontinental ballistic missiles, biological weapons, and cyberweapons.
Something that has been re-purposed, converted, or enhanced to become a weapon of war is termed weaponized, such as a weaponized virus or weaponized laser.

==
History ==
The use of weapons is a major driver of cultural evolution and human history up to today, since weapons are a type of tool which is used to dominate and subdue autonomous agents such as animals and by that allow for an expansion of the cultural niche, while simultaneously other weapon users (i.e., agents such as humans, groups, cultures) are able to adapt to weapons of enemies by learning, triggering a continuous process of competitive technological, skill and cognitive improvement (arms race).

===
Prehistoric ===
The use of objects as weapons has been observed among chimpanzees, leading to speculation that early hominids used weapons as early as five million years ago.
However, this can not be confirmed using physical evidence because wooden clubs, spears, and unshaped stones would have left an ambiguous record.
The earliest unambiguous weapons to be found are the Schöningen spears, eight wooden throwing spears dating back more than 300,000 years.
At the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, numerous human skeletons dating to 10,000 years ago may present evidence of traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including obsidian projectiles embedded in the bones that might have been caused from arrows and clubs during conflict between two hunter-gatherer groups.
But the evidence interpretation of warfare at Nataruk has been challenged.

===
Ancient history ===
The earliest ancient weapons were evolutionary improvements of late neolithic implements, but significant improvements in materials and crafting techniques led to a series of revolutions in military technology.

The development of metal tools began with copper during the Copper Age (about 3,300 BC) and was followed by the Bronze Age, leading to the creation of the Bronze Age sword and similar weapons.

During the Bronze Age, the first defensive structures and fortifications appeared as well, indicating an increased need for security.
Weapons designed to breach fortifications followed soon after, such as the battering ram, which was in use by 2500 BC.The development of iron-working around 1300 BC in Greece had an important impact on the development of ancient weapons.
It was not the introduction of early Iron Age swords, however, as they were not superior to their bronze predecessors,
but rather the domestication of the horse and widespread use of spoked wheels by c. 2000 BC.
This led to the creation of the light, horse-drawn chariot, whose improved mobility proved important during this era.
Spoke-wheeled chariot usage peaked around 1300 BC and then declined, ceasing to be militarily relevant by the 4th century BC.Cavalry developed once horses were bred to support the weight of a human.
The horse extended the range and increased the speed of attacks.

In addition to land based weaponry, warships, such as the trireme, were in use by the 7th century BC.

=== Post-classical history ===
European warfare during the Post-classical history was dominated by elite groups of knights supported by massed infantry (both in combat and ranged roles).
They were involved in mobile combat and sieges which involved various siege weapons and tactics.
Knights on horseback developed tactics for charging with lances providing an impact on the enemy formations and then drawing more practical weapons (such as swords) once they entered into the melee.
By contrast, infantry, in the age before structured formations, relied on cheap, sturdy weapons such as spears and billhooks in close combat and bows from a distance.
As armies became more professional, their equipment was standardized and infantry transitioned to pikes.
Pikes are normally seven to eight feet in length, and used in conjunction with smaller side-arms (short sword).

In Eastern and Middle Eastern warfare, similar tactics were developed independent of European influences.

The introduction of gunpowder from the Asia at the end of this period revolutionized warfare.
Formations of musketeers, protected by pikemen came to dominate open battles, and the cannon replaced the trebuchet as the dominant siege weapon.

===
Modern history ===


====
Early modern ====
The European Renaissance marked the beginning of the implementation of firearms in western warfare.
Guns and rockets were introduced to the battlefield.

Firearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants such as gunpowder, rather than from a counter-weight or spring.
This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user.
Therefore even early firearms such as the arquebus were much more powerful than human-powered weapons.
Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th century to 19th century, with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant.
During the U.S. Civil War new applications of firearms including the machine gun and ironclad warship emerged that would still be recognizable and useful military weapons today, particularly in limited conflicts.
In the 19th century warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel-powered steam engines.

Since the mid-18th century North American French-Indian war through the beginning of the 20th century, human-powered weapons were reduced from the primary weaponry of the battlefield yielding to gunpowder-based weaponry.
Sometimes referred to as the "Age of Rifles", this period was characterized by the development of firearms for infantry and cannons for support, as well as the beginnings of mechanized weapons such as the machine gun.

Of particular note, Howitzers were able to destroy masonry fortresses and other fortifications, and this single invention caused a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), establishing tactics and doctrine that are still in use today.
See Technology during World War I for a detailed discussion.

====
Industrial age ====
An important feature of industrial age warfare was technological escalation – innovations were rapidly matched through replication or countered by another innovation.
The technological escalation during World War I (WW I) was profound, including the wide introduction of aircraft into warfare, and naval warfare with the introduction of aircraft carriers.

====
World War
I ====
World War
I marked the entry of fully industrialized warfare as well as weapons of mass destruction (e.g., chemical and biological weapons), and new weapons were developed quickly to meet wartime needs.
Above all, it promised to the military commanders the independence from the horse and the resurgence in maneuver warfare through extensive use of motor vehicles.
The changes that these military technologies underwent before and during the Second World War were evolutionary, but defined the development for the rest of the century.

====
Interwar ====
This period of innovation in weapon design continued in the inter-war period (between WW I and WW II) with continuous evolution of weapon systems by all major industrial powers.

The major armament firms were the Schneider-Creusot (based in France), the Škoda Works (Czechoslovakia), and Vickers (Great Britain).
The 1920s were committed to disarmament and outlawing of war and poison gas, but rearmament picked up rapidly in the 1930s.
The munitions makers responded nimbly to the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape.
The main purchasers of munitions from the big three companies were Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey—and, to a lesser extent, in Poland, Finland, the Baltic States, and the Soviet Union,


=====
Criminalizing poison gas =====
Realistic critics understood that war could not really be outlawed, but its worst excesses might be banned.
Poison gas became the focus of a worldwide crusade in the 1920s.

Poison gas did not win battles, and the generals did not want it.
The soldiers hated it far more intensely than bullets or explosive shells.
By 1918, chemical shells made up 35 per cent of French ammunition supplies, 25 per cent of British, and 20 per cent of the American stock.
The “Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare” ["Geneva Protocol"] was issued in 1925, and was accepted as policy by all major countries.
In 1937 poison gas was manufactured in large quantities, but not used except against nations that lacked modern weapons or gas masks.

====
World War II ====
Many modern military weapons, particularly ground-based ones, are relatively minor improvements of weapon systems developed during World War II.
See military technology during World War II for a detailed discussion.

World War II
however, perhaps marked the most frantic period of weapons development in the history of humanity.
Massive numbers of new designs and concepts were fielded, and all existing technologies were improved between 1939 and 1945.
The most powerful weapon invented during this period was the atomic bomb, however many other weapons influenced the world, such as jet planes and radar, but were overshadowed by the visibility of nuclear weapons and long-range rockets.

====
Nuclear weapons ====
Since the realization of mutually assured destruction (MAD), the nuclear option of all-out war is no longer considered a survivable scenario.

During the Cold War in the years following World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race.
Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments.
Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the Earth x100 fold, then a new tactic had to be developed.

With this realization, armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than total war.

== Types ==


===
By user ===
– what person or unit uses the weaponPersonal weapons (or small arms) – designed to be used by a single person.

Light weapons – 'man-portable' weapons that may require a small team to operate.

Heavy weapons – artillery and similar weapons larger than light weapons (see SALW).

Hunting weapon – used by hunters for sport or getting food.

Crew served weapons – larger than personal weapons, requiring two or more people to operate correctly.

Fortification weapons – mounted in a permanent installation, or used primarily within a fortification.

Mountain weapons – for use by mountain forces or those operating in difficult terrain.

Vehicle weapons – to be mounted on any type of combat vehicle.

Railway weapons – designed to be mounted on railway cars, including armored trains.

Aircraft weapons – carried on and used by some type of aircraft, helicopter, or other aerial vehicle.

Naval weapons – mounted on ships and submarines.

Space weapons – are designed to be used in or launched from space.

Autonomous weapons – are capable of accomplishing a mission with limited or no human intervention.

===
By function ===
– the construction of the weapon and principle of operationAntimatter weapons (theoretical) would combine matter and antimatter to cause a powerful explosion.

Archery weapons operate by using a tensioned string and bent solid to launch a projectile.

Artillery are firearms capable of launching heavy projectiles over long distances.

Biological weapons spread biological agents, causing disease or infection.

Chemical weapons, poisoning and causing reactions.

Energy weapons rely on concentrating forms of energy to attack, such as lasers or sonic attack.

Explosive weapons use a physical explosion to create blast concussion or spread shrapnel.

Firearms use a chemical charge to launch projectiles.

Improvised weapons are common objects, reused as weapons, such as crowbars and kitchen knives.

Incendiary weapons cause damage by fire.

Non-lethal weapons are designed to subdue without killing.

Magnetic weapons use magnetic fields to propel projectiles, or to focus particle beams.

Melee weapons operate as physical extensions of the user's body and directly impact a close target.

Blade weapons, designed to pierce through flesh and cause bleeding.

Blunt instruments, designed to break bones, concuss or produce crush injuries.

Missiles are rockets which are guided to their target after launch.
(
Also a general term for projectile weapons).

Loitering munitions, designed to loiter over a battlefield, striking once a target is located.

Nuclear weapons use radioactive materials to create nuclear fission and/or nuclear fusion detonations.

Primitive weapons make little or no use of technological or industrial elements.

Ranged weapons (unlike melee weapons), target a distant object or person.

Rockets use chemical propellant to accelerate a projectile
Suicide weapons exploit the willingness of their operator not surviving the attack.

===
By target ===
– the type of target the weapon is designed to attackAnti-aircraft weapons target missiles and aerial vehicles in flight.

Anti-fortification weapons are designed to target enemy installations.

Anti-personnel weapons are designed to attack people, either individually or in numbers.

Anti-radiation weapons target sources of electronic radiation, particularly radar emitters.

Anti-satellite weapons target orbiting satellites.

Anti-ship weapons target ships and vessels on water.

Anti-submarine weapons target submarines and other underwater targets.

Anti-tank weapons are designed to defeat armored targets.

Area denial weapons target territory, making it unsafe or unsuitable for enemy use or travel.

Hunting weapons are weapons used to hunt game animals.

Infantry support weapons are designed to attack various threats to infantry units.

==
Manufacture of weapons ==
The arms industry is a global industry that involves the sales and manufacture of weaponry.
It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities.
Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms-industry to supply their own military forces - and some also have a substantial trade in weapons for use by its citizens, for self-defence, hunting or sporting purposes.

Contracts to supply a given country's military are awarded by governments, making arms contracts of substantial political importance.
The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development a "military-industrial complex", where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked.

According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–14 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009, and the arms sales of the world’s 100 largest private arms-producing and military services companies totalled  $420 billion in 2018.

==
Legislation ==
The production, possession, trade and use of many weapons are controlled.
This may be at a local or central government level, or international treaty.
Examples of such controls include:


===
Gun laws ===
All countries have laws and policies regulating aspects such as the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification and use of small arms by civilians.

Countries which regulate access to firearms will typically restrict access to certain categories of firearms and then restrict the categories of persons who may be granted a license for access to such firearms.
There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting (a.k.a.
target shooting), self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, with different sets of requirements, permissions, and responsibilities.

===
Arms control laws ===
International treaties and agreements place restrictions upon the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation and usage of weapons from small arms and heavy weapons to weapons of mass destruction.
Arms control is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy which seeks to impose such limitations upon consenting participants, although it may also comprise efforts by a nation or group of nations to enforce limitations upon a non-consenting country.

===
Arms trafficking laws ===
Arms trafficking is the trafficking of contraband weapons and ammunition.
What constitutes legal trade in firearms varies widely, depending on local and national laws.

==
Lifecycle problems ==
There are a number of issue around the potential ongoing risks from deployed weapons, the safe storage of weapons, and their eventual disposal when no longer effective or safe.

Ocean dumping of unused weapons and bombs, including ordinary bombs, UXO, landmines and chemical weapons has been common practice by many nations, and often caused hazards.

Unexploded ordnance (UXO) are bombs, land mines and naval mines and similar that did not explode when they were employed and still pose a risk for many years or decades.

Demining or mine clearance from areas of past conflict is a difficult process, but every year, landmines kill 15,000 to 20,000 people and severely maim countless more.

Nuclear terrorism was a serious concern after the fall of the Soviet Union, with the prospect of "loose nukes" being available.
While this risk may have receded, similar situation may arise in the future.

==
In science fiction ==

Strange and exotic weapons are a recurring feature or theme in science fiction.
In some cases, weapons first introduced in science fiction have now been made a reality.
Other science fiction weapons remain purely fictional, and are often beyond the realms of known physical possibility.

At its most prosaic, science fiction features an endless variety of sidearms, mostly variations on real weapons such as guns and swords.
Among the best-known of these are the phaser used in the Star Trek television series, films and novels and the lightsaber and blaster featured in the Star Wars movies, comics, novels and TV series.

In addition to adding action and entertainment value, weaponry in science fiction sometimes become themes when they touch on deeper concerns, often motivated by contemporary issues.
One example is science fiction that deals with weapons of mass destruction.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The dictionary definition of weapon at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Weapon at Wikiquote
 Media related to Weapons at Wikimedia Commons
The Ground Forces of the Russian Federation (Russian:
Сухопутные войска Российской Федерации, tr.
Sukhoputnye Voyska Rossiyskoy
Federatsii, SVR) are the land forces of the Russian Armed Forces.
It is also simply referred to as the Russian Army (Russian:
Русская армия, tr.
Russkaya armiya).

==
Mission ==
The primary responsibilities of the Russian Ground Forces are the protection of the state borders, combat on land, the security of occupied territories, and the defeat of enemy troops.
The Ground Forces must be able to achieve these goals both in nuclear war and non-nuclear war, especially without the use of weapons of mass destruction.
Furthermore, they must be capable of protecting the national interests of Russia within the framework of its international obligations.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces is officially tasked with the following objectives:
the training of troops for combat, on the basis of tasks determined by the Armed Forces' General Staff
the improvement of troops' structure and composition, and the optimization of their numbers, including for special troops
the development of military theory and practice
the development and introduction of training field manuals, tactics, and methodology
the improvement of operational and combat training of the Ground Forces


==
History ==
As the Soviet Union dissolved, efforts were made to keep the Soviet Armed Forces as a single military structure for the new Commonwealth of Independent States.
The last Minister of Defence of the Soviet Union, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, was appointed supreme commander of the CIS Armed Forces in December 1991.
Among the numerous treaties signed by the former republics, in order to direct the transition period, was a temporary agreement on general purpose forces, signed in Minsk on 14 February 1992.
However, once it became clear that Ukraine (and potentially the other republics) was determined to undermine the concept of joint general purpose forces and form their own armed forces, the new Russian government moved to form its own armed forces.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed a decree forming the Russian Ministry of Defence on 7 May 1992, establishing the Russian Ground Forces along with the other branches of the military.
At the same time, the General Staff was in the process of withdrawing tens of thousands of personnel from the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany, the Northern Group of Forces in Poland, the Central Group of Forces in Czechoslovakia, the Southern Group of Forces in Hungary, and from Mongolia.

Thirty-seven divisions had to be withdrawn from the four groups of forces and the Baltic States, and four military districts—totalling 57 divisions—were handed over to Belarus and Ukraine.
Some idea of the scale of the withdrawal can be gained from the division list.
For the dissolving Soviet Ground Forces, the withdrawal from the former Warsaw Pact states and the Baltic states was an extremely demanding, expensive, and debilitating process.
As the military districts that remained in Russia after the collapse of the Union consisted mostly of the mobile cadre formations, the Ground Forces were, to a large extent, created by relocating the formerly full-strength formations from Eastern Europe to under-resourced districts.
However, the facilities in those districts were inadequate to house the flood of personnel and equipment returning from abroad, and many units "were unloaded from the rail wagons into empty fields.
"

The need for destruction and transfer of large amounts of weaponry under the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe also necessitated great adjustments.

=== Post-Soviet reform plans ===
The Ministry of Defence newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published a reform plan on 21 July 1992.
Later one commentator said it was "hastily" put together by the General Staff "to satisfy the public demand for radical changes.
"
The General Staff, from that point, became a bastion of conservatism, causing a build-up of troubles that later became critical.
The reform plan advocated a change from an Army-Division-Regiment structure to a Corps-Brigade arrangement.
The new structures were to be more capable in a situation with no front line, and more capable of independent action at all levels.
Cutting out a level of command, omitting two out of three higher echelons between the theatre headquarters and the fighting battalions, would produce economies, increase flexibility, and simplify command-and-control arrangements.
The expected changeover to the new structure proved to be rare, irregular, and sometimes reversed.
The new brigades that appeared were mostly divisions that had broken down until they happened to be at the proposed brigade strengths.
New divisions—such as the new 3rd Motor Rifle Division in the Moscow Military District, formed on the basis of disbanding tank formations—were formed, rather than new brigades.

Few of the reforms planned in the early 1990s eventuated, for three reasons: Firstly, there was an absence of firm civilian political guidance, with President Yeltsin primarily interested in ensuring that the Armed Forces were controllable and loyal, rather than reformed.
Secondly, declining funding worsened the progress.
Finally, there was no firm consensus within the military about what reforms should be implemented.
General Pavel Grachev, the first Russian Minister of Defence (1992–96), broadly advertised reforms, yet wished to preserve the old Soviet-style Army, with large numbers of low-strength formations and continued mass conscription.
The General Staff and the armed services tried to preserve Soviet era doctrines, deployments, weapons, and missions in the absence of solid new guidance.
British military expert, Michael Orr, claims that the hierarchy had great difficulty in fully understanding the changed situation, due to their education.
As graduates of Soviet military academies, they received great operational and staff training, but in political terms they had learned an ideology, rather than a wide understanding of international affairs.
Thus, the generals—focused on NATO expansion in Eastern Europe—could not adapt themselves and the Armed Forces to the new opportunities and challenges they faced.

===
Internal crisis of 1993 ===
The Russian Ground Forces reluctantly became involved in the Russian constitutional crisis of 1993 after President Yeltsin issued an unconstitutional decree dissolving the Russian Parliament, following its resistance to Yeltsin's consolidation of power and his neo-liberal reforms.
A group of deputies, including Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, barricaded themselves inside the parliament building.
While giving public support to the President, the Armed Forces, led by General Grachev, tried to remain neutral, following the wishes of the officer corps.
The military leadership were unsure of both the rightness of Yeltsin's cause and the reliability of their forces, and had to be convinced at length by Yeltsin to attack the parliament.

When the attack was finally mounted, forces from five different divisions around Moscow were used, and the personnel involved were mostly officers and senior non-commissioned officers.
There were also indications that some formations deployed into Moscow only under protest.
However, once the parliament building had been stormed, the parliamentary leaders arrested, and temporary censorship imposed, Yeltsin succeeded in retaining power.

===
Chechen Wars ===


====
First Chechen War ====
The Chechen people had never willingly accepted Russian rule.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Chechens declared independence in November 1991, under the leadership of a former Air Forces officer, General Dzhokar Dudayev.
The continuation of Chechen independence was seen as reducing Moscow's authority; Chechnya became perceived as a haven for criminals, and a hard-line group within the Kremlin began advocating war.
A Security Council meeting was held 29 November 1994, where Yeltsin ordered the Chechens to disarm, or else Moscow would restore order.
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev assured Yeltsin that he would "take Grozny with one airborne assault regiment in two hours.
"The
operation began on 11 December 1994 and, by 31 December, Russian forces were entering Grozny, the Chechen capital.
The 131st Motor Rifle Brigade was ordered to make a swift push for the centre of the city, but was then virtually destroyed in Chechen ambushes.
After finally seizing Grozny amid fierce resistance, Russian troops moved on to other Chechen strongholds.
When Chechen militants took hostages in the Budyonnovsk hospital hostage crisis in Stavropol Kray in June 1995, peace looked possible for a time, but the fighting continued.
Following this incident, the separatists were referred to as insurgents or terrorists within Russia.

Dzhokar Dudayev was assassinated in a Russian airstrike on 21 April 1996, and that summer, a Chechen attack retook Grozny.
Alexander Lebed, then Secretary of the Security Council, began talks with the Chechen rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov in August 1996 and signed an agreement on 22/23 August; by the end of that month, the fighting ended.

The formal ceasefire was signed in the Dagestani town of Khasavyurt on 31 August 1996, stipulating that a formal agreement on relations between the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria and the Russian federal government need not be signed until late 2001.

Writing some years later, Dmitri Trenin and Aleksei Malashenko described the Russian military's performance in Chechniya as "grossly deficient at all levels, from commander-in-chief to the drafted private."
The Ground Forces' performance in the First Chechen War has been assessed by a British academic as "appallingly bad".

Writing six years later, Michael Orr said "one of the root causes of the Russian failure in 1994–96 was their inability to raise and deploy a properly trained military force."
====
Second Chechen War ====
The Second Chechen War began in August 1999 after Chechen militias invaded neighboring Dagestan, followed quickly in early September by a series of four terrorist bombings across Russia.
This prompted Russian military action against the alleged Chechen culprits.

In the first Chechen war, the Russians primarily laid waste to an area with artillery and airstrikes before advancing the land forces.
Improvements were made in the Ground Forces between 1996 and 1999; when the Second Chechen War started, instead of hastily assembled "composite regiments" dispatched with little or no training, whose members had never seen service together, formations were brought up to strength with replacements, put through preparatory training, and then dispatched.
Combat performance improved accordingly, and large-scale opposition was crippled.

Most of the prominent past Chechen separatist leaders had died or been killed, including former President Aslan Maskhadov and leading warlord and terrorist attack mastermind Shamil Basayev.
However, small-scale conflict continued to drag on; as of November 2007, it had spread across other parts of the Russian Caucasus.
It was a divisive struggle, with at least one senior military officer dismissed for being unresponsive to government commands:
General Colonel Gennady Troshev was dismissed in 2002 for refusing to move from command of the North Caucasus Military District to command of the less important Siberian Military District.
The Second Chechen War was officially declared ended on 16 April 2009.

===
Reforms under Sergeyev ===
When Igor Sergeyev arrived as Minister of Defence in 1997, he initiated what were seen as real reforms under very difficult conditions.

The number of military educational establishments, virtually unchanged since 1991, was reduced, and the amalgamation of the Siberian and Trans-Baikal Military Districts was ordered.
A larger number of army divisions were given "constant readiness" status, which was supposed to bring them up to 80 percent manning and 100 percent equipment holdings.
Sergeyev announced in August 1998 that there would be six divisions and four brigades on 24-hour alert by the end of that year.
Three levels of forces were announced; constant readiness, low-level, and strategic reserves.
However, personnel quality—even in these favored units—continued to be a problem.
Lack of fuel for training and a shortage of well-trained junior officers hampered combat effectiveness.
However, concentrating on the interests of his old service, the Strategic Rocket Forces, Sergeyev directed the disbanding of the Ground Forces headquarters itself in December 1997.
The disbandment was a "military nonsense", in Orr's words, "justifiable only in terms of internal politics within the Ministry of Defence".
The Ground Forces' prestige declined as a result, as the headquarters disbandment implied—at least in theory—that the Ground Forces no longer ranked equally with the Air Force and Navy.

===
Reforms under Putin ===
Under President Vladimir Putin, more funds were committed, the Ground Forces Headquarters was reestablished, and some progress on professionalisation occurred.
Plans called for reducing mandatory service to 18 months in 2007, and to one year by 2008, but a mixed Ground Force, of both contract soldiers and conscripts, would remain.
(
As of 2009, the length of conscript service was 12 months.)Funding increases began in 1999; after some recovery in the Russian economy and the associated rise in income, especially from oil, "Russia's officially reported defence spending [rose] in nominal terms at least, for the first time since the formation of the Russian Federation".
The budget rose from 141 billion rubles in 2000 to 219 billion rubles in 2001.
Much of this funding has been spent on personnel—there have been several pay rises, starting with a 20-percent rise authorised in 2001; the current professionalisation programme, including 26,000 extra sergeants, was expected to cost at least 31 billion roubles ($1.1 billion USD).
Increased funding has been spread across the whole budget, with personnel spending being matched by greater procurement and research and development funding.

However, in 2004, Alexander Goltz said that, given the insistence of the hierarchy on trying to force contract soldiers into the old conscript pattern, there is little hope of a fundamental strengthening of the Ground Forces.
He further elaborated that they are expected to remain, to some extent, a military liability and "Russia's most urgent social problem" for some time to come.
Goltz summed up by saying: "All of this means that the Russian armed forces are not ready to defend the country and that, at the same time, they are also dangerous for Russia.
Top military personnel demonstrate neither the will nor the ability to effect fundamental changes.
"More money is arriving both for personnel and equipment; Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin stated in June 2008 that monetary allowances for servicemen in permanent-readiness units will be raised significantly.
In May 2007, it was announced that enlisted pay would rise to 65,000 roubles (US$2,750) per month, and the pay of officers on combat duty in rapid response units would rise to 100,000–150,000 roubles (US$4,230–$6,355) per month.
However, while the move to one year conscript service would disrupt dedovshchina, it is unlikely that bullying will disappear altogether without significant societal change.
Other assessments from the same source point out that the Russian Armed Forces faced major disruption in 2008, as demographic change hindered plans to reduce the term of conscription from two years to one.
===
Serdyukov reforms ===
A major reorganisation of the force began in 2007 by the Minister for Defence Anatoliy Serdyukov, with the aim of converting all divisions into brigades, and cutting surplus officers and establishments.
However, this affected units of continuous readiness (Russian: ЧПГ – части постоянной готовности) only.
It is intended to create 39 to 40 such brigades by 1 January 2016, including 39 all-arms brigades, 21 artillery and MRL brigades, seven brigades of army air defence forces, 12 communication brigades, and two electronic warfare brigades.
In addition, the 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division stationed in the Far East remained, and there will be an additional 17 separate regiments.
The reform has been called "unprecedented".

In the course of the reorganization, the 4-chain command structure (military district – field army – division – regiment) that was used until then was replaced with a 3-chain structure: strategic command – operational command – brigade.
Brigades are supposed to be used as mobile permanent-readiness units capable of fighting independently with the support of highly mobile task forces or together with other brigades under joint command.
In a statement on 4 September 2009, RGF Commander-in-Chief Vladimir Boldyrev said that half of the Russian land forces were reformed by 1 June and that 85 brigades of constant combat preparedness had already been created.
Among them are the combined-arms brigade, missile brigades, assault brigades and electronic warfare brigades.

===
Reforms Under Sergey Shoygu ===
After Sergey Shoygu took over the role of minister of defense, the reforms Serdyukov had implemented were redirected and corrected.
Sergey Shoygu replaced the purpose of the reforms to instead cover military training.
Sergey Shoygu also has helped restore trust with senior officers as well as the defense ministry.
He did this a number of ways but one of the ways was integrating himself by wearing a military uniform.
Sergey Shoygu helped improve operational readiness by ordering 750 military exercises including some that are very large (Vostok 2018).
The exercises also seemed to have helped validate the general direction of reform.
the effect of this readiness was seen during Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Since Serdyukov had already completed the unpopular reforms (military downsizing and reorganization), it had been relatively easy for Sergey Shoygu to be conciliatory with the officer corps and Ministry of Defense.
Rearmament has been a important goal of reform.
With the goal of 70% modernization by 2020
This was one of the main goals of these reforms.
From 1998 to 2001 The Russian Army received almost no new equipment.
Sergey Shoygu took a less confrontational approach with the defense industry.
By showing better flexibility on terms and pricing, the awarding of new contracts for the upcoming period was much better.
Sergey Shoygu promised that future contracts would be awarded primarily to domestic firms.
While easing tensions, these concessions also weakened incentives for companies to improve performance.

==
Structure ==
The President of Russia is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The Main Command (Glavkomat) of the Ground Forces, based in Moscow, directs activities.
This body was disbanded in 1997, but reformed by President Putin in 2001 by appointing Colonel General Nikolai Kormiltsev as the commander-in-chief of the ground forces and also as a deputy minister of defense.
Kormiltsev handed over command to Colonel General (later General of the Army)
Alexey Maslov in 2004, and
in a realignment of responsibilities, the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief lost his position as a deputy minister of defence.
Like Kormiltsev, while serving as Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief Maslov has been promoted to General of the Army.

In January 2014, the acting commander of the Russian Ground Forces was Lieutenant General Sergei Istrakov, who was appointed by Russian president Vladimir Putin upon the dismissal of former commander Colonel General Vladimir Chirkin over corruption charges in December 2013.
Istrakov handed over his position to a new commander on 2 May 2014, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces consists of the Main Staff of the Ground Troops, and departments for Peacekeeping Forces, Armaments of the Ground Troops, Rear Services of the Ground Troops, Cadres of the Ground Troops (personnel), Indoctrination Work, and Military Education.
There were also a number of directorates which used to be commanded by the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief in his capacity as a deputy defence minister.
They included NBC Protection Troops of the Armed Forces, Engineer Troops of the Armed Forces, and Troop Air Defence, as well as several others.
Their exact command status is now unknown.

===
Branches of service ===
The branches of service include motorized rifles, tanks, artillery and rocket forces, troop air defense, special corps (reconnaissance, signals, radioelectronic warfare, engineering, nuclear, biological and chemical protection, logistical support, automobile, and the protection of the rear), special forces, military units, and logistical establishments.
The Motorised Rifle Troops, the most numerous branch of service, constitutes the nucleus of Ground Forces' battle formations.
They are equipped with powerful armament for destruction of ground-based and aerial targets, missile complexes, tanks, artillery and mortars, anti-tank guided missiles, anti-aircraft missile systems and installations, and means of reconnaissance and control.
It is estimated that there are currently 19 motor rifle divisions, and the Navy now has several motor rifle formations under its command in the Ground and Coastal Defence Forces of the Baltic Fleet, the Northeastern Group of Troops and Forces on the Kamchatka Peninsula and other areas of the extreme northeast.
Also present are a large number of mobilisation divisions and brigades, known as "Bases for Storage of Weapons and Equipment", that in peacetime only have enough personnel assigned to guard the site and maintain the weapons.

The Tank Troops are the main impact force of the Ground Forces and a powerful means of armed struggle, intended for the accomplishment of the most important combat tasks.
As of 2007, there were three tank divisions in the force: the 4th and 10th within the Moscow Military District, and 5th Guards "Don" in the Siberian MD.

The 2nd Guards Tank Division in the Siberian Military District and the 21st Tank Division in the Far Eastern MD were disbanded.

The Artillery and Rocket Forces provide the Ground Forces' main firepower.
The Ground Forces currently include five or six static defence machine-gun/artillery divisions and seemingly now one division of field artillery—the 34th Guards in the Moscow MD.
The previous 12th in the Siberian MD, and the 15th in the Far Eastern MD, seem to have disbanded.
The Air Defense Troops (PVO) are one of the basic weapons for the destruction of enemy air forces.
They consist of surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery and radio-technical units and subdivisions.
Army Aviation, while intended for the direct support of the Ground Forces, has been under the control of the Air Forces (VVS) since 2003.
However, by 2015, Army Aviation will have been transferred back to the Ground Forces and 18 new aviation brigades will have been added.
Of the around 1,000 new helicopters that have been ordered under the State Armament Programmes, 900 will be for the Army Aviation.
The Spetsnaz GRU serve under the Ground Forces in peacetime and at the same time are directly subordinated to the Main Directorate of Intelligence (GRU) and will fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations or under special circumstances.
The Ground Forces currently fields 7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

=== Dispositions since 2010 ===
As a result of the 2008 Russian military reforms, the ground forces now consist of armies subordinate to the four new military districts: (Western, Southern, Central, and Eastern Military Districts).
The new districts have the role of 'operational strategic commands,' which command the Ground Forces as well as the Naval Forces and part of the Air and Air Defence Forces within their areas of responsibility.
Each major formation is bolded, and directs the non-bolded major subordinate formations.
It is not entirely clear to which superior(s) the four operational-strategic commands will report from 1 December 2010, as they command formations from multiple services (Air Force, Ground Forces & Navy).
A current detailed list of the subordinate units of the four military districts can be found in the respective articles.
During 2009, all 23 remaining divisions were reorganised into four tank brigades, 35 motor-rifle brigades, one prikritiya brigade formed from a machinegun-light artillery division, and three airborne-assault brigades (pre-existing).
Almost all are now designated otdelnaya (separate), with only several brigades retaining the guards honorific title.

In 2013, two of these brigades were reactivated as full divisions: the 2nd Guards Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division and 4th Guards
Kantemirovskaya Tank Division.
These two divisions marked the beginning of the expansion of the Ground Forces as more brigades are being reformed into full divisions within each military district.

==
Personnel ==
In 2006, the Ground Forces included an estimated total of 395,000 persons, including approximately 190,000 conscripts and 35,000 personnel of the Airborne Forces (VDV).
This can be compared to an estimated 670,000, with 210,000 conscripts, in 1995–96.
These numbers should be treated with caution, however, due to the difficulty for those outside Russia to make accurate assessments, and confusion even within the General Staff on the numbers of conscripts within the force.
The Ground Forces began their existence in 1992, inheriting the Soviet military manpower system practically unchanged, though it was in a state of rapid decay.
The Soviet Ground Forces were traditionally manned through terms of conscription, which had been reduced in 1967 from three to two years.
This system was administered through the thousands of military commissariats (Russian: военный комиссариат, военкомат, voyenkomat) located throughout the Soviet Union.
Between January and May of each year, every young Soviet male citizen was required to report to the local voyenkomat for assessment for military service, following a summons based on lists from every school and employer in the area.

The voyenkomat worked to quotas sent out by a department of the General Staff, listing how many young men were required by each service and branch of the Armed Forces.
(
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, draft evasion has skyrocketed; officials regularly bemoan the ten or so percent that actually appear when summoned.)
The new conscripts were then picked up by an officer from their future unit and usually sent by train across the country.
On arrival, they would begin the Young Soldiers' course, and become part of the system of senior rule, known as dedovshchina, literally "rule by the grandfathers.
"
There were only a very small number of professional non-commissioned officers (NCOs), as most NCOs were conscripts sent on short courses to prepare them for section commanders' and platoon sergeants' positions.
These conscript NCOs were supplemented by praporshchik warrant officers, positions created in the 1960s to support the increased variety of skills required for modern weapons.
The Soviet Army's officer-to-soldier ratio was extremely top-heavy, partially in order to compensate for the relatively low education level of the military manpower base and the absence of professional NCOs.
Following World War II and the great expansion of officer education, officers became the product of four-to-five-year higher military colleges.
As in most armies, newly commissioned officers usually become platoon leaders, having to accept responsibility for the soldiers' welfare and training (with the exceptions noted above).
Young officers in Soviet Army units were worked round the clock, normally receiving only three days off per month.
Annual vacations were under threat if deficiencies emerged within the unit, and the pressure created enormous stress.
Towards the end of the Soviet Union, this led to a decline in morale amongst young officers.
In the early 2000s, many junior officers did not wish to serve—in 2002, more than half the officers who left the forces did so early.
Their morale was low, among other reasons because their postings were entirely in the hands of their immediate superiors and the personnel department.
"
Without having to account for their actions, they can choose to promote or not promote him, to send him to Moscow or to some godforsaken post on the Chinese border.
"There is little available information on the current status of women, who are not conscripted, in the Russian Ground Forces.
According to the BBC, there were 90,000 women in the Russian Army in 2002, though estimates on numbers of women across the entire Russian Armed Forces in 2000 ranged from 115,000 to 160,000.
Women serve in support roles, most commonly in the fields of nursing, communications, and engineering.
Some officers' wives have become contract service personnel.

== Equipment ==
The Russian Ground Forces retain a very large quantity of vehicles and equipment.
There is also likely to be a great deal of older equipment in state military storage, a practice continued from the Soviet Union.
However, following the collapse of the USSR, the newly independent republics became host to most of the formations with modern equipment, whereas Russia was left with lower-category units, usually with older equipment.
As financial stringency began to bite harder, the amount of new equipment fell as well, and by 1998, only ten tanks and about 30 BMP infantry fighting vehicles were being purchased each year.
New equipment, like the Armata Universal Combat Platform, Bumerang and Kurganets-25 will be equipped from 2015 and replace many old tanks, BMPs, BTRs like the T-72, T-90, BMP-1/2/3, and BTR-80 in active service.
Funding for new equipment has greatly risen in recent years, and the Russian defence industry continues to develop new weapons systems for the Ground Forces.
Level of modern weapons in the Ground Forces is 60 per cent in late 2019.
Two Iskander-M missile system brigade sets, over 60 Tornado-G MLRS and more than 20 Msta-SM self-propelled howitzers have been received in 2016.
More than 70 upgraded Grad-M MLRS have been fielded too.
The Russian Ground Forces received two brigade sets of Buk-M3 and Buk-M2 air defence missile complexes in 2016.
Troops also received two division sets of Tor-M2 and two of Tor-M2U air defence missile complexes.
Moreover, the Forces received Verba MANPADS, more than 130 BMP-3 IFVs and BTR-82A APCs as well as more than 20 Tigr-M armored vehicles equipped with the Arbalet-DM combat module.
Russian troops have reportedly received 2,930 new or modernized systems allowing for two missile brigades, two SAM brigades and two SAM regiments, one Spetsnaz brigade, 12 motorized rifle and tank battalions, and three artillery divisions to be reequipped.
The share of modern weapons and equipment in the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 increased by 4 times.
Over eight years, more than 2.5 thousand units of armored weapons have been delivered to tank formations and military units of the Ground Forces, including more than 1,000 upgraded tanks
T-72B3, T-72B3M, T-80BVM and
T-90M.
The motorized rifle troops received more than 1.5 thousand units of infantry fighting vehicles BMP-3, upgraded BMP-2 and armored personnel carriers BTR-82A (AM).

The missile forces and artillery of the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 received over 1.5 thousand units of military equipment - operational-tactical missile systems "Iskander-M", multiple launch rocket systems of the "Tornado" family, self-propelled howitzers "Msta-SM".

Air Defense Troops of the Ground Forces received over 900 units of military equipment - long-range anti-aircraft missile systems S-300V4, short-range and medium-range anti-aircraft missile systems "Tor-M2" and "Buk-M3", portable anti-aircraft missile systems "Verba".
=== Equipment summary ===
Figures listed as "Active" only include equipment that circulated in active service.

==
Ranks and insignia ==
The newly re-emergent Russia retained most of the ranks of the Soviet Army, with some minor changes.
The principal difference from the usual Western style is some variation in generals' rank titles—in at least one case, Colonel General, derived from German usage.
Most of the rank names were borrowed from existing German/Prussian, French, English, Dutch, and Polish ranks upon the formation of the modern Russian Army in the late 17th century, and have lasted with few changes of title through the Soviet period.

==
Commanders ==


===
Commander-in-chief (1992–1997) ===
Vladimir Semyonov (1992–1997)


===
Chief of the Main Directorate (1998–2001) ===
Yury Bukreyev (1998–2001)


===
Commander-in-chief (2001–present) ===
Nikolai Kormiltsev (2001–2004)
Aleksei Maslov (2004–2008)
Vladimir Bondyrev (2008–2010)
Aleksandr Postnikov-Streltsov (2010–2012)
Vladimir Chirkin (2012–2013)
Sergei Istrakov (2013–2014)
Oleg Salyukov (2014–present)


==
Ground Forces Day ==
On 31 May 2006, President Vladimir Putin signed decree No.
549 "
On the establishment of professional holidays and memorable days in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation", according to which it was ordered to celebrate Ground Forces Day (Russian: День Сухопутных войск).
The date chosen for the holiday commemorates the edict made by Tsar Ivan the Terrible on 1 October 1550 on the placement in Moscow and surrounding districts of a thousand servicemen forming a local brigade of Streltsy, which essentially became a key document in the further formation and development of the Imperial Russian Army.

Forces Day was first celebrated on the Preobrazhenskaya Square in Moscow in the Church of the Transfiguration of the Lord, where a bishop's service was held.
Before the start of the service, an order of the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu and the decree of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow were read, according to which the Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord officially became the main temple of the RF Ground Forces.
A year later, the holiday was celebrated with the adoption of the Ground Forces Anthem.
The following holidays are also celebrated by the Ground Forces:
Day of Tankmen, Day of Rocket Forces and Artillery, Day of Air Defense.
==
Gallery ==
==
See also ==
Russian Airborne Forces
Naval Infantry (Russia)
Awards and emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Army of Russia at Wikimedia Commons
The Colt AR-15 is a lightweight, magazine-fed, gas-operated semi-automatic rifle.
The "AR” stands for the first two letters of ArmaLite.
It was designed with the extensive use of aluminum alloys and synthetic materials in order to reduce weight.

Colt's Manufacturing Company currently uses the AR-15 trademark for its line of semi-automatic AR-15 rifles.

==
History ==
Due to financial problems, and limitations in terms of manpower and production capacity, ArmaLite sold the AR-15 design and the AR-15 trademark along with the ArmaLite AR-10 to Colt's Manufacturing Company in 1959.
Colt started selling the semi-automatic version of the M16 rifle as the Colt AR-15 in 1964.
The first mass production version was the Colt AR-15 Sporter, in .223 Remington, with a 20-inch barrel and issued with 5-round magazines.
Over the decades, Colt has made many different types of AR-15 rifle and carbine models, including the AR-15, AR-15A2, AR-15A3, AR-15A4, and many other models.

Although the sale of new AR-15s was banned by the Federal Assault Weapons Ban from 1994 to 2004, Colt and others continued to sell legally compliant versions during that period.
On September 20, 2019, Colt announced that it would no longer produce the AR-15 for private use, due to market saturation.
It would still produce the AR-15 for police and military units though.

However, by May 2020, changed market conditions and a significant increase in demand allowed Colt to resume production for sales to private users.

==
Operating mechanism ==
U.S. Patent 2,951,424 describes the cycling mechanism used in the original AR-15.
The bolt carrier acts as a movable cylinder and the bolt itself acts as a stationary piston.
This mechanism is often called "direct gas impingement" (DGI), although it differs from prior gas systems.
Designer Eugene Stoner did not consider the AR-15 to be a conventional direct impingement mechanism, but that is how it came to be characterized.
Gas is tapped from the barrel as the bullet moves past a gas port located above the rifle's front sight base.
The gas expands into the port and down a gas tube, located above the barrel that runs from the front sight base into the AR-15's upper receiver.
Here, the gas tube protrudes into a "gas key" (bolt carrier key), which accepts the gas and funnels it into the bolt carrier.
At this point, the bolt is locked into the barrel extension by locking lugs, so the expanding gas forces
the bolt carrier backward a short distance.
As the bolt carrier moves toward the butt of the gun, the bolt cam pin, riding in a slot on the bolt carrier, forces the bolt to rotate and thus unlocks it from the barrel extension.
Once the bolt is fully unlocked it begins its rearward movement along with the bolt carrier.
The bolt's rearward motion extracts the empty cartridge case from the chamber.
As soon as the neck of the case clears the barrel extension, the bolt's spring-loaded ejector forces it out the ejection port in the side of the upper receiver.

Behind the bolt carrier is a plastic or metal buffer, which rests in line with a return spring.
The buffer spring begins to push the bolt carrier and bolt back toward the chamber once it is compressed sufficiently.
A groove machined into the upper receiver guides the bolt cam pin and prevents it and the bolt from rotating into a closed position.
The bolt's locking lugs push a fresh round from the magazine as the bolt moves forward.
The round is guided by feed ramps into the chamber.
As the bolt's locking lugs move past the barrel extension, the cam pin twists into a pocket milled into the upper receiver.
This twisting action follows the groove cut into the carrier and forces the bolt to twist and "lock" into the barrel extension.

==
Features ==


===
Upper receivers ===
The upper receiver incorporates the fore stock, the charging handle, the forward assist, the gas operating system, the barrel, the bolt and bolt carrier assembly.
AR-15s employ a modular design.
Thus one upper receiver can quickly and easily be substituted for another.
Upper receivers are available with barrels of different weights, lengths, calibers, and rail systems with various sights and accessories.
The standard AR-15 rifle uses a 20-inch (510 mm) barrel.
Although, both shorter 16-inch (410 mm) carbine barrels and longer 24-inch
(610 mm) target barrels are also available.

Early models had barrels with a 1:12 rate of twist for the original 223 Remington, 55-grain (3.6 g) bullets.
Current models have barrels with a 1:9 or 1:7 twist rate for the 5.56×45mm NATO, 62-grain (4.0 g) bullets.

===
Lower receivers ===
The lower receiver incorporates the magazine well, the pistol grip, the buttstock, the buffer and the buffer spring.
The lower receiver also contains the trigger, disconnector, hammer and fire selector (collectively known as the fire control group).
Full-sized rifles use a fixed buttstock, while carbines generally use an adjustable telescoping buttstock.

The early commercial SP-1 AR-15s used a pair of 0.250-inch (6.4 mm) diameter receiver push pins, identical to those found on the military rifles.
In 1966 the company replaced the front pin with a paired nut and screw hinge using a 0.315-inch (8.0 mm) diameter pin to prevent shooters from being able to change receivers with military rifles or competitor rifles without the use of an adapter.
They resumed production with the smaller and standardized 0.250 in pin in the mid-1990s.

===
Sights ===
The AR-15's most distinctive ergonomic feature is the carrying handle and rear sight assembly on top of the receiver.
This is a by-product of the original ArmaLite design, where the carry handle served to protect the charging handle.
As the line of sight is 2.5 in (63.5 mm) over the bore, the AR-15 has an inherent parallax problem.
At closer ranges (typically inside 15–20 meters), the shooter must compensate by aiming high to place shots where desired.
The standard AR-15 rifle has a 500 mm (19.75 inches) sight radius.
The AR-15 uses an L-type flip, aperture rear sight
and it is adjustable with two settings, 0 to 300 meters and 300 to 400 meters.
The front sight is a post adjustable for elevation.
The rear sight can be adjusted for windage.
The sights can be adjusted with a bullet tip or pointed tool.
The AR-15 can also mount a scope on the carrying handle.
With the advent of the AR-15A2, a new fully adjustable rear sight was added, allowing the rear sight to be dialed in for specific range settings between 300 and 800 meters and to allow windage adjustments without the need of a tool or cartridge.
Current versions such as AR-15A4 have a detachable carrying handle and use Picatinny rails, which allows for the use of various scopes and sighting devices.

===
Muzzle devices ==
=
Colt AR-15 rifles most often have a barrel threaded in ​1⁄2″-28 threads to incorporate the use of a muzzle device such as a flash suppressor, sound suppressor or muzzle brake.
The initial design, the "duckbill," had three tines or prongs and was prone to breakage and getting entangled in vegetation.
The design was later changed to close the end to avoid this problem.
Eventually, on the A2 version of the rifle, the bottom port was closed to reduce muzzle climb and prevent dust from rising when the rifle was fired in the prone position.
For these reasons, the US military declared this muzzle device a compensator, but it is more commonly known as the "GI", "A2", or "Birdcage" muzzle device.
The standard AR15 muzzle device conforms to the STANAG dimensional requirements for firing 22mm rifle grenades.

===
Magazines ===
The Colt AR-15 uses 20- or 30-round staggered-column detachable box magazines.
Low-capacity 5- or 10-round magazines are also available to comply with legal restrictions, for hunting, for benchrest shooting or where a larger magazine can be inconvenient.

===
Comparison to military versions ===
The primary distinction between civilian semi-automatic rifles (no longer manufactured by Colt for civilian use) and military models is select fire.

Military rifles were produced with firing modes, semi-automatic fire and either fully automatic fire mode or burst fire mode, in which the rifle fires three rounds in succession when the trigger is depressed.

Most components are interchangeable between semi-auto and select fire rifles including magazines, sights, upper receiver, barrels and accessories.

The military M4 carbine typically uses a 14.5-inch (370 mm) barrel.

Civilian rifles commonly have 16-inch or longer barrels to comply with the National Firearms Act.
In order to prevent a civilian semi-automatic AR-15 from being readily converted for use with the select fire components, Colt changed a number of features.

Parts changed include the lower receiver, bolt carrier, hammer, trigger, disconnector, and safety/mode selector.
The semi-automatic bolt carrier has a longer lightening slot to prevent the bolt's engagement with an automatic sear.
Due to a decrease in mass the buffer spring is heavier.
On the select fire version, the hammer has an extra spur which interacts with the additional auto-sear that holds it back until the bolt carrier group is fully in battery, when automatic fire is selected.

Using a portion of the select fire parts in a semi-automatic rifle will not enable a select fire option.

As designed by Colt the pins supporting the semi-auto trigger and hammer in the lower receiver are larger than those used in the military rifle to prevent interchangeability between semi-automatic and select fire components.

==
AR-15 style rifle ==
After Colt's patents expired in 1977, other manufacturers began to copy the Colt AR-15 rifle's design.
However, the term "AR-15" is a Colt registered trademark and Colt only uses the term to refer to its line of semi-automatic rifles.
Therefore, other manufacturers began to market their generic AR-15s under separate designations, although these are all frequently referred to as AR-15s, as are some rifles and carbines that are not even based on the AR-15 design.
AR-15
style rifles are available in a wide range of configurations and calibers from a large number of manufacturers.
These configurations range from standard full-sizes rifles with 20-inch barrels, to short carbine-length models with 16-inch barrels, adjustable length stocks and optical sights, to long range target models with 24-inch barrels, bipods and high-powered scopes.
These rifles may also have short-stroke gas piston system, forgoing the direct gas system standard in AR-15 rifles.
These calibers include the 5.56×45mm NATO, 5.7×28mm, 6.8mm Remington SPC, .300
Blackout, 9×19mm Parabellum and .458 SOCOM to name a few.

== Use in mass shootings ==
From 28–29 April, 1996, Martin Bryant killed 35 and injured 23 in an incident known today as the Port Arthur Massacre, during which he used a Colt AR-15 and a .308 L1A1 SLR.
It was one of the deadliest mass shootings in Australian history and resulted in the 1996 National Firearms Agreement.

==
Legality ==
The Colt AR-15 is banned by name in California with a list of additional AR-style and AK-style firearms in the Kasler v. Lockyer Assault Weapons List.
This list deems the Colt AR-15, as well as the Armalite AR-15, Bushmaster XM-15, DPMS Panther, and many other AR-style rifles as Assault Weapons by name, thus illegal to own/possess in the state of California.

==
Gallery ==


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Colt AR-15 at Wikimedia Commons
A directed-energy weapon (DEW) is a ranged weapon that damages its target with highly focused energy, including laser, microwaves, and particle beams.
Potential applications of this technology include weapons that target personnel, missiles, vehicles, and optical devices.
In the United States, the Pentagon, DARPA, the Air Force Research Laboratory, United States
Army Armament Research Development and Engineering Center, and the Naval Research Laboratory are researching directed-energy weapons and railguns to counter ballistic missiles, hypersonic cruise missiles, and hypersonic glide vehicles.

These systems of missile defense are expected to come online no sooner than the mid to late-2020s.
Russia, China, India, and the United Kingdom are also developing directed-energy weapons while Iran and Turkey claim to have directed-energy weapons in active service and the first usage of directed-energy weapons in a combat was claimed to have occurred in Libya in August 2019 by Turkey which claimed to use the ALKA Directed-energy weapon.
After decades of research and development, directed-energy weapons are still at the experimental stage and it remains to be seen if or when they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons.

==
Operational advantages ==
Directed energy weapons could have several main advantages over conventional weaponry:
Directed-energy weapons can be used discreetly; radiation above and below the visible spectrum is invisible and does not generate sound.

Light is, for all practical purposes, essentially unaffected by gravity, windage and Coriolis force, giving it an almost perfectly flat trajectory.
This makes aim much more precise and extends the range to line-of-sight, limited only by beam diffraction and spread (which dilute the power and weaken the effect), and absorption or scattering by intervening atmospheric contents.

Lasers travel at light-speed and have near infinite range and are therefore suitable for use in space warfare.

Laser weapons potentially eliminate many logistical problems in terms of ammunition supply, as long as there is enough energy to power them.

Depending on several operational factors, directed-energy weapons may be cheaper to operate than conventional weapons in certain contexts.

==
Microwave weapons ==
Although some devices are labeled as microwave weapons, the microwave range is commonly defined as being between 300 MHz and 300 GHz, which is within the RF range—these frequencies having wavelengths of 1 millimeter to 1 meter.
Some examples of weapons which have been publicized by the military are as follows:

Active Denial System is a millimeter wave source that heats the water in a human target's skin and thus causes incapacitating pain.
It was developed by the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory and Raytheon for riot-control duty.
Though intended to cause severe pain while leaving no lasting damage, concern has been voiced as to whether the system could cause irreversible damage to the eyes.
There has yet to be testing for long-term side effects of exposure to the microwave beam.
It can also destroy unshielded electronics.
The device comes in various sizes, including attached to a Humvee.

Vigilant Eagle is a proposed airport defense system that directs high-frequency microwaves towards any projectile that is fired at an aircraft.
The system consists of a missile-detecting and tracking subsystem (MDT), a command and control system, and a scanning array.
The MDT is a fixed grid of passive infrared (IR) cameras.
The command and control system determines the missile launch point.
The scanning array projects microwaves that disrupt the surface-to-air missile's guidance system, deflecting it from the aircraft.

Bofors HPM Blackout is a high-powered microwave weapon that is said to be able to destroy at short distance a wide variety of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) electronic equipment and is purportedly non-lethal.

The effective radiated power (ERP) of the EL/M-2080 Green Pine radar makes it a hypothetical candidate for conversion into a directed-energy weapon, by focusing pulses of radar energy on target missiles.
The energy spikes are tailored to enter missiles through antennas or sensor apertures where they can fool guidance systems, scramble computer memories or even burn out sensitive electronic components.

AESA radars mounted on fighter aircraft have been slated as directed energy weapons against missiles, however, a senior US Air Force officer noted: "they aren't particularly suited to create weapons effects on missiles because of limited antenna size, power and field of view".
Potentially lethal effects are produced only inside 100 meters range, and disruptive effects at distances on the order of one kilometer.
Moreover, cheap countermeasures can be applied to existing missiles.

Counter-electronics High Power Microwave Advanced Missile Project
==
Laser weapons ==
A laser weapon is a directed-energy weapon based on lasers.

== Particle-beam weapons ==

Particle-beam weapons can use charged or neutral particles, and can be either endoatmospheric or exoatmospheric.
Particle beams as beam weapons are theoretically possible, but practical weapons have not been demonstrated yet.
Certain types of particle beams have the advantage of being self-focusing in the atmosphere.

Blooming is also a problem in particle-beam weapons.
Energy that would otherwise be focused on the target spreads out and the beam becomes less effective:
Thermal blooming occurs in both charged and neutral particle beams, and occurs when particles bump into one another under the effects of thermal vibration, or bump into air molecules.

Electrical blooming occurs only in charged particle beams, as ions of like charge repel one another.

===
Plasma weapons ===
Plasma weapons fire a beam, bolt, or stream of plasma, which is an excited state of matter consisting of atomic electrons & nuclei and free electrons if ionized, or other particles if pinched.

The MARAUDER (Magnetically Accelerated Ring to Achieve Ultra-high Directed-Energy and Radiation) used the Shiva Star project (a high energy capacitor bank which provided the means to test weapons and other devices requiring brief and extremely large amounts of energy) to accelerate a toroid of plasma at a significant percentage of the speed of light.
The Russian Federation is developing plasma weapons.

==
Sonic weapons ==
Tests performed on mice show the threshold for both lung and liver damage occurs at
about 184 dB. Damage increases rapidly as intensity is increased.
Noise-induced neurological disturbances in humans exposed to continuous low frequency tones for durations longer than 15 minutes involved development of immediate and long-term problems affecting brain tissue.
The symptoms resembled those of individuals who had suffered minor head injuries.
One theory for a causal mechanism is that the prolonged sound exposure resulted in enough mechanical strain to brain tissue to induce an encephalopathy.

===
Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) ===
The Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) is an acoustic hailing device developed by LRAD Corporation to send messages and warning tones over longer distances or at higher volume than normal loudspeakers.
LRAD systems are used for long-range communications in a variety of applications including as a means of non-lethal, non-kinetic crowd control.

According to the manufacturer's specifications, the systems weigh from 15 to 320 pounds (6.8 to 145.1 kg) and can emit sound in a 30°- 60° beam at 2.5 kHz.
==
History ==


===
Mirrors of Archimedes ===
According to a legend, Archimedes created a mirror with an adjustable focal length (or more likely, a series of mirrors focused on a common point) to focus sunlight on ships of the Roman fleet as they invaded Syracuse, setting them on fire.
Historians point out that the earliest accounts of the battle did not mention a "burning mirror", but merely stated that Archimedes's ingenuity combined with a way to hurl fire were relevant to the victory.
Some attempts to replicate this feat have had some success; in particular, an experiment by students at MIT showed that a mirror-based weapon was at least possible, if not necessarily practical.
The hosts of MythBusters tackled the Mirrors of Archimedes three times (in episodes 19, 57 and 172) and were never able to make the target ship catch fire, declaring the myth busted three separate times.

===
Robert Watson-Watt ===
In 1935, the British Air Ministry asked Robert Watson-Watt of the Radio Research Station whether a "death ray" was possible.
He and colleague Arnold Wilkins quickly concluded that it was not feasible, but
as a consequence suggested using radio for the detection of aircraft
and this started the development of radar in Britain.

===
The fictional "engine-stopping ray" ===
Stories in the 1930s and World War Two gave rise to the idea of an "engine-stopping ray".
They seemed to have arisen from the testing of the television transmitter in Feldberg, Germany.
Because electrical noise from car engines would interfere with field strength measurements, sentries would stop all traffic in the vicinity for the twenty minutes or so needed for a test.
Reversing the order of events in retelling the story created a "tale" where tourists car engine stopped first and then were approached by a German soldier who told them that they had to wait.
The soldier returned a short time later to say that the engine would now work and the tourists drove off.
Such stories were circulating in Britain around 1938 and during the war British Intelligence relaunched the myth as a "British engine-stopping ray," trying to spoof the Germans into researching what the British had supposedly invented in an attempt to tie up German scientific resources.

===
German World War II experimental weapons ===
During the early 1940s Axis engineers developed a sonic cannon that could cause fatal vibrations in its target body.
A methane gas combustion chamber leading to two parabolic dishes pulse-detonated at roughly 44 Hz.
This sound, magnified by the dish reflectors, caused vertigo and nausea at 200–400 meters (220–440 yd) by vibrating the middle ear bones and shaking the cochlear fluid within the inner ear.
At distances of 50–200 meters (160–660 ft), the sound waves could act on organ tissues and fluids by repeatedly compressing and releasing compressive resistant organs such as the kidneys, spleen, and liver.
(
It had little detectable effect on malleable organs such as the heart, stomach and intestines.)
Lung tissue was affected at only the closest ranges as atmospheric air is highly compressible and only the blood rich alveoli resist compression.
In practice, the weapon was highly vulnerable to enemy fire.
Rifle, bazooka and mortar rounds easily deformed the parabolic reflectors, rendering the wave amplification ineffective.
In the later phases of World War II, Nazi Germany increasingly put its hopes on research into technologically revolutionary secret weapons, the Wunderwaffe.

Among the directed-energy weapons the Nazis investigated were X-ray beam weapons developed under Heinz Schmellenmeier, Richard Gans and Fritz Houtermans.
They built an electron accelerator called Rheotron (invented by Max Steenbeck at Siemens-Schuckert in the 1930s, these were later called Betatrons by the Americans) to generate hard X-ray synchrotron beams for the Reichsluftfahrtministerium (RLM).
The intent was to pre-ionize ignition in aircraft engines and hence serve as anti-aircraft DEW and bring planes down into the reach of the flak.
The Rheotron was captured by the Americans in Burggrub on April 14, 1945.Another approach was Ernst Schiebolds 'Röntgenkanone' developed from 1943 in Großostheim near Aschaffenburg.
Richert Seifert & Co from Hamburg delivered parts.

===
Reported use in Sino-Soviet conflicts ===
The Central Intelligence Agency informed Secretary Henry Kissinger that it had twelve reports of Soviet forces using laser-based weapons against Chinese forces during the 1969 Sino-Soviet border clashes, though William Colby doubted that they had actually been employed.

===
Strategic Defense Initiative ===
In the 1980s, U.S. President Ronald Reagan proposed the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, which was nicknamed Star Wars.
It suggested that lasers, perhaps space-based X-ray lasers, could destroy ICBMs in flight.
Panel discussions on the role of high-power lasers in SDI took place at various laser conferences, during the 1980s, with the participation of noted physicists including Edward Teller.
Though the strategic missile defense concept has continued to the present under the Missile Defense Agency, most of the directed-energy weapon concepts were shelved.
However, Boeing has been somewhat successful with the Boeing YAL-1 and Boeing NC-135, the first of which destroyed two missiles in February 2010.
Funding has been cut to both of the programs.

===
Iraq War ===
During the Iraq War, electromagnetic weapons, including high power microwaves, were used by the U.S. military to disrupt and destroy Iraqi electronic systems and may have been used for crowd control.
Types and magnitudes of exposure to electromagnetic fields are unknown.

===
Alleged tracking of Space Shuttle Challenger ===
The Soviet Union invested some effort in the development of ruby and carbon dioxide lasers as anti-ballistic missile systems, and later as a tracking and anti-satellite system.
There are reports that the Terra-3 complex at Sary Shagan was used on several occasions to temporarily "blind" US spy satellites in the IR range.

It has been claimed (and proven false) that the USSR made use of the lasers at the Terra-3 site to target the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1984.
At the time, the Soviet Union were concerned that the shuttle was being used as a reconnaissance platform.
On 10 October 1984 (STS-41-G), the Terra-3 tracking laser was allegedly aimed at Challenger as it passed over the facility.
Early reports claimed that this was responsible for causing "malfunctions on the space shuttle and distress to the crew", and that the United States filed a diplomatic protest about the incident.
However, this story is comprehensively denied by the crew members of STS-41-G and knowledgeable members of the US intelligence community.
After the end of the Cold War, the Terra-3 facility was found to be a low-power laser testing site with limited satellite tracking capabilities, which is now abandoned and partially disassembled.

==
Planetary defense ==
In the United States, the Directed Energy Solar Targeting of Asteroids and exploRation (DE-STAR) Project was considered for non-military use to protect Earth from asteroids.

== Non-lethal weapons ==
The TECOM Technology Symposium in 1997 concluded on non-lethal weapons, "determining the target effects on personnel is the greatest challenge to the testing community", primarily because  "the potential of injury and death severely limits human tests".
Also, "directed-energy weapons that target the central nervous system and cause neurophysiological disorders may violate the Certain Conventional Weapons Convention of 1980.
Weapons that go beyond non-lethal intentions and cause 'superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering' may also violate the Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977."Some common bio-effects of non-lethal electromagnetic weapons include:

Difficulty breathing
Disorientation
Nausea
Pain
Vertigo
Other systemic discomfortInterference with breathing poses
the most significant, potentially lethal results.

Light and repetitive visual signals can induce epileptic seizures.
Vection and motion sickness can also occur.

Cruise ships are known to use sonic weapons (such as LRAD) to drive off pirates.
Russia has been reportedly using blinding laser weapons during its military intervention in Donbass.

== See also ==


===
Similar articles ===
Electronic warfare
Electromagnetic pulse
L3Harris
Technologies
Laser applications
List of laser articles
List of plasma (physics)
applications articles


===
Directed-energy weapons ===
Active Denial System (ADS), a non-lethal directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control
ALKA, possibly the first Directed-energy weapon to be used in combat
MEDUSA (weapon)


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Airpower Australia
Applied Energetics – Photonic and high-voltage energetics (formerly Ionatron)
Wired News (AP) article on weapons deployment in Iraq, Active Denial System and Stunstrike, July 10, 2005
Boeing Tests Laser-Mounted Humvee as IED Hunter, November 13, 2007
WSTIAC Quarterly, Vol.
7
, No.
1
– Directed Energy Weapons
Ogonek Report on '21st Century Weapons'
How 'Revolutionary' Is CHAMP, New Air Force Microwave Weapon?,
November 28, 2012
By David Axe
Modern equipment of the Turkish Land Forces.
Totals in these tables do not necessary accurately reflect combat attrition sustained during the ongoing Syrian-Turkish clashes and Kurdish–Turkish conflict.

==
Infantry weapons ==


===
Handguns ===


===
Shotguns ===


===
Submachine guns and personal defence weapons ===


=== Assault and battle rifles ===


===
Sniper and anti-materiel rifles ===


===
Machine guns ===


===
Anti-armor weapons ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


===
MANPADS ===


=== Grenades and mines ===


===
Mortars ===


===
Protective gear ===
== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Armored vehicles ===


===
Rockets and artillery ===


===
Anti-aircraft ===
Most of the Anti-aircraft equipment is in the inventory of Turkish Air Force.
===
Engineering vehicles and equipment ===


===
Utility vehicles ===


===
Cargo vehicles ===


===
Unmanned ground vehicles ===


===
Radar systems ===
These are radars in Turkish Land Forces command.
For other radars see List of active weapons of the Turkish Air Force.

===
Electronic warfare ===


==
Aircraft ==
These are aircraft in Turkish Land Forces command.
For other aircraft see List of active aircraft of the Turkish Air Force page.

===
Unmanned aircraft vehicles ===


===
Helicopters ===


===
Fixed wing aircraft ===


==
Future procurements ==


==
See also ==
Military equipment of Turkey
List of modern weapons of the Turkish Air Force
Equipment of the Turkish Naval Forces
Equipment of the Turkish Gendarmerie
Equipment of the Turkish Coast Guard


==
References ==


==
External links ==
See the Turkish Government, Undersecretariat for Defense Industries website for an official list of Turkish military procurement projects.
This is a historical list of countries by firearm-related death rate per 100,000 population in the listed year.

Homicide figures may include justifiable homicides along with criminal homicides, depending upon jurisdiction and reporting standards.

Not included are homicides, suicides, accidental deaths, or justifiable deaths by any means other than by firearm.

==
List ==
This is a table which is giving information about "firearm-related death rate per 100,000 population per year".

==
Charts and graphs ==


==
See also ==
Firearm death rates in the United States by state
List of countries by intentional homicide rate
List of countries by suicide rate
Number of guns per capita by country
List of cities by murder rate
List of U.S. states and territories by violent crime rate
List of U.S. states and territories by intentional homicide rate
List of United States cities by crime rate (2012) (250,000
+)
United States cities by crime rate (100,000–250,000)
United States cities by crime rate (60,000-100,000)
Index of gun politics articles
Estimated number of civilian guns per capita by country


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Systematic comparison of 195 countries and territories for the period from 1990 to 2016:
Naghavi, Mohsen;  et al.
(
28 August 2018).
"
Global Mortality From Firearms, 1990-2016".
JAMA.
320 (8):
792–814.
doi:10.1001/jama.2018.10060.
ISSN 0098-7484.
PMC 6143020.
PMID 30167700.

"Murder Victims by Weapon, 2013–2017".
Uniform Crime Reports for 2017.
FBI.

"Fatal Injury Data".
Centers for Disease Control.
January 18, 2019.
Retrieved 29 March 2019.

"Fatal Injury Mapping".
Centers for Disease Control.
Archived from the original on 2012-01-25.
Retrieved 29 March 2019.

"Statistics and Data: Crime Data".
dataunodc.un.org.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC).

Historic data can be found on the United Nations Survey on Crime Trends and the Operations of Criminal Justice Systems (UN-CTS) page.

"International Homicide Comparisons".
GunCite.com.
May 20, 2006.
Retrieved 2008-04-08.

"Global Impacts of Gun Violence".
gunpolicy.org.
Retrieved 2012-02-10.

"Deaths Due to Injury by Firearms per 100,000 Population".
StateHealthFacts.org.
Kaiser Family Foundation.
Retrieved 2008-04-08.

Greg Barrow (2000-02-15). "
SA gun deaths rise".
BBC News.

"Victims of crime survey 2011" (PDF).
statssa.gov.za.
Statistics, South African Government.

Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
Fast Facts - Suicide and Self Injury, Injuries, and Homicide
"European Detailed Mortality Database".
data.euro.who.int.
World Health Organization, Regional office for Europe.

"CoDQL (
Cause of Death Query online)".
World Health Organization.
—
Causes of death by year from countries that have reported to the WHO.
Firearm deaths correspond to ICD-10 codes W32-W34, Accidental discharge of firearm; X72-X74, Intentional self-harm by firearm; X93-X95, Assault by firearm; Y22-Y24, Firearm discharge, undetermined intent.

Krug, EG; Powell, KE; Dahlberg, LL (1998).
"
Firearm-related deaths in the United States and 35 other high- and upper-middle-income countries" (PDF).
International Journal of Epidemiology.
27 (2)
: 214–221.
doi:10.1093/ije/27.2.214.
PMID 9602401.
—
Contains statistics from 36 countries between 1990 and 1995.
This is a list of equipment of the British Army currently in use.
It includes small arms, combat vehicles, aircraft, watercraft, artillery and transport vehicles.
The British Army is the principal land warfare force of the United Kingdom, a part of British Armed Forces.
Since the end of the Cold War, the British Army has been deployed to a number of conflict zones, often as part of an expeditionary force, a coalition force or part of a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
To meet its commitments, the equipment of the Army is periodically updated and modified.
Programs exist to ensure the Army is suitably equipped for both current conflicts and expected future conflicts, with any shortcomings in equipment addressed as Urgent Operational Requirements (UOR), which supplements planned equipment programmes.

==
Infantry section equipment ==
The British infantry section consists of eight men who are normally organised into two four-man infantry fireteams.
While equipment formations can be tailored as required by section and platoon commanders, infantry sections are usually issued with the following:
WeaponsSix L85A2/A3 rifles, two of which are usually equipped with an L123A2/A3 underslung grenade launcher (UGL)
One L129A1 sharpshooter rifle
One L7A2 general purpose machine gun (can be replaced by an additional L85A2/A3 rifle at commanding officer's discretion for a total of seven L85A2/A3 rifles)
Seven L3A1 bayonets for use with L85A2/A3 and L129A1 rifles (eight bayonets if the L7A2 GPMG is replaced with an additional L85A2/A3 rifle)
One L128A1 combat shotgun for use by the section point man
(point position is subject to rotation between individual members of the section)
Two NLAW anti-tank weapons
L72A9 or L2A1 anti-structure munitions
L109A2 high explosive grenades
L132A1 smoke grenades
and/or
L84A3
red phosphorus smoke grenadesVision systemsSight Unit Small Arms, Trilux (SUSAT) or SpecterOS Lightweight Day Sights (LDS)
Advanced Combat Optical Gunsight (ACOG) to be used with the L129A1 rifle
Image intensified Common Weapon Sights
Laser Light Module Vario Ray Adaptive Target Acquisition Modules
TAM-14 small Thermal Imaging System
Head mounted Night Vision System (HNVS), based on the American AN
/PVS-14.

VIPIR-2+ thermal imaging weapon sights
Commander's target locating systems (CTLS)Communications
equipmentPersonal
Role Radio (PRR) – one issued to each member.

Bowman secure VHF radio


== Weapons ==


===
Pistols ===


===
Infantry rifles ===
===
Bayonet ===


===
Long range rifles ===


===
Submachine guns ===


===
Machine guns ===


===
Shotguns ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


===
Explosives ===


===
Indirect fire weapons ===


===
Portable anti-material weapons ===


===
Non service weapons ===
In addition to the weapons above, several foreign weapons and former British service weapons are held as non-service pattern light weapons (NSPLW) in order to conduct familiarisation and/or usage training, obtain data on and demonstrate weapon characteristics and performance, make comparisons to current British service weapons, and test items such as ammunition and ancillary equipment.

====
Handguns ====
Beretta 92
Browning Hi-Power (FN and Canadian models; FN model formerly issued as the L9A1 pistol)
M1911A1
(Colt .45 ACP and Springfield Armory 9x19mm and .45 ACP models)
Makarov pistol
SIG
Sauer P225
Tokarev pistol
Uzi 9mm Pistol
Walther Model P5 (Compact variant formerly issued as the L102A1 pistol)
Walther Model PP (7.65mm, 9mm Short, and .22 LR models; formerly issued as the L47A1 7.65mm and L66A1 .22in pistols)
Walther Model PPK (Same calibres as Model PP)


====
Infantry and long range rifles ====
AK-47, AKM, and variants
AK-74 and variants (including AKS-74U)
AR-15 family (Including M16A1, M16A2 and Colt Canada C7, all of which were formerly issued to some extent)
Beretta AR70/223 and AR70/90
CETME Models A, B, and C
CETME Models L and LC
Dragunov SVD
FN FAL and variants (Including British and Australian L1A1 variants, Canadian C1 and C2, and IMBEL-Springfield Armory SAR-48)
FAMAS
FN FNC
Galil (5.56mm and 7.62mm models)
HK 33E
HK
G3
HK G36
HK G41
Lee-Enfield
M1 Carbine
M1 Garand
Remington M24
Ruger Mini-14
Steyr AUG


====
Submachine guns ====
Beretta 38/49 Model 4
Beretta Model 12 and Model
12S
Colt 9mm SMG
Ingram Model 10 (.45
ACP and 9x19mm models)
Ingram Model 11 (9mm Short and 9x19mm models)
Sterling submachine gun (Including Canadian C1; models produced by Sterling and ROF Fazakerley formerly issued as the L2A1-A3 and L34A1 submachine guns)
Uzi 9mm SMG (Including Mini Uzi and Micro Uzi)


====
Machine guns ===
=
AA-52 and AA-52 NF-1
DShK-38
Enfield BREN (Specifically 7.62mm models which were formerly issued as the L4 series)
FN MAG (
L7A2 GPMG and variants are not of FN manufacture, instead being variously produced by RSAF Enfield, Manroy Engineering, and Heckler & Koch)
Galil ARM LMG
Heckler & Koch HK21
(HK 21A1, HK11A1, and HK 21E
; HK G8 variant treated as a rifle)
HK 23E (5.56mm version of HK 21E)
HK
13 LMG
HK MG4
M60
M1919
(M1919A6 .30 Cal and Canadian 7.62mm models)
PK series
RPD LMG
RPK
SG43 and SGM
Steyr AUG HBAR and AUG LMG


===
=
Anti-tank weapons ====
RPG-7


==
Personal equipment ==


===
Protective equipment ===


===
Helmet ===
Many soldiers are now equipped with the new Virtus helmet (Revision Batlskin Cobra Plus) which provides increased blunt impact protection, has a lighter weight than the preceding Mk7, can be fitted with face and mandible guards for certain roles, is specially shaped to allow effective weapon usage while in a prone position and wearing body armour, and features a permanent universal night vision mount and a scalable counterweight attached to the helmet's rear in order to ease strain on the user's neck while a night vision device is equipped.
Prior to this, the standard helmet in service was the Mk7 which replaced the older Mk6 and Mk6A helmets on operations.
The Mk7 helmet offered the same protection as the Mk6A but had a lower weight and was equipped with a new harness that kept the helmet more stable on the head when night vision equipment was fitted.
The shape of the helmet was better integrated with new weapon sights compared to the Mk6A, making it easier to use in a variety of fighting positions.
All helmets allow the soldier to wear a respirator, hearing protection, goggles and/or a radio headset as necessary.

===
Combat body armour ===
The British Army utilises three combat body armour systems.
For training activities, old stocks of Enhanced Combat Body Armour are utilised; first introduced in the 1980s, this is a soft body armour vest that can be augmented with hard armour plates.
For operational activities since 2006, soldiers have been issued with a combined soft and hard body armour vest known as Osprey body armour, with the latest iteration being the Mk 4 and Mk 4A 'Osprey Assault' body armour.
The Osprey Mk 4 vest provides the same level of ballistic protection as older Osprey vests while improving the comfort of personnel on operations by being closer fitting, less bulky and easier to move in; this is aided by having a thinner hard armour plate which is carried in an internal pocket as opposed to the external pockets of Enhanced Combat Body Armour and earlier Osprey vests.
A new ribbed material lining on the inside of the vest improves breathability in hotter climates such as that of Afghanistan.
The Mk 4A version achieves a further weight reduction by switching from a cummerbund to a smaller side plate pouch.
All versions of Osprey body armour are modular in that MOLLE loops on the outside of the vest allow soldiers to attach various load carrying pouches to suit their role, with the Osprey Mk 4 having a higher number of loops and introducing new pouches such as a "commander's pouch" for holding stationery and open magazine pouches with elastic draw-cords for easier access to ammunition (though pouches with Velcro flaps and Fastex fastenings were also included).

Osprey Mk 4 and Mk 4A body armour has mostly been replaced by the Scalable Tactical Vest component of Virtus body armour, which is even closer fitting and lighter than the Opsrey Mk 4 and can have its level of protection scaled up or down to match the prevailing type of threat.
The vest also features a quick-release mechanism to aid safe extraction from hazardous situations such as burning vehicles or drowning and a dynamic weight distribution system which, when linked to a soldier's waist belt, aids in spreading the soldier's load across the back, shoulders, and hips; a mechanism in the small of the back allows the wearer to adjust the weight bias depending on the situation.
Ancillary to regular body armour is a three-tier pelvic armour system issued since 2010 to mitigate against the effects of blasts, including shrapnel.
The first layer is a pair of underwear shorts manufactured from a ballistic silk material.
The second layer consists of detachable pelvic body armour that is intended to be worn while 'outside the wire' to meet the greater threats faced by soldiers on patrol; it can be rolled up and clipped to a belt and then pulled through the legs to form a protective pouch, ensuring that mobility is not impeded while the second layer is worn.
The third layer consists of knee-length ballistic shorts worn over a soldier's combat trousers, offering coverage of the upper leg and wider abdominal region and designed for use by soldiers operating hand-held metal detectors to search for explosive devices or otherwise serving in a combat role where greater levels of protection are required.

===
Respirator ===
By January 2015, over 300,000 General Service Respirators had been delivered to replace the older S10 respirator.
These respirators are also used by the Royal Navy, Royal Air Force and Royal Fleet Auxiliary.
===
Uniforms ===


===
Boots ===
In 2012, the MOD purchased a newly designed range of brown combat boots from Haix, Alt-Berg, and other manufacturers for the Army, Royal Navy and RAF to replace the black and desert combat footwear previously worn.
Five different boots, developed to match the Multi-Terrain Pattern uniform, are available to Armed Forces personnel depending on where they are based and what role they are in.
Each of the five boot types comes in two different styles, with personnel being able to wear the particular style they find most comfortable.
Black boots have been retained for wear with most non-camouflage uniforms as well as units on parade in full dress uniform, such as regiments performing ceremonial duties in central London.

Desert Combat – worn by dismounted troops conducting medium to high levels of activity in desert type environments with temperatures exceeding 40 °C
Desert Patrol – worn by drivers/armoured troops conducting lower levels of activity in desert type environments exceeding 40 °C
Temperate Combat – worn by dismounted troops for medium to high levels of activity in temperate (European) climates
Patrol – worn by mounted troops (drivers/armoured troops) taking part in lower levels of activity in temperate (European) climates
Cold Wet Weather – worn by dismounted troops for medium to high levels of activity in temperatures down to −20
°
C.Before the adoption of the brown boots, British troops were issued with desert combat boots manufactured by Meindl and Lowa for use in Afghanistan.
Both boots remain listed as part of the MOD's 'Black Bag' of operational clothing despite their official replacement by the brown boots, and may be worn by individual soldiers in lieu of the issue footwear.

===
Personal Role Radio ===
A Personal Role Radio (PRR) is distributed to every member of an eight-strong infantry section.

=== Load carrying equipment ===
Soldiers need to carry ammunition, water, food, protective equipment, and various other supplies; Personal Load Carrying Equipment (PLCE), officially known as 90 Pattern Webbing, is the current webbing system used by the British Army for this purpose.
The webbing consists of a belt, a yoke harness, and various belt pouches, as well as two daysacks for use with the Combat Order; these can be attached to a larger 'Bergen' rucksack for use with the Marching Order.
Associated with PLCE is a series of similar load carrying equipment and rucksacks.
PLCE webbing is capable of holding everything that a soldier needs to operate for 24 hours without resupply in its Fighting Order, for up to two or three days without resupply in its Combat or Patrol Order and for up to two weeks without resupply in its Marching Order.
PLCE is now very unlikely to be spotted during operations due to the introduction of the Osprey body armour series and the later Virtus scalable tactical vest, both of which feature MOLLE loops for direct attachment of load carrying pouches as well as various associated load carrying items such as rucksacks that also feature MOLLE attachment loops, though PLCE webbing produced in the newer MTP pattern does exist and, due to its durability and the quantity produced, the webbing is often seen in use during training exercises.
===
Future Integrated Soldier Technology ===
The Future Integrated Soldier Technology (FIST) is a programme under development by the Ministry of Defence.
The programme is designed to achieve enhanced military effect through the used of advanced technologies improving the situational awareness, lethality and survivability of soldiers.
Ultimately, the programme is part of the wider British Armed Forces doctrine of network-enabled capability.
35,000 sets of kit are expected to be bought and issued between 2015 and 2020.
This equipment is designed to bring the British infantryman up to standards and link with new technology currently employed, including the new underslung grenade launcher for the SA80 and the deployed Bowman communications network.
It is not intended that every soldier be equipped with FIST: instead, unit commanders will request FIST kits as necessary so that they can be tailored to the situation and mission aims.

== Vehicles ==


===
Armoured ===


===
Artillery and air-defence ===


====
List of obsolete anti-tank guided missiles ====
Malkara
MILAN
Swingfire
Vigilant


====
Mobile artillery monitoring battlefield radar ====
The Mobile Artillery Monitoring Battlefield Radar (or Mobile Artillery Monitoring Battlefield Asset) is a counter-battery radar.
It detects enemy artillery projectiles fired by one or more weapons and from their trajectories locates the position of the weapon that fired it.
It has a detection range of up to 30 km and can process up-to 100 projectiles simultaneously.
It is mounted on a Bandvagn 206 (Bv206) all-terrain vehicle.
Five vehicles are operated by the 5th Regiment Royal Artillery.

====
Exactor ====
The Exactor is a previously classified purchase of the Rafael Spike-NLOS missile system.
The system is primarily used for precise indirect counter barrage attacks at long ranges (30 km (19 mi)) where the GMLRS would result in too much collateral damage.
It originally consisted of six Mk2 or Mk4 missiles mounted on an M113 chassis, of which 12 were purchased directly from the Israeli Defence Force with a further two chassis leased.

In 2010, the United Kingdom hired Rafael to produce an improved Mk 5 missile and also ditched the M-113 based launchers as they were poorly air-conditioned and difficult to keep running.
These new missiles were mounted on a simpler flatbed trailer containing four missiles each.
This new system was dubbed the Exactor 2 by the U.K. Ministry of Defence.
18 such systems now exist within the Royal Artillery in six batteries of three.
====
Centurion ====
Centurion is a C-RAM system based on the 20mm Phalanx CIWS, originally acquired for used in Basra, Iraq.
It is operated by 16th Regiment Royal Artillery, and intended to intercept incoming rockets, shells and mortars out to a 1.2 km square area.
They are maintained by Babcock International in the United Kingdom.
A total of ten sets were purchased in 2005, but since then four have been reconverted back to the maritime variant.

===
Engineering and logistics ===


===
Miscellaneous ===


====
C vehicle fleet ====
The job of the Royal Engineers is to restrict the enemy's ability to advance, while also allowing friendly combat forces the freedom to maneuver as necessary.
Other tasks undertaken are bomb disposal, the construction of fortifications, runways, roads and bridges and the improvement of existing infrastructure to support operations – such as improving existing roads for logistic convoys.
To achieve this, the Royal Engineers operate a large and diverse fleet of vehicles.
At present, the C vehicle fleet is provided by a private finance initiative (PFI) and consists of some 2,500 vehicles of over 160 types of "earthmoving plant, Engineer Construction Plant (ECP) and rough terrain
Materials Handling Equipment (MHE)".

The provider of the PFI is Amey Lex Consortium (ALC), which was awarded a 15-year contract in 2005 for £600 million.
The handing over of the C vehicle fleet to a PFI has improved overall efficiency, with ALC selecting common chassis for multiple roles and significantly reducing equipment types.
This has led to reduced training needs in personnel, commonality of spares and an overall reduction in the logistic footprint and cost of maintenance.
ALC maintains the fleet at various degrees of readiness, with a large pool of the vehicles being modified and adapted for military use – however, the majority of the fleet is maintained at commercial standards.
The fleet is dispersed worldwide to accommodate both existing and future operations.
When in use, the vehicles are essentially being "hired on an ad hoc basis".
To help sustain the C vehicle fleet on operations, the PFI includes a logistics support package.

====
All-terrain vehicles ====
There are a number of all-terrain vehicles in service with the British Army.
The Supacat ATMP is a lightweight 6×6 used by airborne and air-mobile forces.
It can carry up to 8 troops with a standard NATO pallet of stores and ammunition.
The Springer all-terrain vehicle is a light-role 4×2 load carriage platform, which can self-load a 1-ton pallet.
Each vehicle is equipped with an 8,000 lb (3,600 kg) self-recovery winch and sand ladders, which act as loading ramps for a cargo pallet.
Approximately 900 Grizzly 450 quad bikes are used as light transport for things such as mortars, ammunition and general supplies.
Finally, the Harley Davidson MT350E and Honda R250 motorcycles are used by dispatch riders and for a variety of liaison and traffic control tasks.

====
Special forces ====
The Special forces maintain a unique fleet of vehicles to support their covert operations.
In 2001, 65 Supacat High Mobility Transporter (HMT) 400 vehicles were ordered under Project Minacity after being in development for a special forces protected vehicle requirement since the late 1990s.
The Minacity vehicles entered service in 2003 in Afghanistan.
In 2008, 24 Australian Bushmaster armoured vehicles were purchased under an UOR for the SAS in Iraq, as these provided all-round protection unlike the Minacity.
It is fitted with additional armour, counter-IED electronics, and
a .50 calibre machine gun mounted in a RWS.
In addition, other vehicles known to be in service are: 60 Toyota Hilux for special forces mobility; and 78 ACMAT VLRAs as tactical support vehicles to resupply and sustain special forces on operations.
In August 2016, the BBC reported that the Jankel Toyota Land Cruiser-based Al-Thalab long range patrol vehicle was being used in Syria.

==
Aircraft ==

		
		
		


==
Watercraft ==


===
Raiding craft ===
The raiding craft in service with the British Army are operated in large numbers, predominately with the Royal Engineers and the Royal Logistic Corps, for supporting both bridging and amphibious operations.
These craft are highly versatile and often find themselves serving in environments ranging from the Arctic to the tropics.

===
Mk.4 Workboat ===
Four boats in service, operated by the Royal Logistic Corps as small tugs and general purpose work-boats in support of amphibious operations.
They have a displacement of 48 tonnes and a maximum speed of 10 knots.

===
Mexeflotes ===
Mexeflotes are amphibious landing raft operated by the Royal Logistic Corps for amphibious operations and are designed to deliver both armoured vehicles and material from ship to shore.
They are deployed on the 16,160 tonne Bay-class landing ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary.
==
Future equipment ==
The Future Integrated Soldier Technology is a suite of equipment capable of enhancing an infantryman's effectiveness as part of the Future Soldier programme.

The Scout SV known as "Ajax" in British service and its variants have been chosen to replace the CVR(T) family of vehicles.
Ajax was due to go operational in 2019, however the first were delivered in early 2021
The Land Ceptor Missile system will replace the Rapier by 2020.

A new body armour system known as Virtus is under development as a replacement for the Osprey vest and Mk.
7 helmet.

The MoD has a requirement for a new multi role vehicle under the Multi Role Vehicle-Protected.
At DSEI 2015 General Dynamics UK announced that they would offer variants of their Ocelot (Foxhound) and Eagle vehicles for the requirement.
In July 2017, the US DSCA notified the US Congress of a possible sale of 2,747 JLTV vehicles and accessories to the UK.
As of Oct 2019 no decision had been made.

The British Army wants to purchase 8x8 wheeled armoured fighting vehicles to replace the Mastiff and Ridgeback in British Service.
This program used to be part of FRES UV, later named simply UV (Utility Vehicle) and now known as Mechanised Infantry Vehicle (MIV).
This vehicle is intended to equip the 4 "heavy protected mobility" battalions under Army 2020 Refine.
They will also be part of the two Strike Brigades proposed under the Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015.
In 2018 the UK rejoined the Boxer AFV consortium and as of Oct. 2019 are in negotiations with a view to purchasing 500+ units.
On 5 November 2019, it was announced that a £2.8 billion deal for 500 Boxer armoured vehicles had been signed.
Deliveries would start in 2023.

Senior army officers and procurement officials are looking at either upgrading the Challenger 2 or outright replacing it.
At DSEI 2015, army officials expressed their concern with the Challenger 2's armament and its inevitable obsolescence in coming years.
Other causes of concern are the Challengers engine and electronics.
The army stated that they had been in discussions with armoured fighting vehicle manufacturers about the future of the tank and its potential replacement.
A later Defense News article said that the British Army would still proceed with its Challenger 2 LEP, citing that a replacement at the present would be too costly.
On 22 December 2016, an assessment phase award was awarded to BAE Systems and Rheinmetall Land Systeme GmbH to progress the Challenger 2 Life Extension Project.

Under the Non-Articulated Vehicle – Protected (NAV-P) program, the MoD is looking for a successor to the DROPS vehicles.
This has resulted in a contract placed in 2018 for the conversion of 382 MAN HX77 Support Vehicles to carry the EPLS (Enhanced Palletised Load System) equipment.
They are due to fully enter service in March 2021.
The contract includes the conversion of 33 winterised/waterproofed versions
The Army is currently in the process of receiving 56 Harris Corporation T7 EOD unmanned ground vehicles (UGV), procured by DE&S under Project Starter.
These systems are due to fully enter service by December 2020, replacing the fleet of Wheelbarrow Mk.8Bs at the same time.

The British MOD released a Request for Information for the Mobile Fires Platform, a new 155mm self-propelled howitzer to support the Armoured Infantry and Strike Brigades.

A Prior Information Notice (PIN) was released for a successor to the Mobile Artillery Monitoring Battlefield Radar (MAMBA), Advanced Sound-ranging Post (ASP) and Counter-battery radar, all which will reach their out-out-service date in 2026.

In July 2019, the UK issued a PIN notice for Directed Energy Weapon (DEW) demonstrators which could be mounted on army vehicles.

A Robotic Platoon Vehicle (RPV) was pitched at DSEI 2019.

==
See also ==
Other equipment listsRoyal Engineers bridging and trackway equipment
British Army communications and reconnaissance equipment
Unmanned systems of the British
ArmyRelated articlesArmy 2020 Refine
List of British weapon L numbers


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"
The British Army: Vehicles and Equipment".
Ministry of Defence.

"Army Index".
Armed Forces.co.uk.

"British Special Forces & Elite Units".
Elite UK Forces.
From 1925 to the Iranian Revolution in 1979, Iran was mostly equipped with Western hardware and equipment.
Cases exist where Iran was supplied with equipment even before it was made standard in the countries that developed it (for example the US F-14 Tomcat, or the British Chieftain).
Primary suppliers included the United States, Britain, France, West Germany, Italy, Israel, and the Soviet Union.

The Iran–Iraq War, and post revolutionary sanctions at the time had a dramatic effect on Iran's inventory of western equipment.
Under the pressures of war all supplies were quickly exhausted and replacements became increasingly difficult to come by.
The war eventually forced Iran to turn towards Syria, Pakistan, North Korea, Brazil,  and China to meet its short term military requirements.
Initial developments in every field of military technology were carried out with the technical support of Russia, China, and North Korea to lay the foundations for future industries.

Iranian reliance on these countries has rapidly decreased over the last decade in most sectors where Iran has gained almost total independence; however, in some sectors such as the Aerospace sector Iran is still greatly reliant on external help.
Iran has developed the capacity to reverse engineer existing foreign hardware, adapt it to its own requirements and then manufacture the finished product.
Examples of this are the Boragh IFV.
In an attempt to make its military industries more sustainable Iran has also sought to export its military products.

This page includes weapons used by both the Islamic Republic of Iran Army Ground Forces and the Revolutionary Guards ground forces.

==
Infantry weapons ==


===
Small arms ===
===
Infantry anti-tank weapons/unguided ===


==
Anti-tank guided missile ==


==
Armored Fighting Vehicles ==


===
Armored fighting vehicles ===
== Tanks ==


=== Tanks ===


==
Other vehicles ==


===
Engineering vehicles ===


==
Artillery ==
===
Mortars ===


===
Towed artillery ===


===
Self-propelled artillery and multiple launch rocket systems ===


== Surface-to-surface missiles ==
This refers to ballistic missiles and not battlefield systems.
Iran's missile forces are under the command of the Revolutionary Guards, under the army's authority.
Additional information is available at the article Air Force of the Army of the Guardians of the Islamic Revolution, which force operates Iran's long-range missiles.
Iran was reported to have purchased 18 mobile Musudan missiles (the extended range version of Soviet R-27 Zyb) with a 3,200-to-4,000 km range in 2005.

=== Anti-ship missiles ===


=== Battlefield missile systems ===
==
Air defence missile systems ==


==
Helicopters ==


==
Aircraft ==
The IRIA Ground Forces operates an army aviation component comprising the following:


===
Unmanned aerial vehicles ===


==
See also ==
Iranian military industry
List of countries by level of military equipment
List of Iranian Air Force aircraft
List of military equipment manufactured in Iran


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Manufacturing equipment for the Iranian Army
Iranian Defense Industries Organization
GlobalSecurity.
Org - Iran
Iranian Manufactured Assault Rifles
Non-lethal weapons, also called less-lethal weapons, less-than-lethal weapons, non-deadly weapons, compliance weapons, or pain-inducing weapons are weapons intended to be less likely to kill a living target than conventional weapons such as knives and firearms.
It is often understood that unintended or incidental casualties are risked wherever force is applied, but non-lethal weapons try to minimise the risk of casualties (e.g. serious/permanent injuries or death) as much as possible.
Non-lethal weapons are used in policing and combat situations to limit the escalation of conflict where employment of lethal force is prohibited or undesirable, where rules of engagement require minimum casualties, or where policy restricts the use of conventional force.
These weapons occasionally cause serious injuries or death; the term "less-lethal" has been preferred by some organizations as it describes the risks of death more accurately than the term "non-lethal", which some have argued is a misnomer.
Non-lethal weapons may be used by conventional military in a range of missions across the force continuum.
They may also be used by military police, by United Nations forces, and by occupation forces for peacekeeping and stability operations.

Non-lethal weapons may also be used to channelize a battlefield, control the movement of civilian populations, or to limit civilian access to restricted areas (as they were utilized by the USMC's 1st Marine Expeditionary Force in Somalia in 1995).
Similar weapons, tactics, techniques and procedures are employed by police forces domestically in riot control, prisoner control, crowd control, refugee control, and self-defense, where the terminology of "Less-than-Lethal" is often used.

==
History ==


===
Military ===
In the past, military and police faced with undesirable escalation of conflict had few acceptable options.
Military personnel guarding embassies often found themselves restricted to carrying unloaded weapons.
National guards or policing forces charged with quelling riots were able to use only batons or similar club-like weapons, or bayonet or saber charges, or fire live ammunition at crowds.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Non-lethality Policy Review Group at U.S. Global Strategy Council in Washington and other independent think tanks around the world called for a concerted effort to develop weapons that were more life-conserving, environmentally friendly, and fiscally responsible than weapons available at that time.
The U.S. Congress and other governments agreed and began an organized development of non-lethal weapons to provide a range of options between talking and shooting.

Recognizing the need to limit the escalation of force, research and development of a range of non-lethal weapons has since been undertaken internationally by governments and weapons manufacturers to fill the need for such weapons.
Some non-lethal weapons may provide more effective riot control than firearms, truncheons or bayonets with less risk of loss of life or serious injury.
Before the general availability of early military non-lethal weapons in the mid 1990s, war-fighters had few or no casualty-limiting options for the employment of scalable force and were continually at risk whenever lethal force was prohibited during sensitive missions.

In 2001 the United States Marine Corps revealed its development of a less-than-lethal energy weapon called the Active Denial System, a focused high frequency microwave device said to be capable of heating all living matter in the target area rapidly and continuously for the duration of the beam, causing transient intolerable pain but no lasting damage.
The skin temperature of a person subjected to this weapon can jump to approximately 130 °F (54 °C) in as little as 2 seconds depending on the skin's starting temperature.
The system is nonlethal (the penetration of the beam into human skin is only a few millimeters).In 2004, author Jon Ronson cited an unclassified military report titled "Non-Lethal Weapons: Terms and References" 21 acoustic weapons were listed, in various stages of development, including the Infrasound ("Very low-frequency sound which can travel long distances and easily penetrate most buildings and vehicles ...
biophysical effects are projected to be: nausea, loss of bowels, disorientation, vomiting, potential internal organ damage or death may occur.
Superior to ultrasound...)
", however no such effects had been achieved as of 2002.In 2010, the Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate (JNLWD)
Non-Lethal Weapons (NLW)
Reference Book was created.
The weapons in this book are currently in development.

===
Police ===
Until the development of non-lethal weapons, police officers around the world had few if any non-lethal options for riot control.
Common tactics used by police that were intended to be non-lethal or less lethal included a slowly advancing wall of men with batons, officers on horses trained to deal with policing situations, or a charge into a riot using the flats of sabers.
Other reasonably successful approaches included shotguns with lower-powered cartridges, "salt shells", using bean-bag rounds and ricocheting the shot off of the ground.
In the mid-20th century, with the integration of fire-control systems into major cities, police found that high-pressure fire hoses could be effective in dispersing a crowd (the use of water cannons and fire trucks has remained an effective nonlethal tactic to disperse riots).
Trained police dogs were also commonly used to scare and disperse rioters and apprehend individuals.
In the 1980s the development of the high-tensile plastics Kevlar and Lexan revolutionized personal armor and shields, and led to new tactics for riot squads and other special-purpose teams.
Officers could now stand up against violent rioters throwing dangerous projectiles without having to resort to lethal methods to quickly disperse the danger.

Coupled with the introduction of effective non-lethal chemical agents such as tear gas and offensive odor canisters, and non-lethal impact rounds such as rubber bullets and "bean bag" flexible baton rounds, riot tactics were modified to rely less on violent response to attacking rioters than on a return to the slowly advancing wall, with supporting officers firing non-lethal ordnance into the crowd to discourage advance.

Police officers on patrol were traditionally armed with a baton or pistol or both, and non-lethal methods of subduing an attacker centered on hand-fighting techniques such as jujutsu and baton use.
In the 1980s and 1990s officers began deploying non-lethal personal sidearms such as pepper sprays, and eventually electroshock weapons such as Tasers, which were developed for use by police and also found a market in self-defense by private citizens.
However, these weapons were developed for non-lethal resolution of a one-on-one conflict.

During the 1990s and early 2000s (decade) interest in various other forms of less-than-lethal weapons for military and police use rose.
Amongst other factors, the use of less-than-lethal weapons may be legal under international law and treaty in situations where weapons such as aerosol sprays or gases defined as chemical are not.
Less-than-lethal weapons are also useful in keeping the peace in the aftermath of violent conflict.

Between the years of 1987–1990 after a three-year field study by the FBI's Firearm's Training Unit; In 1990 the use of Oleoresin Capsicum was first issued and used by the FBI as the first official law enforcement agency.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s (decade)
police began to adopt a new pepper spray delivery system based on the equipment used in paintballs.
A specialized paintball, called a "pepperball", is filled with liquid or powdered capsaicin, the active ingredient in pepper spray, and is propelled by compressed gas using a paintball marker similar to those used for the sport but operating at higher pressure.
The impact of the capsule is immediately painful (a pepperball's shell is thicker than a standard paintball and is fired at higher velocity), and it breaks open on impact, dispersing the capsaicin with similar effect to aerosol-delivered pepper spray.

However, to be most effective, pepper spray must contact the eyes, nose, or mouth of the target; pepper spray on clothing or tougher skin has a much reduced effect.

== Effects ==
Non-lethal weapons have a design intent to provide an effect to reliably elicit a degree of incapacitation but without the typically lethal or permanent lasting effects of conventional weapons.

This design intent has often made them a weapon of choice for use by law enforcement during civil protests, etc.

Effect modalities vary by the technology being employed:  kinetic projectiles function by blunt impact which actuate pain receptors to elicit a behavioral change, lights affect visual perception, acoustics affect hearing, etc.

Notwithstanding their design intent, non-lethal weapons can still cause harm.
This is particularly true with certain technologies that interact with appropriately vulnerable regions; an example is kinetic munitions on the head, neck, eyes, abdominal and urogenital regions of the body.

As a result, some analysts describe "non-lethal" as a misnomer and recommend defining them as "less-lethal", whereas other sources identify "non-lethal" as representing a goal of minimization of producing fatalities or permanent injuries while not literally requiring minimization to a zero probability thereof.

Because the design intent is to avoid/minimize permanence, the effects invariably have been transient in nature.

Some effects may be momentary while others may persist for some finite period of time.

==
Mechanics ==
Non-lethal weapons are intended to minimize injury or death.
While people are occasionally seriously injured or killed by these weapons, fatalities are relatively infrequent.

Causes of death from non-lethal weapons are varied and occasionally uncertain.
Misplaced or ricocheting shots, pre-existing medical conditions, inadequate user training, repetitive applications and intentional misuse have been implicated in different cases where death has occurred.

As different parts of the body differ in vulnerability, and because people vary in weight and fitness, any weapon powerful enough to incapacitate may be capable of killing under certain circumstances.

Thus "non-lethal force" does have some risk of causing death: in this context "non-lethal" means only "not intended to kill".

Several groups maintain there is great room for improvement in non-lethal weapons and procedures for their use.
Claims for the relative safety of such weapons are usually contingent on their being used "properly".
For example, the rubber bullets developed during the 1960s were supposed to be fired at the ground and hit the target only after ricochet, and other non-lethal bullets are designed to be fired at the lower body; they can be lethal if fired directly at the head.

== Ammunition ==
Non-lethal rounds are firearm rounds which are designed to incapacitate, but not kill, a target.
The rounds rely on the transfer of kinetic energy and blunt force trauma to accomplish this incapacitation.
Rubber bullets, rubber buckshot, soft polymer rounds, wax bullets, plastic bullets, beanbag rounds, sponge grenades, ring airfoil projectiles (both kinetic and tear gas projectiles) and rubber bullets with electroshock effect (e.g. Taser XREP rounds) are less lethal than conventional metal bullets, and are also propelled at lower speed by using less propellant.
"
Bean bag" type bullets are sometimes referred to as flexible baton rounds.
More recently, high-velocity paintball guns are also used to launch less-lethal rounds, including the FN 303 launcher and PepperBall commercial products.
There is also the Variable Velocity Weapon Concept, for which a propulsion energy source may not yet have been clearly established and/or finalized.
In any case, all of these technologies apply the same basic mechanism, which is to launch a mass at the target that interacts kinetically.

==
Explosives ==
Hand grenades come in several less-lethal varieties, such as "flashbang" (stun) grenades, "sting" grenades with rubber shrapnel, and grenades designed to release chemical irritants (described below).

In 1972 stun grenades were used to capture the hijacked Sabena Flight 571, allowing the Israeli forces headed by Ehud Barak and including Benjamin Netanyahu to storm the plane and take it over within 10 minutes while capturing two terrorists and killing Ali Taha, the leader of the terrorist group and his aide, while rescuing all passengers (three were wounded, and one died of her injuries several days later).

A stun grenade was apparently used by members of the IHH against the IDF soldiers during the Gaza flotilla raid at the beginning of the IDF storming of the Mavi Marmara.
In June 2010 in Kenya, a stun grenade was used to draw attention, and then a real grenade along with an explosive package were used, killing many people.
In April during the 2010 Kyrgyzstani uprising police attempted to use stun grenades to stop a demonstration but the crowd overwhelmed the police.
In March stun grenades were used by Belarusian police in Minsk against demonstrators, and in September they were used by Greek police in Athens.
In these latter two cases the demonstrations were dispersed with no injuries.

In February 2011 stun grenades were seen used by Egyptian police against rioters.

==
Gases and sprays ==


===
Water ===
Water cannons are commonly used in crowd and riot control, for dispersal or to prevent movement on a particular position.
These water cannons are intended to disperse crowds with little risk of harm, but the pressure can still cause eye injuries or even death.
Water-filled rounds for small arms are in experimental stages.
Electrified water cannon was in development but was abandoned.

===
Scent-based weapons ===
Malodorants produce strong odours that cause people to leave the affected area.

In 2008, the Israeli Defence Forces began using Skunk for crowd control.
It is a form of mist sprayed from a water cannon, which leaves a terrible odor of rot or sewage on whatever it touches, and does not wash off easily.

===
Pepper spray ===
The active ingredient in pepper spray is oleoresin capsicum (OC), an acrid irritant chemical derived from cayenne pepper plants.
A 1998 estimate by the Internet Association of Chiefs of Police suggested at least 113 pepper spray-related fatalities had occurred in the United States, all with aggravating factors such as intoxication, pre-existing health problems, or from the police use of airway-restrictive immobilizing holds that can cause positional asphyxia.
The Southern California chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union recommends against maximal prone restraint techniques following pepper spray application, and they caution that anyone sprayed should be monitored to ensure effective breathing.

===
Tear gas ===
The use of chemical weapons such as tear gas (CS) and pepper spray (OC) has come under increasing scrutiny and criticism due to studies showing serious long term side effects.
Many police forces are no longer exposing their members to the chemicals during training.

Journalist Rubén Salazar was killed in Los Angeles in 1970 by an errant CS gas canister during the Chicano riots.
Other serious injuries and fatalities have occurred from either tear gas itself or the projectiles it is delivered in, including the critical injury of veteran Scott Olsen from a tear gas canister during the 2011 Occupy Oakland protests.

===
Psychochemical ===
Psychochemical weapons are psychoactive drugs, such as BZ, LSD, Kolokol-1, EA-3167, and 3-Methylamphetamine designed to have a disorienting effect when used during combat or interrogation.

===
Sleep gas ===
During the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis, Russian special forces used an unidentified gas (thought to be 3-methylfentanyl or another fentanyl variant dissolved in halothane gas) in an attempt to induce sleep in both hostages and terrorists.
Many of the hostages and terrorists (including all of the suicide bombers) were anesthetized, but some terrorists donned gas masks and thus were able to avoid the effects of the gas.
Because the agent used was a potent Fentanyl derivative (a synthetic opioid), it causes respiratory depression and ultimately respiratory failure if administered in high enough dosages.
The central nervous system effects, such as anesthesia and respiratory depression could have been reversed by an opioid antagonist such as naloxone, which is stocked by hospitals and most ambulances.
However, because the Russian authorities did not release any information regarding what type of agent was used, medical professionals were unaware that an opioid had been used during the rescue attempt and thus were unable to administer the antidote which could have saved most hostages.
Approximately 700 hostages were rescued, while 130 died from exposure to the gas.
All the terrorists were ultimately killed by Russian forces through some combination of gas exposure and gunfire.
===
Other chemical agents ===
Blister agents, including CR gas, are less often used riot control agents.
Other irritants include CS gas and nonivamide (PAVA).

==
Sticky foam ==
Sticky foam was tried by the U.S. Marine Corps in the peacekeeping Operation United Shield in 1995 with some success, but as a result various complications in its field use were also discovered.

==
Area denial ==
Area denial weapons work by either incapacitating or deterring the enemy.

=== Anti-vehicle ===

Vehicle stoppers include a wide range of methods and devices meant to disable a vessel or vehicle to prevent attack by an oncoming vessel or vehicle or to stop that vessel or vehicle for evaluation.
Vessel and vehicle stoppers may include kinetic, chemical, or electromagnetic means.

====
Caltrops ====
Caltrops are known to have been in use since Roman times and may have been used earlier: the concept was familiar to the 4th century BC Greeks, who used rocks, brush, nets and trees placed in the path of enemy conveyances on land or ensnarement devices hidden under water to achieve the same result: stop the enemy or suspected hostile in his tracks for examination or to prevent or limit incursions.
Contemporary caltrops look something like large jacks from the childhood game.
Placed in the path of oncoming wheeled or tracked vehicles, they are meant to foul wheels, destroy tires and tracks, and incapacitate vehicles.

===
Anti-personnel ===


====
Caltrops ====
Simple rows or clusters of sharpened sticks (also known as punji sticks), and the use of small caltrops have been a feature of anti-infantry warfare for centuries.
However, due to the difficulty of mass-producing them in the pre-modern age, they were rarely used except in the defense of limited areas or chokepoints, especially during sieges, where they were used to help seal breaches.
Increasing ease of production still did not prevent these methods from slowly falling out of favor from the late Middle Ages onward.
Caltrops are still sometimes used in modern conflicts, such as during the Korean War, where Chinese troops, often wearing only light shoes, were particularly vulnerable.
In modern times, special caltrops are also sometimes used against wheeled vehicles with pneumatic tires.
Some South American urban guerrillas as the Tupamaros and Montoneros called them "miguelitos" and used these as a tactic to avoid pursuit after ambushes.

==
Riot gun ==
In current usage a riot gun or less-lethal launcher is a type of firearm that is used to fire "non-lethal" or "less-lethal" ammunition for the purpose of suppressing riots.
Less-lethal launchers may be special purpose firearms designed for riot control use, or standard firearms, usually shotguns and grenade launchers, adapted to riot control use with appropriate ammunition.
The ammunition is most commonly found in 12 gauge (.729 inches) shotguns and 37mm and 40 mm (1.46 and 1.57 inches) grenade launchers.

In the United States, the term riot gun more commonly refers to a riot shotgun.

==
Electroshock weapons ==
Electroshock weapons are incapacitant weapons used for subduing a person by administering electric shock aimed at disrupting superficial muscle functions.
One type is a conductive energy device (CED), an electroshock gun popularly known by the brand name "Taser", which fires projectiles that administer the shock through a thin, flexible wire.
Other electroshock weapons such as stun guns, stun batons, and electroshock belts administer an electric shock by direct contact.

== Directed energy weapons ==
Directed energy weapons are weapons that emit energy in an aimed direction without the means of a projectile.
They are non-lethal and can immobilize people as well as machines (e.g. vehicles).
Directed energy weapons include electromagnetic weapons, (including laser weapons) and microwave weapons, particle beam weapons, sonic weapons and plasma weapons.

===
Ultraviolet laser ===
HSV Technologies,
Inc. (Stood for the last names of the original founders, Herr, Schlesinger and Vernon; this is NOT the same company as Holden Special Vehicles), formerly of San Diego, California, USA, then Port Orchard, WA, designed a non-lethal device which was profiled in the 2002 TIME magazine article "Beyond the Rubber Bullet".
It is an electrolaser using ultraviolet laser beams of 193 nm, and promises to immobilize living targets at a distance without contact.
There is plan for an engine-disabling variation for use against the electronic ignitions of cars using a 248 nm laser.
The lead inventor, Eric Herr, died in 2008 and the company appears to have been dissolved, with their website defunct as of September 2017.

===
Pulsed energy projectile ===
Pulsed energy projectile or PEP is a technology of non-lethal directed energy weaponry currently under development by the US military.
It involves the emission of an invisible laser pulse which, upon contact with the target, ablates the surface and creates a small amount of exploding plasma.
This produces a pressure wave that stuns the target and knocks them off their feet, and electromagnetic radiation that affects nerve cells causing a painful sensation.
The technology can also be used as a lethal weapon, and indeed an early name was pulsed impulsive kill laser.

The pulsed energy projectile is intended for riot control and is said to work over distances of up to 2 km.
It weighs about 230 kg and will probably be mounted on vehicles.
The weight could become lighter as laser production technology improves.

The system was developed by Mission Research Corporation (now owned by Orbital ATK).
It uses a chemical deuterium fluoride laser device producing infrared laser pulses.

The plasma (produced by the early part of the pulse) explodes because its electrons absorb the energy of the later part of the pulse.

In 2003, a US military review reported that the electromagnetic radiation produced by PEPs had been shown to cause pain and temporary paralysis in animal experiments.

United States
Special Operations Command FY 2010 plans included starting developmental work on a Counter UAV Pulsed Energy Projectile.

===
Active Denial System (ADS) ===
The Active Denial System (ADS) weapon system is a dish that projects electromagnetic radiation just powerful enough to penetrate human skin and make the nervous system think the victim is on fire, although no physical damage is done.
Future combat vehicles such as the American GCV Infantry Fighting Vehicle will incorporate non-lethal weapons.

The Active Denial System is a non-lethal, directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, designed for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control.
Informally, the weapon has also been referred to as a heat ray, since it works by heating the surface of targets, such as the skin of targeted human subjects.

In 2011, the ADS was redesigned to make it smaller, more reliable, and able to be used on the move.
ADS II is being designed to operate from moving aircraft, as well as moving ground vehicles.
The redesign does not address problems in different environmental conditions.
Air Force Special Operations Command is experimenting with mounting an ADS on the AC-130J Ghostrider gunship to target threatening crowds or individuals on the ground.
This is to give the gunship a non-lethal option so the crew has more engagement options.
Due to the increasing number of engagements in populated areas, the Air Force is aiming to field a system within 5–10 years to have enough aircraft available with non-lethal systems.
The aircraft will apparently use the ADS II version.

===
Dazzler ===
A Dazzler is a directed-energy weapon intended to temporarily blind or disorient its target with intense directed radiation.
Targets can include sensors or human vision.
Dazzlers emit infrared or invisible light against various electronic sensors, and visible light against humans, when they are intended to cause no long-term damage to eyes.
The emitters are usually lasers, making what is termed a laser dazzler.
Most of the contemporary systems are man-portable, and operate in either the red (a laser diode) or green (a diode-pumped solid-state laser, DPSS) areas of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Initially developed for military use, non-military products are becoming available for use in law enforcement and security.
Weapons designed to cause permanent blindness are banned by the 1995 United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
The dazzler is a non-lethal weapon intended to cause temporary blindness or disorientation and therefore falls outside this protocol.

The personnel halting and stimulation response rifle (PHASR) is a prototype non-lethal laser dazzler developed by the Air Force Research Laboratory's Directed Energy Directorate, U.S. Department of Defense.
Its purpose is to temporarily disorient and blind a target.
Blinding laser weapons have been tested in the past, but were banned under the 1995 UN Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons, which the United States acceded to on 21 January 2009.
The PHASR rifle, a low-intensity laser, is not prohibited under this regulation, as the blinding effect is intended to be temporary.

It also uses a two-wavelength laser.
The PHASR was tested at Kirtland Air Force Base, part of the Air Force Research Laboratory Directed Energy Directorate in New Mexico.

====
Blinding laser weapons ====
Several nations developed blinding laser weapons and they were allegedly used during War in Donbass by Russia.

====
Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) ====
The Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) is an acoustic hailing device developed by LRAD Corporation to send messages and warning tones over longer distances or at higher volume than normal loudspeakers.
LRAD systems are used for long-range communications in a variety of applications including as a means of non-lethal, non-kinetic crowd control.

Though they have been called "sonic weapons", LRADs are not inherently for military use.

The round black device on top of the New York City police Hummer is an LRAD.

According to the manufacturer's specifications, the systems weigh from 15 to 320 pounds (6.8 to 145.1 kg) and can emit sound in a 30°- 60° beam at 2.5 kHz.
The manufacturer also produces systems for public address and mass notification use that broadcast 360°.
=== Safety and legal status ===
In the United States, the University of Texas-Austin Institute for Advanced Technology (IAT) conducts basic research to advance electrodynamics and hypervelocity physics related to electromagnetic weapons.
Although generally considered 'non-lethal weapons', electromagnetic weapons do pose health threats to humans.

In fact, "non-lethal weapons can sometimes be deadly.
"United
States Department of Defense policy explicitly states that non-lethal weapons "shall not be required to have a zero probability of producing fatalities or permanent injuries."

Although a Human Effects Advisory Panel was established in 1998 to provide independent assessment on human effects, data, and models for the use of 'non-lethal weapons' on the general population, the TECOM Technology Symposium in 1997 concluded on non-lethal weapons: "Determining the target effects on personnel is the greatest challenge to the testing community," primarily because  "the potential of injury and death severely limits human tests."

However, "directed energy weapons that target the central nervous system and cause neurophysiological disorders" may violate the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons of 1980.
And weapons that go beyond non-lethal intentions and cause "superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering" could violate the Protocol
I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977.
"
Safety and evaluation of the physical and psychological effects of the long-term or repetitive uses of the pain-inducing non-lethal weapons on humans have not been well understood or studied in any great details.
Any such studies require explicit consent of all participants so as not to violate the UN Convention against torture and other cruelties.

==
Misuse ==
Pepper spray is one non-lethal weapon alleged to have been misused by American police.
In two incidents in California in 1997, police swabbed pepper spray directly into the eyes of protesters.
Amnesty International condemned these actions, and claimed that they were likely a violation of the 1984 United Nations Convention Against Torture.

==
Terrorism concerns ==
Loren Thompson, chief operating officer of the Lexington Institute in Virginia states that: "The relevant (electromagnetic weapon) technology is well within the grasp of some countries and transnational terrorist groups", and further states that U.S. hardware is susceptible to microwave and other directed-energy weapons.
Suitable materials and tools to create electromagnetic weapons are commonly available.

"The threat of electromagnetic bomb proliferation is very real."

==
See also ==
== Notes ==


==
External links ==
Council on Foreign Relations Independent Task Force Report on Nonlethal Weapons
usmilitary.about.com
(Non-lethal weapons)
Weapons of Mass Protection, Air Force Journal article on Nonlethal Weapons.

The Sunshine Project, 'Non-Lethal' Incapacitating (Bio)Chemical Weapons (website)
Centre for Conflict Resolution, Department of Peace Studies, Bradford Non-Lethal Weapons Research Project (BNLWRP), Research Report No.
8
Time - Beyond the rubber bullet
Less-Lethal.org -
Non Lethal and Less Lethal Law Enforcement Technologies.
Hosted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP).

US Deptment of Defense Non-Lethal Weapons Program.
Military robots are autonomous robots or remote-controlled mobile robots designed for military applications, from transport to search & rescue and attack.

Some such systems are currently in use, and many are under development.

==
History ==
Broadly defined, military robots date back to World War II and the Cold War in the form of the German Goliath tracked mines and the Soviet teletanks.
The MQB-1 Predator drone was when "CIA officers began to see the first practical returns on their decade-old fantasy of using aerial robots to collect intelligence".
The use of robots in warfare, although traditionally a topic for science fiction, is being researched as a possible future means of fighting wars.
Already several military robots have been developed by various armies.
Some believe the future of modern warfare will be fought by automated weapons systems.
The U.S. military is investing heavily in research and development towards testing and deploying increasingly automated systems.
The most prominent system currently in use is the unmanned aerial vehicle (IAI Pioneer & RQ-1 Predator) which can be armed with air-to-ground missiles and remotely operated from a command center in reconnaissance roles.
DARPA has hosted competitions in 2004 & 2005 to involve private companies and universities to develop unmanned ground vehicles to navigate through rough terrain in the Mojave Desert for a final prize of 2 million.
Artillery has seen promising research with an experimental weapons system named "Dragon Fire II" which automates loading and ballistics calculations required for accurate predicted fire, providing a 12-second response time to fire support requests.
However, military weapons are prevented from being fully autonomous; they require human input at certain intervention points to ensure that targets are not within restricted fire areas as defined by Geneva Conventions for the laws of war.

There have been some developments towards developing autonomous fighter jets and bombers.
The use of autonomous fighters and bombers to destroy enemy targets is especially promising because of the lack of training required for robotic pilots, autonomous planes are capable of performing maneuvers which could not otherwise be done with human pilots (due to high amount of G-force), plane designs do not require a life support system, and a loss of a plane does not mean a loss of a pilot.
However, the largest drawback to robotics is their inability to accommodate for non-standard conditions.
Advances in artificial intelligence in the near future may help to rectify this.

==
Examples ==


===
In current use ===


===
In development ===
 
US Mechatronics has produced a working automated sentry gun and is currently developing it further for commercial and military use.

MIDARS, a four-wheeled robot outfitted with several cameras, radar, and possibly a firearm, that automatically performs random or preprogrammed patrols around a military base or other government installation.
It alerts a human overseer when it detects movement in unauthorized areas, or other programmed conditions.
The operator can then instruct the robot to ignore the event, or take over remote control to deal with an intruder, or to get better camera views of an emergency.
The robot would also regularly scan radio frequency identification tags (RFID) placed on stored inventory as it passed and report any missing items.

Tactical Autonomous Combatant (TAC) units, described in Project Alpha study Unmanned Effects:
Taking the Human out of the Loop.

Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System is an experimental robotic weapons system being developed by the U.S. Army since 2005.
It consists of a remotely operated sniper rifle attached to an unmanned autonomous helicopter.
It is intended for use in urban combat or for several other missions requiring snipers.
Flight tests are scheduled to begin in summer 2009.

The "Mobile Autonomous Robot Software" research program was started in December 2003 by the Pentagon who purchased 15 Segways in an attempt to develop more advanced military robots.
The program was part of a $26 million Pentagon program to develop software for autonomous systems.

== Effects and impact ==


===
Advantages ===
Autonomous robotics would save and preserve soldiers' lives by removing serving soldiers, who might otherwise be killed, from the battlefield.
Lt.
Gen. Richard Lynch of the United States Army Installation Management Command and assistant Army chief of staff for installation stated at a 2011 conference:
As I think about what’s happening on the battlefield today ...
I contend there are things we could do to improve the survivability of our service members.
And you all know that’s true.

Major Kenneth Rose of the US Army's Training and Doctrine Command outlined some of the advantages of robotic technology in warfare:
Machines don't get tired.
They don't close their eyes.
They don't hide under trees when it rains and they don't talk to their friends ...
A human's attention to detail on guard duty drops dramatically in the first 30 minutes ...
Machines know no fear.

Increasing attention is also paid to how to make the robots more autonomous, with a view of eventually allowing them to operate on their own for extended periods of time, possibly behind enemy lines.
For such functions, systems like the Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot are being tried, which is intended to gain its own energy by foraging for plant matter.
The majority of military robots are tele-operated and not equipped with weapons; they are used for reconnaissance, surveillance, sniper detection, neutralizing explosive devices, etc.
Current robots that are equipped with weapons are tele-operated
so they are not capable of taking lives autonomously.
Advantages regarding the lack of emotion and passion in robotic combat is also taken into consideration as a beneficial factor in significantly reducing instances of unethical behavior in wartime.
Autonomous machines are created not to be "truly 'ethical' robots", yet ones that comply with the laws of war (LOW) and rules of engagement (ROE).
Hence the fatigue, stress, emotion, adrenaline, etc.
that affect a human soldier's rash decisions are removed; there will be no effect on the battlefield caused by the decisions made by the individual.

===
Risks ===
Human rights groups and NGOs such as Human Rights Watch and the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots have started urging governments and the United Nations to issue policy to outlaw the development of so-called "lethal autonomous weapons systems" (LAWS).
The United Kingdom opposed such campaigns, with the Foreign Office declaring that  "international humanitarian law already provides sufficient regulation for this area".
In July 2015, over 1,000 experts in artificial intelligence signed a letter calling for a ban on autonomous weapons.
The letter was presented in Buenos Aires at the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-15) and was co-signed by Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, Noam Chomsky, Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and Google DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis, among others.

===
Psychology ===
American soldiers have been known to name the robots that serve alongside them.
These names are often in honor of human friends, family, celebrities, pets, or are eponymic.
The 'gender' assigned to the robot may be related to the marital status of its operator.
Some affixed fictitious medals to battle-hardened robots, and even held funerals for destroyed robots.
An interview of 23 explosive ordnance detection members shows that while they feel it is better to lose a robot than a human, they also felt anger and a sense of loss if they were destroyed.
A survey of 746 people in the military showed that 80% either 'liked' or 'loved' their military robots, with more affection being shown towards ground rather than aerial robots.
Surviving dangerous combat situations together increased the level of bonding between soldier and robot, and current and future advances in artificial intelligence may further intensify the bond with the military robots.

==
In fictional media ==


== Pictures ==

		
		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
Lethal autonomous weapon
Robot combat
Unmanned combat air vehicle
US battlefield UAVs
Powered exoskeleton
Network-centric warfare
Missile guidance
DARPA Grand Challenge
Multi Autonomous Ground-robotic International Challenge
Roboethics
Telerobotics
Three Laws of Robotics
Supersoldier
Robot Wars (disambiguation)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Biomass military robot in development"
EATR:
Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot - Phase II Project
=== Ethical and legal concerns ===
Gerhard Dabringer (Hg.),
Ethica Themen: Ethical and Legal Aspects of Unmanned Systems.
Interviews, Wien 2010
Public Say It's Illegal to Target Americans Abroad as Some Question CIA Drone Attacks, according to Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll - February 7, 2013
The future of warfare: Why we should all be very afraid (2014-07-21), Rory Tolan, Salon
Archive on air wars, Geographical Imaginations
Logical Limitations to Machine Ethics, with Consequences to Lethal Autonomous Weapons.
Also discussed in:
Does the Halting Problem Mean No Moral Robots?

Robots in War: Issues of Risk and Ethics - 2009
===
Organizations ===
United States Joint Forces Command website: "Leading the transformation of the U.S. military"
irobot.com, builder of the PackBot and the R-Gator systems
Boston Dynamics, builder of BigDog


===
News articles/
press releases ===
USJFC: 'Robotics to play major role in future warfighting'
"From bomb disposal to waste
disposal" Robots help deal with hazards, emergencies and disasters
(International Electrotechnical Commission, July 2011)
"War robots still in Iraq", DailyTech, April 17, 2008
New Model Army Soldier Rolls Closer to Battle (SWORDS)
TALON Small Mobile Robot
TWG Military Robots
Carnegie Mellon University's snooping robot going to Iraq
PackBot Battlefield robotic Platform
Archived 2015-04-05 at the Wayback Machine
Miniature Unmanned Aerial Systems - UAV
Guardium Autonomous Security Vehicle
Unmanned Ground Systems from Israel Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine
High-Tech Military in Due Course
Launching a new kind of warfare
Gerry J. Gilmore (January 24, 2006).
"
Army's Veteran Bomb-Disposal Robot Now 'Packs Heat'".
American Forces Press Service.
Retrieved 2008-02-02.

As Wars End, Robot Field Faces Reboot April 11, 2012
A welding power supply is a device that provides or modulates an electric current to perform arc welding.
There are multiple arc welding processes in common use ranging from relatively simple Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) to more complicated welding processes using inert shielding gas like Gas metal arc welding (GMAW) or Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW).
Welding power supplies primarily serve as devices that allow a welder to exercise control over whether current is alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC), as well as the amperage and voltage.
Power supplies for welding processes that use shielding gas also offer connections for gas and methods to control gas flow.
The operator can set these factors to within the parameters as needed by the metal type, thickness, and technique to be used.
The majority of welding power supplies do not generate power, instead functioning as controllable transformers that allow the operator to adjust electrical properties as needed.
However, in some welding applications, notably SMAW, used in areas isolated from power grids, welding power supplies are used that combine the functions of electrical generation and current modulation into a single mobile unit mounted on a vehicle or towed trailer.

==
Classification ==
Welding machines are usually classified as constant current (CC) or constant voltage (CV); a constant current machine varies its output voltage to maintain a steady current while a constant voltage machine will fluctuate its output current to maintain a set voltage.
Shielded metal arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding will use a constant current source and gas metal arc welding and flux-cored arc welding typically use constant voltage sources but constant current is also possible with a voltage sensing wire feeder.

The nature of the CV machine is required by
gas metal arc welding and flux-cored arc welding because the welder is not able to control the arc length manually.
If a welder were to attempt to use a CV machine for a shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) task, the small fluctuations in the arc distance would cause significant fluctuations in the machine's current output.
With a CC machine the welder can count on a fixed number of amps reaching the material, regardless of how short or long the electric arc gets.

==
Power supply designs ==
The welding power supplies most commonly seen can be categorized within the following types:


===
Transformer ===
A transformer-style welding power supply converts the moderate voltage and moderate current electricity from the utility mains (typically 230 or 115 VAC) into a high current and low voltage supply, typically between 17 and 45 (open-circuit) volts and 55 to 590 amperes.
A rectifier converts the AC into DC on more expensive machines.

This design typically allows the welder to select the output current by variously moving a primary winding closer or farther from a secondary winding, moving a magnetic shunt in and out of the core of the transformer, using a series saturating reactor with a variable saturating technique in series with the secondary current output, or by simply permitting the welder to select the output voltage from a set of taps on the transformer's secondary winding.

These transformer style machines are typically the least expensive.

The trade off for the reduced expense is that pure transformer designs are often bulky and massive because they operate at the utility mains frequency of 50 or 60 Hz.

Such low frequency transformers must have a high magnetizing inductance to avoid wasteful shunt currents.

The transformer may also have significant leakage inductance for short circuit protection in the event of a welding rod becoming stuck to the workpiece.

The leakage inductance may be variable
so the operator can set the output current.
===
Generator and alternator ===
Welding power supplies may also use generators or alternators to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy.
Modern designs are usually driven by an internal combustion engine but older machines may use an electric motor to drive an alternator or generator.
In this configuration the utility power is converted first into mechanical energy then back into electrical energy to achieve the step-down effect similar to a transformer.

Because the output of the generator can be direct current, or even a higher frequency AC, these older machines can produce DC from AC without any need for rectifiers of any type, or can also be used for implementing formerly-used variations on so-called heliarc (most often now called TIG) welders, where the need for a higher frequency add-on module box is avoided by the alternator simply producing higher frequency ac current directly.

===
Inverter ===
Since the advent of high-power semiconductors such as the insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT), it is now possible to build a switched-mode power supply capable of coping with the high loads of arc welding.

These designs are known as inverter welding units.

They generally first rectify the utility AC power to DC; then they switch (invert) the DC power into a stepdown transformer to produce the desired welding voltage or current.

The switching frequency is typically 10 kHz or higher.

Although the high switching frequency requires sophisticated components and circuits, it drastically reduces the bulk of the step down transformer, as the mass of magnetic components (transformers and inductors) that is required for achieving a given power level goes down rapidly as the operating (switching) frequency is increased.

The inverter circuitry can also provide features such as power control and overload protection.

The high frequency inverter-based welding machines are typically more efficient and provide better control of variable functional parameters than non-inverter welding machines.

The IGBTs in an inverter based machine are controlled by a microcontroller, so the electrical characteristics of the welding power can be changed by software in real time, even on a cycle by cycle basis, rather than making changes slowly over hundreds if not thousands of cycles.

Typically, the controller software will implement features such as pulsing the welding current, providing variable ratios and current densities through a welding cycle, enabling swept or stepped variable frequencies, and providing timing as needed for implementing automatic spot-welding; all of these features would be prohibitively expensive to design into a transformer-based machine, but require only program memory space in a software-controlled inverter machine.

Similarly, it is possible to add new features to a software-controlled inverter machine if needed, through a software update, rather than through having to buy a more modern welder.

===
Other types ===
Additional types of welders also exist, besides the types using transformers, motor/generator, and inverters.

For example, laser welders also exist, and they require an entirely different type of welding power supply design that does not fall into any of the types of welding power supplies discussed previously.

Likewise, spot welders require a different type of welding power supply, typically containing elaborate timing circuits and large capacitor banks that are not commonly found with any other types of welding power supplies.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Miller Electric news release on IGBT technology for welding inverters 8 April 2003
Frank G. Armao, Inverter Based Welding Power Supplies for Welding Aluminum, The Lincoln Electric Company (Lincoln Electric tutorial on inverter-based welding machines)
Gun violence in the United States results in tens of thousands of deaths and injuries annually.
In 2018, the most recent year for which data are available as of 2021, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC's) National Center for Health Statistics reports 38,390 deaths by firearm, of which 24,432 were by suicide and 13,958 were homicides.
The rate of firearm deaths per 100,000 people rose from 10.3 per 100,000 in 1999 to 12 per 100,000 in 2017, with 109 people dying per day, being 11.9 per 100,000 in 2018.
In 2010, there were 19,392 firearm-related suicides, and 11,078 firearm-related homicides in the U.S.
In 2010, 358 murders were reported involving a rifle while 6,009 were reported involving a handgun; another 1,939 were reported with an unspecified type of firearm.
About 1.4 million people have died from firearms in the U.S. between 1968 and 2011.
This number includes all deaths resulting from a firearm, including suicides, homicides, and accidents.
Compared to 22 other high-income nations, the U.S. gun-related homicide rate is 25 times higher.
Although it has half the population of the other 22 nations combined, among those 22 nations studied, the U.S. had 82 percent of gun deaths, 90 percent of all women killed with guns, 91 percent of children under 14 and 92 percent of young people between ages 15 and 24 killed with guns.
The ownership and regulation of guns are among the most widely debated issues in the country.

Gun violence against other persons is most common in poor urban areas and is frequently associated with gang violence, often involving male juveniles or young adult males.
Although mass shootings are covered extensively in the media, mass shootings in the United States account for only a small fraction of gun-related deaths.
School shootings are described as a "uniquely American crisis", according to The Washington Post in 2018.
Children at U.S. schools have active shooter drills.
According to USA Today, in 2019 “about 95% of public schools now have students and teachers practice huddling in silence, hiding from an imaginary gunman.
”Legislation
at the federal, state, and local levels has attempted to address gun violence through a variety of methods, including restricting firearms purchases by youths and other "at-risk" populations, setting waiting periods for firearm purchases, establishing gun buyback programs, law enforcement and policing strategies, stiff sentencing of gun law violators, education programs for parents and children, and community-outreach programs.

==
Gun ownership ==
The Congressional Research Service in 2009 estimated there were 310 million firearms in the U.S., not including weapons owned by the military.
Of these, 114 million were handguns, 110 million were rifles, and 86 million were shotguns.
In that same year, the Census bureau stated the population of people in the U.S. at 306 million.

Accurate figures for civilian gun ownership are difficult to determine.
While the number of guns in civilian hands has been on the increase, the percentage of Americans and American households who claim to own guns has been in long-term decline, according to the General Social Survey.
It found that gun ownership by households has declined steadily from about half, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, down to 32% in 2015.
The percentage of individual owners declined from 31% in 1985 to 22% in 2014.

Household firearms ownership hit a high in 1993–1994 when household gun ownership exceeded 50%, according to Gallup polls.
In 2016, household firearm ownership still exceeded 35%, and there was a long-term trend of declining support for stricter gun control laws.
Gallup polling has consistently shown two-thirds opposition to bans on handgun possession.
Gun ownership figures are generally estimated via polling, by such organizations as the General Social Survey (GSS), Harris Interactive, and Gallup.
There are significant disparities in the results across polls by different organizations, calling into question their reliability.
In Gallup's 1972 survey, 43% reported having a gun in their home, while GSS's 1973 survey resulted in 49% reporting a gun in the home; in 1993, Gallup's poll results were 51%, while GSS's 1994 poll showed 43%.
In 2012, Gallup's survey showed 47% of Americans reporting having a gun in their home, while the GSS in 2012 reports 34%.In 1997, estimates were about 44 million gun owners in the United States.
These owners possessed around 192 million firearms, of which an estimated 65 million were handguns.
A National Survey on Private Ownership and Use of Firearms (NSPOF), conducted in 1994, indicated that Americans owned 192 million guns: 36% rifles, 34% handguns, 26% shotguns, and 4% other types of long guns.
Most firearm owners owned multiple firearms, with the NSPOF survey indicating 25% of adults owned firearms.
In the U.S., 11% of households reported actively being involved in hunting, with the remaining firearm owners having guns for self-protection and other reasons.
Throughout the 1970s and much of the 1980s, the rate of gun ownership in the home ranged from 45–50%.
After highly publicized mass murders, it is consistently observed that there are rapid increases in gun purchases and exceptionally large crowds at gun vendors and gun shows, due to fears of increased gun control .Gun ownership also varied across geographic regions, ranging from 25% rates of ownership in the Northeastern United States to 60% rates of ownership in the East South Central States.
A Gallup poll (2004) indicated that 49% of men reported gun ownership, compared to 33% of women, and 44% of whites owned a gun, compared to only 24% of nonwhites.
More than half of those living in rural areas (56%) owned a gun, compared with 40% of suburbanites and 29% of those in urban areas.
More than half (53%) of Republicans owned guns, compared with 36% of political independents and 31% of Democrats.
One criticism of the GSS survey and other proxy measures of gun ownership, is that they do not provide adequate macro-level detail to allow conclusions on the relationship between overall firearm ownership and gun violence.
Gary Kleck compared various survey and proxy measures and found no correlation between overall firearm ownership and gun violence.
In contrast, studies by David Hemenway and his colleagues, which used GSS data and the fraction of suicides committed with a gun as a proxy for gun ownership rates, found a strong positive association between gun ownership and homicide in the United States.
Similarly, a 2006 study by Philip J. Cook and Jens Ludwig, which also used the percent of suicides committed with a gun as a proxy, found that gun prevalence increased homicide rates.
This study also found that the elasticity of this effect was between +0.1 and +0.3.
===
Self-protection ===
The effectiveness and safety of guns used for personal defense is debated.
Studies place the instances of guns used in personal defense as low as 65,000 times per year, and as high as 2.5 million times per year.
Under President Bill Clinton, the Department of Justice conducted a survey in 1994 that placed the usage rate of guns used in personal defense at 1.5 million times per year, but noted this was likely to be an overestimate.
Between 1987 and 1990, David McDowall et al.
found that guns were used in defense during a crime incident 64,615 times annually (258,460 times total over the whole period).
This equated to two times out of 1,000 criminal incidents (0.2%) that occurred in this period, including criminal incidents where no guns were involved at all.
For violent crimes, assault, robbery, and rape, guns were used 0.83% of the time in self-defense.
Of the times that guns were used in self-defense, 71% of the crimes were committed by strangers, with the rest of the incidents evenly divided between offenders that were acquaintances or persons well known to the victim.
In 28% of incidents where a gun was used for self-defense, victims fired the gun at the offender.
In 20% of the self-defense incidents, the guns were used by police officers.
During this same period, 1987 to 1990, there were 11,580 gun homicides per year (46,319 total), and the National Crime Victimization Survey estimated that 2,628,532 nonfatal crimes involving guns occurred.
McDowall's study for the American Journal of Public Health contrasted with a 1995 study by Gary Kleck and Marc  Gertz, which found that 2.45 million crimes were thwarted each year in the U.S. using guns, and in most cases, the potential victim never fired a shot.
The results of the Kleck studies have been cited many times in scholarly and popular media.
The methodology of the Kleck and Gertz study has been criticized by some researchers but also defended by gun-control advocate Marvin Wolfgang.
Using cross-sectional time-series data for U.S. counties from 1977 to 1992, Lott and Mustard of the Law School at the University of Chicago found that allowing citizens to carry concealed weapons deters violent crimes and appears to produce no increase in accidental deaths.
They claimed that if those states which did not have right-to-carry concealed gun provisions had adopted them in 1992, approximately 1,570 murders; 4,177 rapes; and over 60,000
aggravate assaults would have been avoided yearly.

==
Suicides ==
In the U.S., most people who die of suicide use a gun, and most deaths by gun are suicides.

There were 19,392 firearm-related suicides in the U.S. in 2010.
In 2017, over half of the nation's 47,173 suicides involved a firearm.
The U.S. Department of Justice reports that about 60% of all adult firearm deaths are by suicide, 61% more than deaths by homicide.
One study found that military veterans used firearms in about 67% of suicides in 2014.
Firearms are the most lethal method of suicide, with a lethality rate 2.6 times higher than suffocation (the second-most lethal method).In the United States, access to firearms is associated with an increased risk of completed suicide.
A 1992 case-control study in the New England Journal of Medicine showed an association between estimated household firearm ownership and suicide rates, finding that individuals living in a home where firearms are present are more likely to successfully commit suicide than those individuals who do not own firearms, by a factor of 3 or 4.
A 2006 study by researchers from the Harvard School of Public Health found a significant association between changes in estimated household gun ownership rates and suicide rates in the United States among men, women, and children.
A 2007 study by the same research team found that in the United States, estimated household gun ownership rates were strongly associated with overall suicide rates and gun suicide rates, but not with non-gun suicide rates.
A 2013 study reproduced this finding, even after controlling for different underlying rates of suicidal behavior by states.
A 2015 study also found a strong association between estimated gun ownership rates in American cities and rates of both overall and gun suicide, but not with non-gun suicide.
Correlation studies comparing different countries do not always find a statistically significant effect.
A 2016 cross-sectional study showed a strong association between estimated household gun ownership rates and gun-related suicide rates among men and women in the United States.
The same study found a strong association between estimated gun ownership rates and overall suicide rates, but only in men.
During the 1980s and early 1990s, there was a strong upward trend in adolescent suicides with guns as well as a sharp overall increase in suicides among those age 75 and over.
A 2018 study found that temporary gun seizure laws were associated with a 13.7% reduction in firearm suicides in Connecticut and a 7.5% reduction in firearm suicides in Indiana.
David Hemenway, professor of health policy at Harvard University's School of Public Health, and director of the Harvard Injury Control Research Center and the Harvard Youth Violence Prevention Center, stated

Differences in overall suicide rates across cities, states and regions in the United States are best explained not by differences in mental health, suicide ideation, or even suicide attempts, but by availability of firearms.
Many suicides are impulsive, and the urge to die fades away.
Firearms are a swift, lethal method of suicide with a high case-fatality rate.

There are over twice as many gun-related suicides than gun-related homicides in the United States.
Firearms are the most popular method of suicide due to the lethality of the weapon.
90% of all suicides attempted using a firearm result in a fatality, as opposed to less than 3% of suicide attempts involving cutting or drug-use.
The risk of someone attempting suicide is also 4.8 times greater if they are exposed to a firearm on a regular basis; for example, in the home.

==
Homicides ==


===
Statistics ===
Unlike other high-income OECD countries, most homicides in the U.S. are gun homicides.
In the U.S. in 2011, 67 percent of homicide victims were killed using a firearm: 66 percent of single-victim homicides and 79 percent of multiple-victim homicides.
In 1993, there were seven gun homicides for every 100,000 people; by 2013, that figure had fallen to 3.6, according to Pew Research.
The FBI further breaks down gun homicides by weapon type.
Handguns have been consistently responsible for the majority of fatalities.

In 2016, there were 11,004 gun homicides (65% handguns, 6% rifle/shotgun, 30% other/unknown type)
In 2014, there were 8,124 gun homicides (68% handguns, 6% rifle/shotgun, 25% other/unknown type).

In 2010, there were 8,775 gun homicides (68% handguns, 8% rifle/shotgun, 23% other/unknown type).

In 2001, there were 8,890 gun homicides (78% handguns, 10% rifle/shotguns, 12%
other/unknown type).The Centers for Disease Control reports that there were 11,078 gun homicides in the U.S. in 2010.
This is higher than the FBI's count.

===
History ===
In the 19th century gun violence played a role in civil disorder such as the Haymarket riot.
Homicide rates in cities such as Philadelphia were significantly lower in the 19th century than in modern times.

During the 1980s and early 1990s, homicide rates surged in cities across the United States (see graphs at right).
Handgun homicides accounted for nearly all of the overall increase in the homicide rate, from 1985 to 1993, while homicide rates involving other weapons declined during that time frame.
The rising trend in homicide rates during the 1980s and early 1990s was most pronounced among lower income and especially unemployed males.
Youths and Hispanic and African American males in the U.S. were the most represented, with the injury and death rates tripling for black males aged 13 through 17 and doubling for black males aged 18 through 24.
The rise in crack cocaine use in cities across the U.S. is often cited as a factor for increased gun violence among youths during this time period.

===
Demographics of risk ===
Prevalence of homicide and violent crime is higher in statistical metropolitan areas of the U.S. than it is in non-metropolitan counties; the vast majority of the U.S. population lives in statistical metropolitan areas.
In metropolitan areas, the homicide rate in 2013 was 4.7 per 100,000 compared with 3.4 in non-metropolitan counties.
More narrowly, the rates of murder and non-negligent manslaughter are identical in metropolitan counties and non-metropolitan counties.

In U.S. cities with populations greater than 250,000, the mean homicide rate was 12.1 per 100,000.
According to FBI statistics, the highest per capita rates of gun-related homicides in 2005 were in Washington, D.C. (35.4/100,000), Puerto Rico (19.6/100,000), Louisiana (9.9/100,000), and Maryland (9.9/100,000).
In 2017, according to the Associated Press, Baltimore broke a record for homicides.
In 2005, the 17-24 age group was significantly over-represented in violent crime statistics, particularly homicides involving firearms.
In 2005, 17-19-year-olds were 4.3% of the overall population of the U.S. but 11.2% of those killed in firearm homicides.
This age group also accounted for 10.6% of all homicide offenses.
The 20-24-year-old age group accounted for 7.1% of the population, but 22.5% of those killed in firearm homicides.
The 20-24 age group also accounted for 17.7% of all homicide offenses.
Those under 17 are not overrepresented in homicide statistics.
In 2005, 13-16-year-olds accounted for 6% of the overall population of the U.S., but only 3.6% of firearm homicide victims, and 2.7% of overall homicide offenses.

People with a criminal record are more likely to die as homicide victims.
Between 1990 and 1994, 75% of all homicide victims age 21 and younger in the city of Boston had a prior criminal record.
In Philadelphia, the percentage of those killed in gun homicides that had prior criminal records increased from 73% in 1985 to 93% in 1996.
In Richmond, Virginia, the risk of gunshot injury is 22 times higher for those males involved with crime.
It is significantly more likely that a death will result  when either the victim or the attacker has a firearm.
The mortality rate for gunshot wounds to the heart is 84%, compared to 30% for people who suffer stab wounds to the heart.
In the United States, states with higher gun ownership rates have higher rates of gun homicides and homicides overall, but not higher rates of non-gun homicides.
Higher gun availability is positively associated with homicide rates.
However, there is evidence, that gun ownership has more of an effect on rates of gun suicide than it does on gun homicide.
Some studies suggest that the concept of guns can prime aggressive thoughts and aggressive reactions.
An experiment by Berkowitz and LePage in 1967 examined this "weapons effect."
Ultimately, when study participants were provoked, their reaction was substantially more aggressive when a gun (in contrast with a more benign object like a tennis racket) was visibly present in the room.
Other similar experiments like those conducted by Carson, Marcus-Newhall and Miller yield similar results.
Such results imply that the presence of a gun in an altercation could elicit an aggressive reaction which may result in homicide.
However, the demonstration of such reactions in experimental settings does not entail that this would be true in reality.

===
Comparison to other countries ===
The U.S. is ranked 4th out of 34 developed nations for the highest incidence rate of homicides committed with a firearm, according to Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) data.
Mexico, Turkey, Estonia are ranked ahead of the U.S. in incidence of homicides.
A U.S. male aged
15–24 is 70 times more likely to be killed with a gun than their counterpart in the eight (G-8) largest industrialized nations in the world (United Kingdom, France, Germany, Japan, Canada, Italy, Russia).
In a broader comparison of 218 countries the U.S. is ranked 111.
In 2010, the U.S.' homicide rate is 7 times higher than the average for populous developed countries in the OECD, and its firearm-related homicide rate was 25.2 times higher.
In 2013 the United States' firearm-related death rate was 10.64 deaths for every 100,000 inhabitants, a figure very close to Mexico's 11.17, although in Mexico firearm deaths are predominantly homicides whereas in the United States they are predominantly suicides.
(
Although Mexico has strict gun laws, the laws restricting carry are often unenforced, and the laws restricting manufacture and sale are often circumvented by trafficking from the United States and other countries.)
Canada and Switzerland each have much looser gun control regulation than the majority of developed nations, although significantly more than in the United States, and have firearm death rates of 2.22 and 2.91 per 100,000 citizens, respectively.
By comparison Australia, which imposed sweeping gun control laws in response to the Port Arthur massacre in 1996, has a firearm death rate of 0.86 per 100,000, and in the United Kingdom the rate is 0.26.
In the year of 2014, there were a total of 8,124 gun homicides in the U.S.
In 2015, there were 33,636 deaths due to firearms in the U.S, with homicides accounting for 13,286 of those, while guns were used to kill about 50 people in the U.K., a country with population one fifth of the size of the U.S. population.
More people are typically killed with guns in the U.S. in a day (about 85) than in the U.K. in a year, if suicides are included.
With deaths by firearm reaching almost 40,000 in the U.S. in 2017, their highest level since 1968, almost 109 people died per day.
A study conducted by the Journal of the American Medical Association in 2018, states that the worldwide gun death reach 250,000 Yearly and the United States is among just six countries that make up half of those fatalities.

===
Mass shootings ===
The definition of a mass shooting is still under debate.
The precise inclusion criteria are disputed, and there is no broadly accepted definition.
Mother Jones, using their standard of a mass shooting where a lone gunman kills at least four people in a public place for motivations excluding gang violence or robbery, concluded that between 1982 and 2006 there were 40 mass shootings (an average of 1.6 per year).
More recently, from 2007 through May 2018, there have been 61 mass shootings (an average of 5.4 per year).
More broadly, the frequency of mass shootings steadily declined throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, then increased dramatically.
Studies indicate that the rate at which public mass shootings occur has tripled since 2011.
Between 1982 and 2011, a mass shooting occurred roughly once every 200 days.
However, between 2011 and 2014 that rate has accelerated greatly with at least one mass shooting occurring every 64 days in the United States.
In "Behind the Bloodshed", a report by USA Today, said that there were mass killings every two weeks and that public mass killings account for 1 in 6 of all mass killings (26 killings annually would thus be equivalent to 26/6,
4 to 5, public killings per year).
Mother Jones listed seven mass shootings in the U.S. for 2015.
The average for the period 2011–2015 was about 5 a year.
An analysis by Michael Bloomberg's gun violence prevention group, Everytown for Gun Safety, identified 110 mass shootings, defined as shootings in which at least four people were murdered with a firearm, between January 2009 and July 2014; at least 57% were related to domestic or family violence.
This would imply that not more than 43% of 110 shootings in 5.5 years were non-domestic, though not necessarily public or indiscriminate; this equates to 8.6 per year, broadly in line with the other figures.
Other media outlets have reported that hundreds of mass shootings take place in the United States in a single calendar year, citing a crowd-funded website known as Shooting Tracker which defines a mass shooting as having four or more people injured or killed.
In December 2015, The Washington Post reported that there had been 355 mass shootings in the United States so far that year.
In August 2015, The Washington Post reported that the United States was averaging one mass shooting per day.
An earlier report had indicated that in 2015 alone, there had been 294 mass shootings that killed or injured 1,464 people.
Shooting Tracker and Mass Shooting Tracker, the two sites that the media have been citing, have been criticized for using a criterion much more inclusive than that used by the government—they count four victims injured as a mass shooting—thus producing much higher figures.
Handguns figured in the Virginia Tech shooting, the Binghamton shooting, the 2009 Fort Hood shooting, the Oikos University shooting, and the 2011 Tucson shooting, but both a handgun and a rifle were used in the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.
The Aurora theater shooting and the Columbine High School massacre were committed by assailants armed with multiple weapons.
AR-15 style rifles have been used in a number of the deadliest mass shooting incidents, and have come to be widely characterized as the weapon of choice for perpetrators of mass shootings, despite statistics which show that handguns are the most commonly used weapon type in mass shootings.
In recent years, the number of public mass shootings has increased substantially, with a steady increase in gun related deaths.
Although mass shootings are covered extensively in the media, they account for a small fraction of gun-related deaths (only 1 percent of all gun deaths between 1980 and 2008).

Between Jan 1 and May 18, 2018, 31 students and teachers were killed inside U.S. schools.
That exceeds the number of U.S. military servicemembers who died in combat and noncombat roles during the same period.

==
Accidental and negligent injuries ==
The perpetrators and victims of accidental and negligent gun discharges may be of any age.
Accidental injuries are most common in homes where guns are kept for self-defense.
The injuries are self-inflicted in half of the cases.

On January 16, 2013, President Obama issued 23 Executive Orders on Gun Safety, one of which was for the Center for Disease Control (CDC) to research causes and possible prevention of gun violence.
The five main areas of focus were gun violence, risk factors, prevention/intervention, gun safety and how media and violent video games influence the public.
They also researched the area of accidental firearm deaths.
According to this study not only have the number of accidental firearm deaths been on the decline over the past century
but they now account for less than 1% of all unintentional deaths, half of which are self-inflicted.

==
Violent crime ==
In the United States, areas with higher levels of gun ownership have an increased risk of gun assault and gun robbery.
However it is unclear if higher crime rates are a result of increased gun ownership or if gun ownership rates increase as a result of increased crime.

===
Costs ===
In 2000, the costs of gun violence in the United States were estimated to be on the order of $100 billion per year, plus the costs associated with the gun violence avoidance and prevention behaviors.
In 2010, gun violence cost U.S. taxpayers about $516 million in direct hospital costs.

===
U.S. presidential assassinations and attempts ===
At least eleven assassination attempts with firearms have been made on U.S. presidents (over one-fifth of all presidents); four were successful, three with handguns and one with a rifle.

Abraham Lincoln survived an earlier attack, but was killed using a .44-caliber Derringer pistol fired by John Wilkes Booth.
James A. Garfield was shot two times and mortally wounded by Charles J. Guiteau using a .44-caliber revolver on July 2, 1881.
He would die of pneumonia the same year on September 19.
On September 6, 1901, William McKinley was fatally wounded by Leon Czolgosz when he fired twice at point-blank range using a .32-caliber revolver.
Despite only being struck by one of the bullets and receiving immediate surgical treatment, McKinley died 8 days later of gangrene infection.
John F. Kennedy was killed by Lee Harvey Oswald with a bolt-action rifle on November 22, 1963.Andrew Jackson, Harry S. Truman, and Gerald Ford (the latter twice) survived assassination attempts involving firearms unharmed.
Ronald Reagan was critically wounded in the March 30, 1981 assassination attempt by John Hinckley, Jr. with a .22-caliber revolver.
He remains the only U.S. President to survive being shot while in office.
Former president Theodore Roosevelt was shot and wounded right before delivering a speech during his 1912 presidential campaign.
Despite bleeding from his chest, Roosevelt refused to go to a hospital until he delivered the speech.
On February 15, 1933, Giuseppe Zangara attempted to assassinate president-elect Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who was giving a speech from his car in Miami, Florida.
Although Roosevelt was unharmed, Chicago mayor Anton Cermak died in that attempt, and several other bystanders received non-fatal injuries.
Response to these events has resulted in federal legislation to regulate the public possession of firearms.
For example, the attempted assassination of Franklin Roosevelt contributed to passage of the National Firearms Act of 1934, and the Kennedy assassination (along with others) resulted in the Gun Control Act of 1968.
The GCA is a federal law signed by President Lyndon Johnson that broadly regulates the firearms industry and firearms owners.
It primarily focuses on regulating interstate commerce in firearms by largely prohibiting interstate firearms transfers except among licensed manufacturers, dealers, and importers.

===
Other violent crime ===
A quarter of robberies of commercial premises in the U.S. are committed with guns.
Fatalities are three times as likely in robberies committed with guns than where other, or no, weapons are used, with similar patterns in cases of family violence.
Criminologist Philip J. Cook hypothesized that if guns were less available, criminals might commit the same crime, but with less-lethal weapons.
He finds that the level of gun ownership in the 50 largest U.S. cities correlates with the rate of robberies committed with guns, but not with overall robbery rates.
He also finds that robberies in which the assailant uses a gun are more likely to result in the death of the victim, but less likely to result in injury to the victim.
Overall robbery and assault rates in the U.S. are comparable to those in other developed countries, such as Australia and Finland, with much lower levels of gun ownership.
A 2000 study showed a strong association between the availability of illegal guns and violent crime rates, but not between legal gun availability and violent crime rates.

See also Assault with a deadly weapon


==
Offenders ==
Considering mass shootings alone (sometimes defined as at least four people shot dead in a public place), nearly all shooters are male.
A database of 101 mass shootings between 1982 and 2018 recorded 98 male shooters, 2 female shooters, and one partnership of a male and female shooter.
The race of the shooters included 58 whites, 16 blacks, 8 Asians, 7 Latinos, 3 Native Americans, and 8 unknown/other.

===
Vectors ===
In 2015, Arizona State University researcher Sherry Towers said "National news media attention is like a 'vector' that reaches people who are vulnerable."
She stated that disaffected people can become infected by the attention given other disturbed people who have become mass killers.

== Victims ==
African Americans suffer a disproportionate share of firearm homicides.
African Americans, who were only 13% of the U.S. population in 2010, were 55% of the victims of gun homicide.
Non-Hispanic whites were 65% of the U.S. population in 2010, but only 25% of the victims.
Hispanics were 16% of the population in 2010 but 17% of victims.
According to the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics, from 1980 to 2008, 84% of white homicide victims were killed by white offenders and 93% of black homicide victims were killed by black offenders.

==
Public policy ==

Public policy as related to preventing gun violence is an ongoing political and social debate regarding both the restriction and availability of firearms within the United States.
Policy at the Federal level is/has been governed by the Second Amendment, National Firearms Act, Gun Control Act of 1968, Firearm Owners Protection Act, Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act, and the Domestic Violence Offender Act.
Gun policy in the U.S. has been revised many times with acts such as the Firearm Owners Protection Act, which loosened provisions for gun sales while also strengthening automatic firearms law.
At the federal, state and local level, gun laws such as handgun bans have been overturned by the Supreme Court in cases such as District of Columbia v. Heller and McDonald v. Chicago.
These cases hold that the Second Amendment protects an individual right to possess a firearm.
Columbia v. Heller only addressed the issue on Federal enclaves, while McDonald v. Chicago addressed the issue as relating to the individual states.

Gun control proponents often cite the relatively high number of homicides committed with firearms as reason to support stricter gun control laws.

Policies and laws that reduce homicides committed with firearms prevent homicides overall; a decrease in firearm-related homicides is not balanced by an increase in non-firearm homicides.
Firearm laws are a subject of debate in the U.S., with firearms used for recreational purposes as well as for personal protection.
Gun rights advocates cite the use of firearms for self-protection, and to deter violent crime, as reasons why more guns can reduce crime.
Gun rights advocates also say criminals are the least likely to obey firearms laws, and so limiting access to guns by law-abiding people makes them more vulnerable to armed criminals.
In a survey of 41 studies, half of the studies found a connection between gun ownership and homicide but these were usually the least rigorous studies.
Only six studies controlled at least six statistically significant confounding variables, and none of them showed a significant positive effect.
Eleven macro-level studies showed that crime rates increase gun levels (not vice versa).
The reason that there is no opposite effect may be that most owners are noncriminals and that they may use guns to prevent violence.

===
Access to firearms ===
The US Constitution enshrines the right to gun ownership in the Second Amendment of the United States Bill of Rights to ensure the security of a free state through a well regulated Militia.
It states: "A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms shall not be infringed."
The Constitution makes no distinction between the type of firearm in question or state of residency.
Gun dealers in the U.S. are prohibited from selling handguns to those under the age of 21, and long guns to those under the age of 18.
In 2017, the National Safety Council released a state ranking on firearms access indicators such as background checks, waiting periods, safe storage, training, and sharing of mental health records with the NICS database to restrict firearm access.
Assuming access to guns, the top ten guns involved in crime in the U.S. show a definite tendency to favor handguns over long guns.
The top ten guns used in crime, as reported by the ATF in 1993, were the Smith & Wesson .38
Special and .357 revolvers; Raven Arms .25 caliber, Davis P-380 .380 caliber, Ruger .22 caliber, Lorcin L-380 .380 caliber, and Smith & Wesson semi-automatic handguns; Mossberg and Remington 12 gauge shotguns; and the Tec DC-9 9 mm handgun.
An earlier 1985 study of 1,800 incarcerated felons showed that criminals preferred revolvers and other non-semi-automatic firearms over semi-automatic firearms.
In Pittsburgh a change in preferences towards pistols occurred in the early 1990s, coinciding with the arrival of crack cocaine and the rise of violent youth gangs.
Background checks in California from 1998 to 2000 resulted in 1% of sales being initially denied.
The types of guns most often denied included semiautomatic pistols with short barrels and of medium caliber.
A 2018 study determined that California's implementation of comprehensive background checks and misdemeanor violation policies was not associated with a net change in the firearm homicide rate over the ensuing 10 years.
A 2018 study found no evidence of an association between the repeal of comprehensive background check policies and firearm homicide and suicide rates in Indiana and Tennessee.
Among juveniles (minors under the age of 16, 17, or 18, depending on legal jurisdiction) serving in correctional facilities, 86% had owned a gun, with 66% acquiring their first gun by age 14.
There was also a tendency for juvenile offenders to have owned several firearms, with 65% owning three or more.
Juveniles most often acquired guns illegally from family, friends, drug dealers, and street contacts.
Inner city youths cited "self-protection from enemies" as the top reason for carrying a gun.
In Rochester, New York, 22% of young males have carried a firearm illegally, most for only a short time.
There is little overlap between legal gun ownership and illegal gun carrying among youths.
One 2006 study concluded that "suicide, murder and violent crime rates are determined by basic social, economic and/or cultural factors with the availability of any particular one of the world's myriad deadly instrument being irrelevant."
However, A 2011 study indicated that in states where local background checks for gun purchases are completed, the suicide and homicide rates were much lower than states without.
===
Firearms market ===
Gun rights advocates argue that policy aimed at the supply side of the firearms market is based on limited research.
One consideration is that 60–70% of firearms sales in the U.S. are transacted through federally licensed firearm dealers, with the remainder taking place in the "secondary market", in which previously owned firearms are transferred by non-dealers.
Access to secondary markets is generally less convenient to purchasers, and involves such risks as the possibility of the gun having been used previously in a crime.
Unlicensed private sellers were permitted by law to sell privately owned guns at gun shows or at private locations in 24 states as of 1998.
Regulations that limit the number of handgun sales in the primary, regulated market to one handgun a month per customer have been shown to be effective at reducing illegal gun trafficking by reducing the supply into the secondary market.
Taxes on firearm purchases are another means for government to influence the primary market.
Criminals tend to obtain guns through multiple illegal pathways, including large-scale gun traffickers, who tend to provide criminals with relatively few guns.
Federally licensed firearm dealers in the primary (new and used gun) market are regulated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF).
Firearm manufacturers are required to mark all firearms manufactured with serial numbers.
This allows the ATF to trace guns involved in crimes back to their last Federal Firearms License (FFL) reported change of ownership transaction, although not past the first private sale involving any particular gun.
A report by the ATF released in 1999 found that 0.4% of federally licensed dealers sold half of the guns used criminally in 1996 and 1997.
This is sometimes done through "straw purchases."
State laws, such as those in California, that restrict the number of gun purchases in a month may help stem such "straw purchases.
"
States with gun registration and licensing laws are generally less likely to have guns initially sold there used in crimes.
Similarly, crime guns tend to travel from states with weak gun laws to states with strict gun laws.
An estimated 500,000 guns are stolen each year, becoming available to prohibited users.
During the ATF's Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative (YCGII), which involved expanded tracing of firearms recovered by law enforcement agencies, only 18% of guns used criminally that were recovered in 1998 were in possession of the original owner.
Guns recovered by police during criminal investigations were often sold by legitimate retail sales outlets to legal owners, and then diverted to criminal use over relatively short times ranging from a few months to a few years, which makes them relatively new compared with firearms in general circulation.
A 2016 survey of prison inmates by the Bureau of Justice Statistics found that 43% of guns used in crimes were obtained from the black market, 25% from an individual, 10% from a retail source (including 0.8% from a gun show), and 6% from theft.

===
Federal legislation ===
The first Federal legislation related to firearms was the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution ratified in 1791.
For 143 years, this was the only major Federal legislation regarding firearms.
The next Federal firearm legislation was the National Firearms Act of 1934, which created regulations for the sale of firearms, established taxes on their sale, and required registration of some types of firearms such as machine guns.

In the aftermath of the Robert F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. assassinations, the Gun Control Act of 1968 was enacted.
This Act regulated gun commerce, restricting mail order sales, and allowing shipments only to licensed firearm dealers.
The Act also prohibited sale of firearms to felons, those under indictment, fugitives, illegal aliens, drug users, those dishonorably discharged from the military, and those in mental institutions.
The law also restricted importation of so-called Saturday night specials and other types of guns, and limited the sale of automatic weapons and semi-automatic weapon conversion kits.
The Firearm Owners Protection Act, also known as the McClure-Volkmer Act, was passed in 1986.
It changed some restrictions in the 1968 Act, allowing federally licensed gun dealers and individual unlicensed private sellers to sell at gun shows, while continuing to require licensed gun dealers to require background checks.
The 1986 Act also restricted the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms from conducting punitively repetitive inspections, reduced the amount of record-keeping required of gun dealers, raised the burden of proof for convicting gun law violators, and changed restrictions on convicted felons from owning firearms.
In addition it also banned new machine guns for sale to the public, but grandfathered in any that were already registered.

In the years following the passage of the Gun Control Act of 1968, people buying guns were required to show identification and sign a statement affirming that they were not in any of the prohibited categories.
Many states enacted background check laws that went beyond the federal requirements.
The Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act passed by Congress in 1993 imposed a waiting period before the purchase of a handgun, giving time for, but not requiring, a background check to be made.
The Brady Act also required the establishment of a national system to provide instant criminal background checks, with checks to be done by firearms dealers.
The Brady Act only applied to people who bought guns from licensed dealers, whereas felons buy some percentage of their guns from black market sources.
Restrictions, such as waiting periods, impose costs and inconveniences on legitimate gun purchasers, such as hunters.
A 2000 study found that the implementation of the Brady Act was associated with "reductions in the firearm suicide rate for persons aged 55 years or older but not with reductions in homicide rates or overall suicide rates."

The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act, enacted in 1994, included the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, and was a response to public fears over mass shootings.
This provision prohibited the manufacture and importation of some firearms with certain features such as a folding stock, pistol grip, flash suppressor, and magazines holding more than ten rounds.
A grandfather clause was included that allowed firearms manufactured before 1994 to remain legal.
A short-term evaluation by University of Pennsylvania criminologists Christopher S. Koper and Jeffrey A. Roth did not find any clear impact of this legislation on gun violence.
Given the short study time period of the evaluation, the National Academy of Sciences advised caution in drawing any conclusions.
In September 2004, the assault weapon ban expired, with its sunset clause.
The Domestic Violence Offender Gun Ban, the Lautenberg Amendment, prohibited anyone previously convicted of a misdemeanor or felony crime of domestic violence from shipment, transport, ownership and use of guns or ammunition.
This was ex post facto, in the opinion of Representative Bob Barr.
This law also prohibited the sale or gift of a firearm or ammunition to such a person.
It was passed in 1996, and became effective in 1997.
The law does not exempt people who use firearms as part of their duties, such as police officers or military personnel with applicable criminal convictions; they may not carry firearms.

In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, police and National Guard units in New Orleans confiscated firearms from private citizens in an attempt to prevent violence.
In reaction, Congress passed the Disaster Recovery Personal Protection Act of 2006 in the form of an amendment to Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2007.
Section 706 of the Act prohibits federal employees and those receiving federal funds from confiscating legally possessed firearms during a disaster.
On January 5, 2016, President Obama unveiled his new strategy to curb gun violence in America.
His proposals focus on new background check requirements that are intended to enhance the effectiveness of the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS), and greater education and enforcement efforts of existing laws at the state level.
In an interview with Bill Simmons of HBO, President Obama also confirmed that gun control will be the "dominant" issue on his agenda in his last year of presidency.

===
State legislation ===


====
Right-to-carry ====
All 50 U.S. states allow for the right to carry firearms.
A majority of states either require a shall-issue permit or allow carrying without a permit and a minority require a may-issue permit.
Right-to-carry laws expanded in the 1990s as homicide rates from gun violence in the U.S. increased, largely in response to incidents such as the Luby's shooting of 1991 in Texas which directly resulted in the passage of a carrying concealed weapon, or CCW, law in Texas in 1995.
As Rorie Sherman, staff reporter for the National Law Journal wrote in an article published on April 18, 1994, "It is a time of unparalleled desperation about crime.
But the mood is decidedly 'I'll do it myself' and 'Don't get in my way.
'"The result was laws, or the lack thereof, that permitted persons to carry firearms openly, known as open carry, often without any permit required, in 22 states by 1998.
Laws that permitted persons to carry concealed handguns, sometimes termed a concealed handgun license, CHL, or concealed pistol license, CPL in some jurisdictions instead of CCW, existed in 34 states in the U.S. by 2004.
Since then, the number of states with CCW laws has increased; as of 2014, all 50 states have some form of CCW laws on the books.
Economist John Lott has argued that right-to-carry laws create a perception that more potential crime victims might be carrying firearms, and thus serve as a deterrent against crime.
Lott's study has been criticized for not adequately controlling for other factors, including other state laws also enacted, such as Florida's laws requiring background checks and waiting period for handgun buyers.
When Lott's data was re-analyzed by some researchers, the only statistically significant effect of concealed-carry laws found was an increase in assaults, with similar findings by Jens Ludwig.
Lott and Mustard's 1997 study has also been criticized by Paul Rubin and Hashem Dezhbakhsh for inappropriately using a dummy variable; Rubin and Dezhbakhsh reported in a 2003 study that right-to-carry laws have much smaller and more inconsistent effects than those reported by Lott and Mustard, and that these effects are usually not crime-reducing.
Since concealed-carry permits are only given to adults, Philip J. Cook suggested that analysis should focus on the relationship with adult and not juvenile gun incident rates.
He found no statistically significant effect.
A 2004 National Academy of Science survey of existing literature found that the data available "are too weak to support unambiguous conclusions" about the impact of right-to-carry laws on rates of violent crime.
NAS suggested that new analytical approaches and datasets at the county or local level are needed to adequately evaluate the impact of right-to-carry laws.
A 2014 study found that Arizona's SB 1108, which allowed adults in the state to concealed carry without a permit and without passing a training course, was associated with an increase in gun-related fatalities.
A 2018 study by Charles Manski and John V. Pepper found that the apparent effects of RTC laws on crime rates depend significantly on the assumptions made in the analysis.
A 2019 study found no statistically significant association between the liberalization of state level firearm carry legislation over the last 30 years and the rates of homicides or other violent crime.

====
Child Access Prevention (CAP) ====
Child Access Prevention (CAP) laws, enacted by many states, require parents to store firearms safely, to minimize access by children to guns, while maintaining ease of access by adults.
CAP laws hold gun owners liable should a child gain access to a loaded gun that is not properly stored.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) claimed that, on average, one child died every three days in accidental incidents in the U.S. from 2000 to 2005.
In most states, CAP law violations are considered misdemeanors.
Florida's CAP law, enacted in 1989, permits felony prosecution of violators.
Research indicates that CAP laws are correlated with a reduction in unintentional gun deaths by 23%, and gun suicides among those aged 14 through 17 by 11%.
A study by Lott did not detect a relationship between CAP laws and accidental gun deaths or suicides among those age 19 and under between 1979 and 1996.
However, two studies disputed Lott's findings.
A 2013 study found that CAP laws are correlated with a reduction of non-fatal gun injuries among both children and adults by 30–40%.
In 2016 the American Academy of Pediatrics found that safe gun storage laws were associated with lower overall adolescent suicide rates.
Research also indicated that CAP laws were most highly correlated with reductions of non-fatal gun injuries in states where violations were considered felonies, whereas in states that considered violations as misdemeanors, the potential impact of CAP laws was not statistically significant.

===
Local restrictions ===
Some local jurisdictions in the U.S. have more restrictive laws, such as Washington, D.C.'s Firearms Control Regulations Act of 1975, which banned residents from owning handguns, and required permitted firearms be disassembled and locked with a trigger lock.
On March 9, 2007, a U.S. Appeals Court ruled the Washington, D.C. handgun ban unconstitutional.
The appeal of that case later led to the Supreme Court's ruling in District of Columbia v. Heller that D.C.'s ban was unconstitutional under the Second Amendment.

Despite New York City's strict gun control laws, guns are often trafficked in from other parts of the U.S., particularly the southern states.
Results from the ATF's Youth Crime Gun Interdiction Initiative indicate that the percentage of imported guns involved in crimes is tied to the stringency of local firearm laws.

==
Prevention programs ==
Violence prevention and educational programs have been established in many schools and communities across the United States.
These programs aim to change personal behavior of both children and their parents, encouraging children to stay away from guns, ensure parents store guns safely, and encourage children to solve disputes without resorting to violence.
Programs aimed at altering behavior range from passive (requiring no effort on the part of the individual) to active (supervising children, or placing a trigger lock on a gun).
The more effort required of people, the more difficult it is to implement a prevention strategy.
Prevention strategies focused on modifying the situational environment and the firearm itself may be more effective.
Empirical evaluation of gun violence prevention programs has been limited.
Of the evaluations that have been done, results indicate such programs have minimal effectiveness.

===
Hotline ===
SPEAK UP
is a national youth violence prevention initiative created by The Center to Prevent Youth Violence, which provides young people with tools to improve the safety of their schools and communities.
The SPEAK UP program is an anonymous, national hot-line for young people to report threats of violence in their communities or at school.
The hot-line is operated in accordance with a protocol developed in collaboration with national education and law enforcement authorities, including the FBI.
Trained counselors, with access to translators for 140 languages, collect information from callers and then report the threat to appropriate school and law enforcement officials.

===
Gun safety parent counseling ===
One of the most widely used parent counseling programs is Steps to Prevent Firearm Injury program (STOP), which was developed in 1994 by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence (the latter of which was then known as the Center to Prevent Handgun Violence).
STOP was superseded by STOP 2 in 1998, which has a broader focus including more communities and health care providers.
STOP has been evaluated and found not to have a significant effect on gun ownership or firearm storage practices by inner-city parents.
Marjorie S. Hardy suggests further evaluation of STOP is needed, as this evaluation had a limited sample size and lacked a control group.
A 1999 study found no statistically significant effect of STOP on rates of gun ownership or better gun storage.

===
Children ===
Prevention programs geared towards children have also not been greatly successful.
Many inherent challenges arise when working with children, including their tendency to perceive themselves as invulnerable to injury, limited ability to apply lessons learned, their innate curiosity, and peer pressure.

The goal of gun safety programs, usually administered by local firearms dealers and shooting clubs, is to teach older children and adolescents how to handle firearms safely.
There has been no systematic evaluation of the effect of these programs on children.
For adults, no positive effect on gun storage practices has been found as a result of these programs.
Also, researchers have found that gun safety programs for children may likely increase a child's interest in obtaining and using guns, which they cannot be expected to use safely all the time, even with training.
One approach taken is gun avoidance, such as when encountering a firearm at a neighbor's home.
The Eddie Eagle Gun Safety Program, administered by the National Rifle Association (NRA), is geared towards younger children from pre-kindergarten to sixth grade, and teaches kids that real guns are not toys by emphasizing a "just say no" approach.
The Eddie Eagle program is based on training children in a four-step action to take when they see a firearm
: (1) Stop!
(
2) Don't touch!
(
3) Leave the area.
(
4) Go tell an adult.
Materials, such as coloring books and posters, back the lessons up and provide the repetition necessary in any child-education program.
ABC News challenged the effectiveness of the "just say no" approach promoted by the NRA's Eddie the Eagle program in an investigative piece by Diane Sawyer in 1999.
Sawyer's piece was based on an academic study conducted by Dr. Marjorie Hardy.
Dr. Hardy's study tracked the behavior of elementary age schoolchildren who spent a day learning the Eddie the Eagle four-step action plan from a uniformed police officer.
The children were then placed into a playroom which contained a hidden gun.
When the children found the gun, they did not run away from the gun, but rather, they inevitably played with it, pulled the trigger while looking into the barrel, or aimed the gun at a playmate and pulled the trigger.
The study concluded that children's natural curiosity was far more powerful than the parental admonition to "Just say no".
===
Community programs ===
Programs targeted at entire communities, such as community revitalization, after-school programs, and media campaigns, may be more effective in reducing the general level of violence that children are exposed to.
Community-based programs that have specifically targeted gun violence include Safe Kids/Healthy Neighborhoods Injury Prevention Program in New York City, and Safe Homes and Havens in Chicago.
Evaluation of such community-based programs is difficult, due to many confounding factors and the multifaceted nature of such programs.
A Chicago-based program, "BAM" (Becoming a Man) has produced positive results, according to the University of Chicago Crime Lab, and is expanding to Boston in 2017.
====
March for Our Lives
====
The March for Our Lives was a student-led demonstration in support of legislation to prevent gun violence in the United States.
It took place in Washington, D.C. on March 24, 2018, with over 880 sibling events throughout the U.S.
It was planned by Never Again MSD in collaboration with the nonprofit organization.
The demonstration followed the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School shooting in Parkland, Florida on February 14, 2018, which was described by several media outlets as a possible tipping point for gun control legislation.

==
Intervention programs ==
Sociologist James D. Wright suggests that to convince inner-city youths not to carry guns "requires convincing them that they can survive in their neighborhood without being armed, that they can come and go in peace, that being unarmed will not cause them to be victimized, intimidated, or slain."
Intervention programs, such as CeaseFire Chicago, Operation Ceasefire in Boston and Project Exile in Richmond, Virginia during the 1990s, have been shown to be effective.
Other intervention strategies, such as gun "buy-back" programs have been demonstrated to be ineffective.

===
Gun buyback programs ===
Gun "buyback" programs are a strategy aimed at influencing the firearms market by taking guns "off the streets".
Gun "buyback" programs have been shown to be effective to prevent suicides, but ineffective to prevent homicides with the National Academy of Sciences citing theory underlying these programs as "badly flawed.
"
Guns surrendered tend to be those least likely to be involved in crime, such as old, malfunctioning guns with little resale value, muzzleloading or other black-powder guns, antiques chambered for obsolete cartridges that are no longer commercially manufactured or sold, or guns that individuals inherit but have little value in possessing.
Other limitations of gun buyback programs include the fact that it is relatively easy to obtain gun replacements, often of better guns than were relinquished in the buyback.
Also, the number of handguns used in crime (about 7,500 per year) is very small compared to about 70 million handguns in the U.S..
(i.e., 0.011%)."Gun bounty" programs launched in several Florida cities have shown more promise.
These programs involve cash rewards for anonymous tips about illegal weapons that lead to an arrest and a weapons charge.
Since its inception in May 2007, the Miami program has led to 264 arrests and the confiscation of 432 guns owned illegally and $2.2 million in drugs, and has solved several murder and burglary cases.

===
Operation Ceasefire ===
In 1995, Operation Ceasefire was established as a strategy for addressing youth gun violence in Boston.
Violence was particularly concentrated in poor, inner-city neighborhoods including Roxbury, Dorchester, and Mattapan.
There were 22 youths (under the age of 24) killed in Boston in 1987, with that figure rising to 73 in 1990.
Operation Ceasefire entailed a problem-oriented policing approach, and focused on specific places that were crime hot spots—two strategies that when combined have been shown to be quite effective.
Particular focus was placed on two elements of the gun violence problem, including illicit gun trafficking and gang violence.
Within two years of implementing Operation Ceasefire in Boston, the number of youth homicides dropped to ten, with only one handgun-related youth homicide occurring in 1999 and 2000.
The Operation Ceasefire strategy has since been replicated in other cities, including Los Angeles.
Erica Bridgeford, spearheaded a "72-hour ceasefire" in August 2017, but the ceasefire was broken with a homicide.
Councilman Brandon Scott, Mayor Catherine Pugh and others talked of community policing models that might work for Baltimore.

===
Project Exile ===
Project Exile, conducted in Richmond, Virginia during the 1990s, was a coordinated effort involving federal, state, and local officials that targeted gun violence.
The strategy entailed prosecution of gun violations in Federal courts, where sentencing guidelines were tougher.
Project Exile also involved outreach and education efforts through media campaigns, getting the message out about the crackdown.
Research analysts offered different opinions as to the program's success in reducing gun crime.
Authors of a 2003 analysis of the program argued that the decline in gun homicide was part of a "general regression to the mean" across U.S. cities with high homicide rates.
Authors of a 2005 study disagreed, concluding that Richmond's gun homicide rate fell more rapidly than the rates in other large U.S. cities with other influences controlled.

===
Project Safe Neighborhoods ===
Project Safe Neighborhoods (PSN) is a national strategy for reducing gun violence that builds on the strategies implemented in Operation Ceasefire and Project Exile.
PSN was established in 2001, with support from the Bush administration, channelled through the United States Attorney's Offices in the United States Department of Justice.
The Federal government has spent over US$1.5 billion since the program's inception on the hiring of prosecutors, and providing assistance to state and local jurisdictions in support of training and community outreach efforts.

===
READI
Chicago ===
In 2016, Chicago saw a 58% increase in homicides.
In response to the spike in gun violence, a group of foundations and social service agencies created the Rapid Employment and Development Initiative (READI) Chicago.
A Heartland Alliance program, READI Chicago targets those most at risk of being involved in gun violence – either as perpetrator or a victim.
Individuals are provided with 18 months of transitional jobs, cognitive behavioral therapy and legal and social services.
Individuals are also provided with 6 months of support as they transition to full-time employment at the end of the 18 months.
The University of Chicago Crime Lab is evaluating READI Chicago's impact on gun violence reduction.
The evaluation, expected to be completed in Spring 2021, is showing early signs of success.
Eddie Bocanegra, senior director of READI Chicago, hopes that the early success of READI Chicago will result in funding from the City of Chicago.

==
Reporting of crime ==
The National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) is used by law enforcement agencies in the United States for collecting and reporting data on crimes.
The NIBRS is one of four subsets of the Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) program.

Traditional Summary Reporting System (SRS) and the National Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS) –
Offense and arrest data
Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted (LEOKA)
Program
Hate Crime Statistics Program –
hate crimes
Cargo Theft Reporting Program –
cargo theftThe FBI states the UCR Program is retiring the SRS and will transition to a NIBRS-only data collection by January 1, 2021.
Additionally, the FBI states NIBRS will collect more detailed information, including incident date and time, whether reported offenses were attempted or completed, expanded victim types, relationships of victims to offenders and offenses, demographic details, location data, property descriptions, drug types and quantities, the offender's suspected use of drugs or alcohol, the involvement of gang activity, and whether a computer was used in the commission of the crime.
Though NIBRS will be collecting more data the reporting if the firearm used was legally or illegally obtained by the suspect will not be identified.

Nor will the system have the capability to identify if a legally obtained firearm used in the crime was used by the owner or registered owner, if required to be registered.

Additionally, the information of how an illegally obtained firearm was acquired will be left to speculation.
The absence of collecting this information into NIBRS the reported "gun violence" data will remain a gross misinterpretation lending anyone information that can be skewed to their liking/needs and not pinpoint where actual efforts need to be directed to curb the use of firearms in crime.

==
Research limitations ==
In the United States, research into firearms and violent crime is fraught with difficulties, associated with limited data on gun ownership and use, firearms markets, and aggregation of crime data.
Research studies into gun violence have primarily taken one of two approaches: case-control studies and social ecology.
Gun ownership is usually determined through surveys, proxy variables, and sometimes with production and import figures.
In statistical analysis of homicides and other types of crime which are rare events, these data tend to have poisson distributions, which also presents methodological challenges to researchers.
With data aggregation, it is difficult to make inferences about individual behavior.
This problem, known as ecological fallacy, is not always handled properly by researchers; this leads some to jump to conclusions that their data do not necessarily support.
In 1996 the NRA lobbied Congressman Jay Dickey (R-Ark.)
to include budget provisions that prohibited the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) from advocating or promoting gun control and that deleted $2.6 million from the CDC budget, the exact amount the CDC had spent on firearms research the previous year.
The ban was later extended to all research funded by the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS).
According to an article in Nature, this made gun research more difficult, reduced the number of studies, and discouraged researchers from even talking about gun violence at medical and scientific conferences.
In 2013, after the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, President Barack Obama ordered the CDC to resume funding research on gun violence and prevention, and put $10 million in the 2014 budget request for it.
However, the order had no practical effect, as the CDC refused to act without a specific appropriation to cover the research, and Congress repeatedly declined to allocate any funds.
As a result, the CDC has not performed any such studies since 1996.

== See also ==
Crime in the United States
Firearm death rates in the United States by
state
Gun show loophole
Gunshot wound
Index of gun politics articles
Second Amendment to the United States Constitution


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Collier, Charles W. (Autumn 2014).
"
The Death of Gun Control: An American Tragedy".
Critical Inquiry.
41 (1): 102–131.
doi:10.1086/678159.
JSTOR
10.1086/678159.
S2CID 159757009.

==
External links ==
Gun violence – National Criminal Justice
US Violent Crime –
Data on US Violent Crime
Gun Violence Archive – Data on each verified gun related incident, with annual statistics
Report US Anti-gun violence activist art project, Eileen Boxer (2016)
The Accessibility of Firearms and Risk for Suicide and Homicide Victimization Among Household Members – Anglemyer, Horvath, and Rutherford
(2014)
Dahlberg, L. L; Ikeda, R. M; Kresnow, M. J (2004).
"
Guns in the Home and Risk of a Violent Death in the Home: Findings from a National Study".
American Journal of Epidemiology.
160 (10): 929–936.
doi:10.1093
/aje/kwh309.
PMID 15522849.
The People's Liberation Army Ground Force (PLAGF) (simplified Chinese: 中国人民解放军陆军; traditional Chinese: 中國人民解放軍陸軍; pinyin:
Zhōngguó Rénmín Jiěfàngjūn Lùjūn) is the land-based service branch of the People's Liberation Army and the largest and oldest branch of the entire Chinese armed forces.
The PLAGF can trace its lineage from 1927; however, it was not officially established until 1948.

==
History ==
In February 1949 the existing large number of armies and divisions were regularised into up to seventy armies of three divisions each.
While some, such as the 1st Army, survived for over fifty years, a number were quickly amalgamated and disestablished in the early 1950s.
It appears that twenty per cent or even more of the seventy new armies were disestablished up to 1953; in 1952 alone, the 3rd, 4th, 10th, 17th, 18th, and 19th Armies were disbanded.
The PLA ground forces consist of conventionally armed main and regional units, which in 1987 made up over 70 percent of the PLA.
It provided a good conventional defense, but in 1987 had only limited offensive potential and was poorly equipped for nuclear, biological, or chemical warfare.
Main forces included about 35 group armies, comprising 118 infantry divisions, 13 armored divisions, and 33 artillery and antiaircraft artillery divisions, plus 71 independent regiments and 21 independent battalions of mostly support troops.
Regional forces consisted of 73 divisions of border defense and garrison troops plus 140 independent regiments.

Under the old system, a field army consisted of three partially motorized infantry divisions and two regiments of artillery and anti-aircraft artillery.
Each field army division had over 12,000 personnel in three infantry regiments, one artillery regiment, one armored regiment, and one anti-aircraft artillery battalion.
Organization was flexible, the higher echelons being free to tailor forces for combat around any number of infantry divisions.
At least theoretically, each division had its own armor and artillery — actual equipment levels were not revealed and probably varied — and the assets at army level and within the independent units could be apportioned as needed.

In 1987 the new, main-force group armies typically included 46,300 soldiers in up to four divisions, believed to include infantry, armor, artillery, air defense, airborne, and air support elements.
Although the new group armies were supposed to reflect a move to combined-arms operations, because of a lack of mechanization they continued to consist of infantry supported by armor, artillery, and other units.
The 13 armored divisions each had 3 regiments and 240 main battle tanks (MBT) but lacked adequate mechanized infantry support.
There was little evidence of the use of armored personnel carriers during the Sino-Vietnamese border conflict in 1979, and tanks were used as mobile artillery and as support for dismounted infantry.
Artillery forces emphasized towed guns, howitzers, and truck-mounted multiple rocket launchers.
In the 1980s some self-propelled artillery entered service, but the PLA also produced rocket launchers as a cheaper but not totally effective alternative to self-propelled guns.
There was a variety of construction equipment, mobile bridging, trucks, and prime movers.
A new multiple rocket launcher for scattering antitank mines appeared in 1979, but mine-laying and mine-clearing equipment remained scarce.

Regional forces consisted of full-time PLA troops organized as independent divisions for garrison missions.
Garrison divisions were static, artillery-heavy units deployed along the coastline and borders in areas of likely attack.
Regional forces were armed less heavily than their main-force counterparts, and they were involved in training the militia.
They were the PLA units commonly used to restore order during the Cultural Revolution.
When chairman Mao proclaimed the People's Republic of China on October 1, 1949, PLA ground force was 4.9 million-strong peasant army.
After some  time, demobilization of ill-trained and politically unreliable troops began, resulting in the reduction of army strength.

While the size of the PLA Ground Force has been reduced over the past few decades, technology-intensive elements such as special operations forces (SOF), army aviation (helicopters), surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), and electronic warfare units have all been rapidly expanded.
The latest operational doctrine of the PLA ground forces highlights the importance of information technology, electronic and information warfare, and long-range precision strikes in future warfare.
The older generation telephone/radio-based command, control, and communications (C3) systems are being replaced by an integrated battlefield information networks featuring local/wide-area networks (LAN/WAN), satellite communications, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based surveillance and reconnaissance systems, and mobile command and control centers.

==
Structure ==


===
Operational structure ===
There are 13 corps sized Army groups of China since the end of April 2017, divided among five Theater commands  — Eastern, Southern, Northern, Western and Central.
Within the Theater Commands, starting 2011, the divisions are being downsized into full brigades (Chinese:
旅; pinyin:
Lǚ) - armored, mechanized infantry, field artillery, air defense artillery, engineering and logistics brigades.
Many are now full combined arms brigades under these commands, which serve as a Chinese adaptation of the American brigade combat team concept.
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) currently attributes the PLA Ground Force with nine active armored divisions consisting of a number of armored brigades and 25 infantry divisions (mechanized or motorized), organized into a number of infantry brigades.
Dennis Blasko wrote in 2000 that the traditional structure of PLA divisions (armored and mechanized) consisted roughly of three regiments – tuan
(Chinese: 团; pinyin: Tuán) (later on brigades) – of the main service arm,
each of three battalions (Chinese: 营; pinyin: yíng) plus support units, a fourth regiment/brigade of infantry (in an armored division) or armor (in an infantry division), a field artillery regiment, an anti-aircraft defense regiment or battalion, and signals, engineer, reconnaissance, and chemical defense battalions or companies, plus combat service support units.
A typical PLAGF armored brigade has the brigade HQ, two to four tank battalions (124 main battle tanks) – each tank battalion has 3 tank companies (30 + 1 tank for the battalion commander), 1 mechanized infantry battalion (40 armored personnel carriers), 1 field artillery battalion (18 self-propelled howitzers) – 3 batteries of 6 guns each and 1 air defense artillery battalion plus a support battalion.
In a mechanized/motorized infantry brigade, the organization is 4 mechanized/motorized infantry battalions, each wth 40 APCs or infantry fighting vehicles, 1 tank battalion and the rest as in the armored brigades but with either self-propelled or towed guns, together with mortars, in the field artillery battalion.
There are 8 active artillery divisions consisting of a number of artillery brigades.
A typical PLAGF artillery brigade is organized with a brigade HQ, along with 4 field artillery battalions each with 18 guns in 3 batteries and 1 self-propelled anti-tank gun battalion (18 vehicles).Brigades are a relatively new formation for the PLAGF.
Introduced in the 1990s, the PLAGF plans to expand their number and rid itself of the massive, rigid formations of the Soviet model.
As a step towards modernizing its army, this new system allows for smaller, cross-service arm battle groups of battalion size within a brigade to operate independently, increasing the PLA's ability to respond to a rapidly changing battle situation.
By the 2000s, the PLAGF had yet to fully take advantage of this new formation, but has been taking steps to successfully integrate it in its force structure, since 2011 the PLAGF has been mostly organized into brigades.
In the 1980s, regional forces consisted of full-time PLA troops organized as independent divisions for garrison missions.
An example of such a formation was the 1st Garrison Division of Lanzhou Military Region.
Garrison divisions were static, artillery-heavy units deployed along the coastline and borders in areas of likely attack.
Regional forces were armed less heavily than their main-force counterparts, and they were involved in training the militia.
They were the PLA units commonly used to restore order during the Cultural Revolution.
===
Special operations forces ===
The PLA first became interested in modern special warfare in the mid-1980s when it was shifting from the "people's war" to "fighting a local war under hi-tech conditions.
"
The PLA planners believed that the next war would be a short, fast-pace conflict on the periphery rather than a total war on Chinese territories, and conventional infantry-orientated ground forces in their mass numbers could no longer meet the requirements.
It specialises in rapid reaction combat in a limited regional war under high-tech conditions, commando operations, counter-terrorism, and intelligence gathering.
The size of the Special Operations Forces is estimated at 7,000 ~ 14,000 troops.

== Equipment ==
In 1987 the PLA ground forces, which relied upon obsolescent but serviceable equipment, were most anxious to improve defenses against armored vehicles and aircraft.
Most equipment was produced from Soviet designs of the 1950s, but weapons were being incrementally upgraded, some with Western technology.
One example of upgraded, Soviet-design equipment was the Type 69 MBT, an improved version of the Type 59 MBT, itself based on the Soviet T-54.
The Type 69 had improved armor, a gun stabilizer, a fire control system including a laser rangefinder, infrared searchlights, and a 105 mm smooth-bore gun.
In 1987 the existence of a new, Type 80 MBT was revealed in the Western press.
The tank had a new chassis, a 105 mm gun, and a fire control system.
The PLA was believed to have atomic demolition munitions, and there were unconfirmed reports that it also had tactical nuclear weapons.
In any case, nuclear bombs and missiles in the Chinese inventory could be used in a theater role.
The PLA had a scarcity of antitank guided missiles, tactical surface-to-air missiles, and electronics to improve communications, fire control, and sensors.
China began production of the Soviet Sagger antitank missile in 1979 but lacked a more powerful, longer range, semiautomatic antitank guided missile.
The PLA required a mobile surface-to-air missile and an infantry shoulder-fired missile for use against helicopters and certain other aircraft.
The PLA Ground Forces continue to undergo significant modernisation and re-structuring to deal with potential threats and enhance their capabilities.
Front line troops such as special forces, marines and paratroopers are given priority in receiving modern weapon systems and equipment.
Other areas of improvement are its battlefield C4ISR capabilities, with the introduction of satellite communications, wireless networks, and digital radios, army commanders are now able to maintain constant communications with their front-line units while on the move.
The bulk of the ground forces have been regularly asked to operate under severe electronic countermeasures conditions in exercises.
Also a network-centric warfare capability connecting different combat, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance elements to form an integrated network is being developed.
Approximately 40% of the ground force divisions and brigades are either armoured or mechanized to deal with potential large scale conventional threats.
Mechanized infantry are soldiers carried by Infantry Fighting Vehicles or Armored Personnel Carriers.

A mechanized infantry squad consists of nine men; six armed with QBZ-95 assault rifles, one machine gunner and crewman, and one RPG gunner.

Non-mechanized infantry are soldiers moved by truck.

A non-mechanized squad consists of 12 men; the original nine men plus one extra machine gun crew and RPG.

Troops wear green-patterned camouflage uniforms, combat helmets, and flak jackets (
ballistic vests with ceramic plates are only issued in rare cases).

The dismounted squad has two walkie-talkie radios, while the vehicle has a longer range radio and intercom system.
The standard sidearm of PLA ground forces is the QSZ-92, with soldiers and special forces having it chambered in 9×19mm, and commanders and officers in 5.8×21mm
DAP92.
Vehicle crew are equipped with QBZ-95B short-barreled carbine.
The QCW-05 is a 5.8 mm submachine gun used by special forces and non-combat personnel.

Sharpshooting is provided by the QBU-88 marksman rifle.
The QJB-95 serves as the squad automatic weapon with its 75-round drum magazine.
The QJY-88 is a general-purpose machine gun that sometimes used in squads by a two-man crew.
At platoon and company levels, the QJZ-89 and PF-89 is used for fire support.
Also at those levels are the QLZ-87 35 mm automatic grenade launcher and the QLU-11 sniper grenade launcher.
At company and battalion levels, weapons include the QLZ-04 automatic grenade launcher and the PF-98 anti-tank rocket launcher.
The PP-87 82mm mortar is fielded at the battalion level.
Chinese infantry were equipped with Type 07 uniforms and camouflage since 2007.
In 2014, the cost to equip a single Chinese soldier is about 9,400 yuan (US$1,523).
The standard kit includes the helmet, tactical vest, gas mask, backpack, first-aid kit, Type 95 Rifle, woven belt, rain cap, camouflaged uniform, kettle, and combat boots.
However, regular infantrymen rarely use the issued body armor that stored in the armory.
Prior to 2015, only special operation detachment and soldiers in active mission were equipped with body armor.
The infantry equipments such as heavy body armor, personal radio, knee pads has been seen in standard kit in 2015 when PLA are deployed into high risk areas, as observed for units participating in UN Peacekeeping and counter-piracy operations.
PLA started to procure body armors for soldiers in large scale since March 2020, with 1.4 millions of body armor on order, which includes 930,000 units of plates for universal bulletproof vests and 467,000 units of plates for enhanced bulletproof vest.
As of 2017, the PLAGF fielded the largest active force of main battle tanks in the world, comprising roughly 3,390 third-generation, 400-500 second-generation, and 2,850 first-generation tanks.
First-generation tanks are ZTZ-59-I/II/D license-built variants of the T-54, remaining in service with a significant proportion of the PLA despite even the latest version (upgraded in the 1980s) being obsolete.
Second-generation tanks consist of the ZTZ-79
(though sometimes considered first-gen) and ZTZ-88/B; both had limited production runs in the 1980s and 1990s respectively and are now only in the inventory of units in northern and western China, with ZTZ-79s largely being exported.
The bulk of China's third-generation tank force is made up of some 2,500 ZTZ-96
/A/B tanks, as well as more than 600 ZTZ-99/
A tanks, though due to high cost they were produced in relatively small numbers and issued to strategic-reserve units near Beijing.
China also has designed the new ZTQ-15 light tank for service in high-altitude regions.

=== Equipment Summary ===
The PLAGF inventory maintains an array of military vehicles.
All figures below are provided by the Centre for Land Warfare Studies.

==
Relationship with other organizations ==
The People's Liberation Army Ground Force maintains close relationships with several paramilitary organizations within China, primarily the People's Armed Police (PAP) and the Militia (also known as the China Militia).
Both of these paramilitary organisations act as a reserve force for the PLAGF during a time of national emergency such as war or natural disaster.
The PAP consists of approximately 1.5 million personnel.
Their primary mission during peacetime is internal security and counter-terrorism.
The Militia is a mass force engaged in daily production under the leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC), and forms part of the Chinese armed forces.
Under the command of the military organs, it undertakes such jobs as war preparation services, security and defense operation tasks and assistance in maintaining social order and public security.
The Militia numbers some 3 million service men and women.

== See also ==
Ranks of the People's Liberation Army Ground Force
People's Armed Police
Militia (China)
Republic of China
Army


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to social science:
Social science – branch of science concerned with society and human behaviors.
==
Definition ==
Social science can be described as all of the following:

Branch of science – systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.

Major category of academic disciplines – an academic discipline is focused study in one academic field or profession.
A discipline incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with academic areas of study or areas of professional practice.
For example, the branches of science are commonly referred to as the scientific disciplines.
For instance, gravitation is strongly associated with the discipline of physics, and is considered to be part of that disciplinary knowledge.

==
Branches of social science ==
Anthropology - study of humans, past and present, that draws and builds upon knowledge from the social sciences and biological sciences, as well as the humanities and the natural sciences.

Anthropology of religion – study of religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures
Applied anthropology –
application of the method and theory of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems.

Archaeology – study of cultures via material remains and environmental data (Outline of archaeology)
Cultural anthropology – branch of anthropology focused on the study of cultural variation among humans, collecting data about the effect of global economic and political processes on local cultural realities.

Ethnobiology – scientific study of dynamic relationships between peoples, biota, and environments, from the distant past to the immediate present.

Ethnobotany – is the study of a region's plants and their practical uses through the traditional knowledge of a local culture and people.

Ethnography – systematic study of people and cultures.

Ethnology – branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the origins, distribution, technology, religion, language, and social structure of the ethnic, racial, and/or national divisions of humanity.

Ethnopoetics – method of recording text versions of oral poetry or narrative performances (i.e., verbal lore) that uses poetic lines, verses, and stanzas (instead of prose paragraphs) to capture the formal, poetic performance elements which would otherwise be lost in the written texts.

Evolutionary anthropology –
interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominids and non-hominid primates.

Experimental archaeology – Experimental archaeology employs a number of different methods, techniques, analyses, and approaches in order to generate and test hypotheses, based upon archaeological source material, like ancient structures or artifacts.

Historical archaeology – form of archaeology dealing with topics that are already attested in written records.

Linguistic anthropology – is the interdisciplinary study of how language influences social life.

Medical anthropology – interdisciplinary field which studies "human health and disease, health care systems, and biocultural adaptation".

Physical anthropology – study of the physical development of the human species.

Psychological anthropology – interdisciplinary subfield of anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental processes.

Zooarchaeology – study of faunal remains.

Anthrozoology – study of human-animal interaction.

The arts – refers to the theory and physical expression of creativity found in human culture and societies.

Culinary arts – are the cuisine arts of food preparation, cooking, and presentation of food, usually in the form of meals.

Language
Literature – refers to writing considered to be an art form or any single writing deemed to have artistic or intellectual value, often due to deploying language in ways that differ from ordinary usage.

Performing arts – refers to forms of art in which artists use their voices, bodies or inanimate object to convey artistic expression.

Visual arts – are art forms such as painting, drawing, printmaking, sculpture, ceramics, photography, video, filmmaking, design, crafts, and architecture.

Business studies – academic area that consists of many sub-areas pertaining to the social relationships that comprise the human economic systems.

Accountancy – the measurement, processing and communication of financial information about economic entities.

Finance – a field dealing with the study of investments.

Commerce
Management – the administration of an organization, whether it be a business, a not-for-profit organization, or government body.

Human resource management – a function in organizations designed to maximize employee performance in service of an employer's strategic objectives.

Marketing – the study and management of exchange relationships.

Organizational studies – the examination of how individuals construct organizational structures, processes, and practices and how these, in turn, shape social relations and create institutions that ultimately influence people.

Economics – details of this area and its own sub-areas are provided in this taxonomy below.

Economics – analyzes the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.
It aims to explain how economies work and how economic agents interact.

Macroeconomics – branch of economics dealing with the performance, structure, behavior, and decision-making of the whole economy
Microeconomics – branch of economics that studies the behavior of individual households and firms in making decisions on the allocation of limited resources
Behavioural economics – Behavioral economics and the related field, behavioral finance, study the effects of social, cognitive and emotional factors on the economic decisions of individuals and institutions and the consequences for market prices, returns and the resource allocation.

Bioeconomics – applies the laws of thermodynamics to economic theory
Comparative economics – comparative study of different systems of economic organization, such as capitalism, socialism, feudalism and the mixed economy.

Socialist economics – economic theories and practices of hypothetical and existing socialist economic systems.

Development economics – branch of economics which deals with economic aspects of the development process in low-income countries.

Ecological economics – an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary field that aims to address the interdependence and coevolution of human economies and natural ecosystems.

Economic geography – study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of economic activities across the world.

Economic history – study of economies or economic phenomena in the past.

Economic sociology – studies both the social effects and the social causes of various economic phenomena.

Energy economics – broad scientific subject area which includes topics related to supply and use of energy in societies
Entrepreneurial Economics – study of the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship within the economy.

Environmental economics – subfield of economics concerned with environmental issues.

Evolutionary economics – part of mainstream economics as well as heterodox school of economic thought that is inspired by evolutionary biology.

Financial economics – branch of economics concerned with "the allocation and deployment of economic resources, both spatially and across time, in an uncertain environment".

Heterodox economics – approaches or to schools of economic thought that are considered outside of "mainstream economics" and sometimes contrasted by expositors with neoclassical economics.

Green economics – one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks
Feminist economics – diverse area of economic inquiry that highlights the androcentric biases of traditional economics through critical examinations of economic methodology, epistemology, history and empirical study.

Islamic economics – body of Islamic studies literature that "identifies and promotes an economic order that conforms to Islamic scripture and traditions,"
and in the economic world an interest-free Islamic banking system, grounded in Sharia's condemnation of interest (riba).

Industrial organization – field of economics that builds on the theory of the firm in examining the structure of, and boundaries between, firms and markets.

International economics – study of the effects upon economic activity of international differences in productive resources and consumer preferences and the institutions that affect them.

Institutional economics – study of the role of the evolutionary process and the role of institutions in shaping economic behaviour.

Labor economics – seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for labour.

Law and Economics – application of economic methods to analysis of law.

Managerial economics – "application of economic concepts and economic analysis to the problems of formulating rational managerial decisions"
Monetary economics – branch of economics that historically prefigured and remains integrally linked to macroeconomics.

Neoclassical economics – focuses on goods, outputs, and income distributions in markets through supply and demand.

Public finance – study of the role of the government in the economy.

Public economics – study of a government policy through the lens of economic efficiency and equity.

Real estate economics – application of economic techniques to real estate markets.

Resource economics – study of supply, demand, and allocation of the Earth's natural resources.

Welfare economics – branch of economics that uses microeconomic techniques to evaluate economic well-being, especially relative to competitive general equilibrium within an economy as to economic efficiency and the resulting income distribution associated with it.

Political economy – study of the production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.

Socioeconomics – considers behavioral interactions of individuals and groups through social capital and social "markets" (not excluding for example, sorting by marriage) and the formation of social norms.

Transport economics – branch of economics that deals with the allocation of resources within the transport sector and has strong linkages with civil engineering.

Economic methodology – study of methods, especially the scientific method, in relation to economics, including principles underlying economic reasoning.

Computational economics – research discipline at the interface between computer science and economic and management science.

Econometrics – application of mathematics and statistical methods to economic data
Mathematical economics – application of mathematical methods to represent economic theories and analyze problems posed in economics.

Economic statistics – topic in applied statistics that concerns the collection, processing, compilation, dissemination, and analysis of economic data.

Time series – sequence of data points, measured typically at successive time instants spaced at uniform time intervals.

Experimental economics – application of experimental methods to study economic questions.

Cognitive Science –
interdisciplinary scientific study of the mind and its processes.
It examines what cognition is, what it does and how it works.

Cultural studies – academic field grounded in critical theory and literary criticism.

Demography – statistical study of human populations and sub-populations.

Development studies – multidisciplinary branch of social science which addresses issues of concern to developing countries.
Education –  in the general sense is any act or experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual.
In its technical sense, education is the process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another.

Environmental studies – interdisciplinary academic field which systematically studies human interaction with the environment.

Folkloristics – the study of tradition as a social force within complex societies.

Gender and sexuality studies – field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis.

Geography – study of the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth.

Physical geography – branch of the social sciences that studies physical features on the Earth's surface, water, the atmosphere and biodiversity on the Earth.

Geomorphology – branch of physical geography that studies the Earth and its landforms.

Hydrology – study of water on the Earth's surface and in its atmosphere.

Glaciology – study of ice sheets and glaciers on the Earth's surface.

Biogeography – study of distribution of living organisms on the Earth.

Climatology – the study of climate.

Meteorology – the study of weather.

Soil geography – the study of soil.

Oceanography – the study of oceans.

Coastal geography – study of coasts.

Landscape ecology – study of effects of ecological process on the Earth.

Palaeogeography – studies distribution of continents and oceans over time.

Environmental geography – studies the interaction between humans and the physical environment.

Cartography – study and practice of making maps or globes.

Human geography – branch of the social sciences that studies the world, its people, communities, and cultures with an emphasis on relations of and across space and place.

Critical geography – takes a critical theory (Frankfurt School) approach to the study and analysis of geography.

Cultural geography – study of cultural products and norms and their variations across and relations to spaces and places.

Feminist geography – approach in human geography which applies the theories, methods and critiques of feminism to the study of the human environment, society and geographical space.

Economic geography – study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of economic activities across the world.

Development geography – branch of geography with reference to the standard of living and quality of life of its human inhabitants.

Historical geography – study of the human, physical, fictional, theoretical, and "real" geographies of the past.

Time geography –
Political geography & geopolitics – field of human geography that is concerned with the study of both the spatially uneven outcomes of political processes and the ways in which political processes are themselves affected by spatial structures.

Marxist geography – strand of critical geography that uses the theories and philosophy of Marxism to examine the spatial relations of human geography.

Military geography – sub-field of geography that is used by, not only the military, but also academics and politicians to understand the geopolitical sphere through the militaristic lens.

Strategic geography – concerned with the control of, or access to, spatial areas that affect the security and prosperity of nations.

Population geography – study of the ways in which spatial variations in the distribution, composition, migration, and growth of populations are related to the nature of places.

Social geography – branch of human geography that is most closely related to social theory in general and sociology in particular, dealing with the relation of social phenomena and its spatial components.

Behavioral geography – approach to human geography that examines human behavior using a disaggregate approach.

Children's geographies – area of study within human geography and Childhood Studies which involves researching the places and spaces of children's lives.

Health geography – application of geographical information, perspectives, and methods to the study of health, disease, and health care.

Tourism geography – study of travel and tourism, as an industry and as a social and cultural activity.

Urban geography – study of areas which have a high concentration of buildings and infrastructure.

Environmental geography – branch of geography that describes the spatial aspects of interactions between humans and the natural world.

Regional geography – study of world regions.

Gerontology – study of the social, psychological and biological aspects of aging.

History – discovery, collection, organization, and presentation of information about past events.
History can also mean the period of time after writing was invented.

This category includes many sub-domains of history such as, art history, diplomatic history, history of science, economic history, environmental history, military history, political history, urban history, women's history and many others.

Industrial relations – multidisciplinary field that studies the employment relationship.

Information science –  interdisciplinary field primarily concerned with the analysis, collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and dissemination of information.

International studies – study of the major political, economic, social, cultural and sacral issues that dominate the international agenda
Law – set of rules and principles (laws) by which a society is governed, through enforcement by governmental authorities.

Legal management – social sciences discipline that is designed for students interested in the study of State and its elements, Law, Law Practice, Legal Research and Jurisprudence, legal Philosophy, Criminal Justice, Governance, Government structure, Political history and theories, Business Organization and Management, Entrepreneurship, Public Administration and Human Resource Development.

Paralegal studies – social sciences discipline that is designed for students interested in the study of State and its elements, Law, Law Practice, Legal Research and Jurisprudence, legal Philosophy, Criminal Justice, Governance, Government structure, Political history and theories, Business Organization and Management, Entrepreneurship, Public Administration and Human Resource Development.

Library science – study of issues related to libraries and the information fields.

Linguistics – scientific study of natural language.

Anthropological linguistics – study of the relations between language and culture and the relations between human biology, cognition and language.

Applied linguistics – interdisciplinary field of study that identifies, investigates, and offers solutions to language-related real-life problems.

Biolinguistics – study of the biology and evolution of language.

Clinical linguistics and speech and language pathology – sub-discipline of linguistics which involves the application of linguistic theory to the field of Speech-Language Pathology.

Cognitive linguistics – branch of linguistics that interprets language in terms of the concepts, sometimes universal, sometimes specific to a particular tongue, which underlie its forms.

Comparative linguistics – branch of historical linguistics that is concerned with comparing languages to establish their historical relatedness.

Computational linguistics – interdisciplinary field dealing with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective.

Developmental linguistics – study of the development of linguistic ability in an individual, particularly the acquisition of language in childhood.

language acquisition –
the process by which humans acquire the capacity to perceive and comprehend language, as well as to produce and use words to communicate.

Dialectology
– scientific study of linguistic dialect, a sub-field of sociolinguistics.

dialectometry – the study of high levels of structure in geographical dialect networks.

Discourse analysis – general term for a number of approaches to analyzing use of written, oral or sign language or any significant semiotic event.

Etymology – study of the history of words, their origins, and
how their form and meaning have changed over time.

Evolutionary linguistics – the scientific study of both the origins and development of language as well as the cultural evolution of languages.

Forensic linguistics – application of linguistic knowledge, methods and insights to the forensic context of law, language, crime investigation, trial, and judicial procedure.

Geolinguistics – branch of human geography that studies the geographic distribution of language or its constituent elements.

Historical linguistics – study of language change.

Language – is a structured means of communication
Lexis – total vocabulary or lexicon having items of lexical, rather than grammatical,
meaning.

Linguistic typology – subfield of linguistics that studies and classifies languages according to their structural features.

Literature – refers to writing considered to be an art form or any single writing deemed to have artistic or intellectual value, often due to deploying language in ways that differ from ordinary usage.

Morphology – identification, analysis and description of the structure of a given language's morphemes and other linguistic units, such as words, affixes, parts of speech, intonation/stress, or implied context (words in a lexicon are the subject matter of lexicology).

Neurolinguistics – study of the neural mechanisms in the human brain that control the comprehension, production, and acquisition of language.

Philology – study of language in written historical sources; it is a combination of literary studies, history and linguistics.

Phonetics – branch of linguistics that comprises the study of the sounds of human speech, or the equivalent aspects of sign.

Phonology – branch of linguistics concerned with the systematic organization of sounds in languages.

Phraseology – study of set or fixed expressions, such as idioms, phrasal verbs, and other types of multi-word lexical units (often collectively referred to as phrasemes), in which the component parts of the expression take on a meaning more specific than or otherwise not predictable from the sum of their meanings when used independently.

Pragmatics – subfield of linguistics which studies the ways in which context contributes to meaning.

Psycholinguistics – study of the psychological and neurobiological factors that enable humans to acquire, use, comprehend and produce language.

Sociolinguistics – descriptive study of the effect of any and all aspects of society, including cultural norms, expectations, and context, on the way language is used, and the effects of language use on society.

Speech science –
Speech science refers to the study of production, transmission and perception of speech.
Speech science involves anatomy, in particular the anatomy of the oro-facial region and neuroanatomy, physiology, and acoustics.

Stylistics – study and interpretation of texts from a linguistic perspective.

Syntax – "the study of the principles and processes by which sentences are constructed in particular languages."

Semantics – study of meaning.

Writing systems and orthography – representation of language in a textual medium through the use of a set of signs or symbols (known as a writing system).

Mathematics-is from formal sciences, yet exactly how it does in formal science, it also provides support (in form of models, theories,patterns,etc.)for the development of social science (in variety of ways) and it’s various other branches.
like in Sociology, Economics, Finance, Management, Accountability, Anthropology, communication, business-studies, Industrial design, Law, Political science ,etc.
(
including statistics ,Theoretical linguistics, Philosophy also);(the other fields from formal science include decision theory, game theory, theoretical Philosophy ,etc.)

Management– in addition to the administration of an organization, it is the act of getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Media studies – academic discipline and field of study that deals with the content, history and effects of various media; in particular, the 'mass media'.

Communication studies – academic field that deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning.

Philosophy – study of general and fundamental problems concerning matters such as existence, knowledge, values, reason, mind, and language.
Academic philosophy is considered a science by some.
Others say that philosophy is not a science
but it is instead a precursor of it.
The role of philosophy is also a philosophical question.
Philosophy of language –  is concerned with four central problems: the nature of meaning, language use, language cognition, and the relationship between language and reality.

Philosophy of information – (PI) is the area of research that studies conceptual issues arising at the intersection of computer science, information science, information technology, and philosophy.

Political philosophy – is the study of topics such as politics, liberty, justice, property, rights, law, and the enforcement of a legal code by authority.

Epistemology – study of how we know what we know; study of the nature and scope of knowledge.

Ethics – major branch of philosophy, encompassing right conduct and good life.
It is significantly broader than the common conception of analyzing right and wrong.

Logic –  formal science of using reason
Philosophy of mind – branch of philosophy that studies the nature of the mind, mental events, mental functions, mental properties, consciousness and their relationship to the physical body, particularly the brain.

Philosophy of science – questions the assumptions, foundations, methods and implications of science; questions the use and merit of science; sometimes overlaps metaphysics and epistemology by questioning whether scientific results are actually a study of truth.

Social philosophy – is the study of questions about social behavior and interpretations of society and social institutions in terms of ethical values rather than empirical relations.

Aesthetics –  is a branch of philosophy dealing with the nature of art, beauty, and taste, with the creation and appreciation of beauty.

Philosophy of mathematics –  is the branch of philosophy that studies the philosophical assumptions, foundations, and implications of mathematics.
The aim of the philosophy of mathematics is to provide an account of the nature and methodology of mathematics and to understand the place of mathematics in people's lives.

Philosophy of education –  Philosophy of education can refer to either the academic field of applied philosophy or to one of any educational philosophies that promote a specific type or vision of education,
and/or which examine the definition, goals and meaning of education.

Planning
Environmental planning – is the process of facilitating decision making to carry out land development with the consideration given to the natural environment, social, political, economic and governance factors and provides a holistic framework to achieve sustainable outcomes.
A major goal of environmental planning is to create sustainable communities, which aim to conserve and protect undeveloped land.

Urban planning – studies the development and use of land, protection and use of the environment, public welfare, and the design of the urban environment, including air, water, and the infrastructure passing into and out of urban areas, such as transportation, communications, and distribution networks.

Regional planning – deals with the efficient placement of land-use activities, infrastructure, and settlement growth across a larger area of land than an individual city or town.

Political science – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

Civics – study of the theoretical and practical aspects of citizenship, its rights and duties; the duties of citizens to each other as members of a political body and to the government.

Comparative politics – field and a method used in political science, characterized by an empirical approach based on the comparative method.

Game theory – study of strategic decision making.

Geopolitics – theory that describes the relation between politics and territory whether on local or international scale.

political geography –  field of human geography that is concerned with the study of both the spatially uneven outcomes of political processes and the ways in which political processes are themselves affected by spatial structures.

Ideology – set of ideas that constitute one's goals, expectations, and actions.

Political economy – Political economy originally was the term for studying production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.
Political economy originated in moral philosophy.
It developed in the 18th century as the study of the economies of states, polities, hence political economy.

Political psychology, bureaucratic, administrative and judicial behaviour –
Psephology – branch of political science which deals with the study and scientific analysis of elections.

Voting systems – methods by which voters make a choice between options, often in an election or on a policy referendum.

Public administration – houses the implementation of government policy and an academic discipline that studies this implementation and that prepares civil servants for this work.

Public policy – generally the principled guide to action taken by the administrative or executive branches of the state with regard to a class of issues in a manner consistent with law and institutional customs.

Public health – the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting human health through organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public and private, communities and individuals
Local government studies – form of public administration which in a majority of contexts, exists as the lowest tier of administration within the a given state.

International politics – study of relationships between countries, including the roles of states, inter-governmental organizations (IGOs), international nongovernmental organizations (INGOs), non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and multinational corporations (MNCs).

International relations theory – study of international relations from a theoretical perspective; it attempts to provide a conceptual framework upon which international relations can be analyzed.

Psychology –
science of behavior and mental processes
Applied psychology – use of psychological principles and theories to overcome problems in other areas, such as mental health, business management, education, health, product design, ergonomics, and law.

Psychological testing – field characterized by the use of samples of behavior in order to assess psychological construct(s), such as cognitive and emotional functioning, about a given individual.

Clinical psychology – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Community psychology – Sense of community Social capital
Consumer behaviour – study of when, why
, how, and where people do or do not buy a product.

Counseling psychology – psychological specialty that encompasses research and applied work in several broad domains: counseling process and outcome; supervision and training; career development and counseling; and prevention and health.

Educational psychology – study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations.

Forensic psychology – intersection between psychology and the courtroom—criminal, civil, family and Federal.

Health psychology – concerned with understanding how biological, psychological, environmental, and cultural factors are involved in physical health and illness.

Industrial and organizational psychology
– scientific study of employees, workplaces, and organizations.

Legal psychology – involves empirical, psychological research of the law, legal institutions, and people who come into contact with the law.

Media psychology – seeks an understanding of how people perceive, interpret, use, and respond to a media-rich world.

Military psychology – research, design and application of psychological theories and experimentation data towards understanding, predicting and countering behaviours either in friendly or enemy forces or civilian population that may be undesirable, threatening or potentially dangerous to the conduct of military operations.

Occupational health psychology – concerned with the psychosocial characteristics of workplaces that contribute to the development of health-related problems in people who work.

Pastoral psychology – application of psychological methods and interpretive frameworks to religious traditions, as well as to both religious and irreligious individuals.

Political psychology – interdisciplinary academic field dedicated to understanding political science, politicians and political behavior through the use of psychological theories.

Psychometrics – field of study concerned with the theory and technique of psychological measurement, which includes the measurement of knowledge, abilities, attitudes, personality traits, and educational measurement.

School psychology – field that applies principles of clinical psychology and educational psychology to the diagnosis and treatment of children's and adolescents' behavioral and learning problems.

Sport psychology – interdisciplinary science that draws on knowledge from the fields of Kinesiology and Psychology.

Systems psychology – branch of applied psychology that studies human behaviour and experience in complex systems.

Traffic psychology – study of the behavior of road users and the psychological processes underlying that behavior
(Rothengatter, 1997, 223) as well as to the relationship between behavior and accidents
Behavior analysis – philosophy of psychology based on the proposition that all things that organisms do can and should be regarded as behaviors, and that psychological disorders are best treated by altering behavior patterns or modifying the environment.

Biopsychology – application of the principles of biology (in particular neurobiology), to the study of physiological, genetic, and developmental mechanisms of behavior in human and non-human animals.

Cognitive psychology – subdiscipline of psychology exploring internal mental processes.

Clinical psychology – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Cultural psychology – field of psychology which assumes the idea that culture and mind are inseparable, and that psychological theories grounded in one culture are likely to be limited in applicability when applied to a different culture.

Developmental psychology – scientific study of systematic psychological changes, emotional changes, and perception changes that occur in human beings over the course of their life span.

Educational psychology – study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations.

Evolutionary psychology – approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological traits such as memory, perception, and language from a modern evolutionary perspective.

Experimental psychology – application of experimental methods to the study of behavior and the processes that underlie it.

Forensic psychology – intersection between psychology and the courtroom—criminal, civil, family and Federal.

Health psychology – concerned with understanding how biological, psychological, environmental, and cultural factors are involved in physical health and illness.

Humanistic psychology – psychological perspective which rose to prominence in the mid-20th century in the context of the tertiary sector beginning to produce in the most developed countries in the world more than the secondary sector was producing, for the first time in human history demanding creativity and new understanding of human capital.

Industrial and organizational psychology
– scientific study of employees, workplaces, and organizations.

Music therapy – allied health profession and one of the expressive therapies, consisting of an interpersonal process in which a trained music therapist uses music to help clients to improve or maintain their health.

Neuropsychology – studies the structure and function of the brain as they relate to specific psychological processes and behaviors.

Personality psychology – branch of psychology that studies personality and individual differences.

Psychometrics – field of study concerned with the theory and technique of psychological measurement, which includes the measurement of knowledge, abilities, attitudes, personality traits, and educational measurement.

Psychology of religion – application of psychological methods and interpretive frameworks to religious traditions, as well as to both religious and irreligious individuals.

Psychophysics – quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.

Sensation and perception psychology –
Public administration – houses the implementation of government policy and an academic discipline that studies this implementation and that prepares civil servants for this work.

Religious studies – is an academic field devoted to research into religion beliefs, behaviors, and institutions.

Science and technology studies – the study of how society, politics, and culture affect scientific research and technological innovation, and how these, in turn, affect society, politics and culture.

Social work – professional and academic discipline that seeks to improve the quality of life and wellbeing of an individual, group, or community by intervening through research, policy, community organizing, direct practice, and teaching on behalf of those afflicted with poverty or any real or perceived social injustices and violations of their human rights.

Sociology – studies society using various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis to understand human social activity, from the micro level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and social structure.

Criminology – study of the nature, extent, causes, and control of criminal behavior in both the individual and in society.

Demography – statistical study of human populations and sub-populations.

Urban and rural sociology - the analysis of social life in metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas.

Sustainable development – the process of meeting human development goals while sustaining the ability of natural systems to continue to provide the natural resources and natural system services upon which the economy of human society depends.

Sustainable agriculture – farming in sustainable ways based on an understanding of ecosystem services, the study of relationships between organisms and their environment.

Sustainability studies – focuses on the interdisciplinary perspective of the sustainability concept.
Programs include instruction in sustainable development, geography, environmental policies, ethics, ecology, landscape architecture, city and regional planning, economics, natural resources, sociology, and anthropology, many of which are considered social sciences in their own right.

==
History of social science ==
History of the social sciences
History of anthropology
History of archaeology
History of area studies
History of communication studies
History of cultural studies
History of development studies
History of economics
History of education
History of environmental studies
History of gender studies
History of geography
History of human geography
History of history
History of information science
History of journalism
History of law
History of library science
History of linguistics
History of management
History of political science
History of international studies
History of international relations
History of political economy
History of public administration
History of psychology
History of social psychology
History of social work
History of sociology
History of criminal justice
History of demography
History of sustainability
==
Education and degrees ==
Bachelor of
Social Science
Bachelor of Science
Bachelor of Arts
Bachelor of Economics


==
General social science concepts ==
Ethical research in social science
Open and closed systems in social scienceAshishmedia


==
Social science organizations ==


==
Social science publications ==
List of social science journals


==
Social scientists ==
List of anthropologists
List of business theorists
List of developmental psychologists
List of economists
List of socialist economists
List of educational psychologists
List of geographers
List of psychologists
List of political scientists
List of social psychologists
List of sociologists
List of urban planners
List of urban theorists


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science
National Nothing Day


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Social Science Virtual Library
UC Berkeley Experimental Social Science Laboratory
Intute: Social Sciences (UK)
History of Social Science
On the Social Sciences Critical Essays
praxeology as the method of the social sciences
in defense of extreme apriorism
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act or Federal Assault Weapons Ban (AWB) was a subsection of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, a United States federal law which included a prohibition on the manufacture for civilian use of certain semi-automatic firearms that were defined as assault weapons as well as certain ammunition magazines that were defined as "large capacity."

The 10-year ban was passed by the US Congress on September 13, 1994, following a close 52–48 vote in the US Senate, and was signed into law by US President Bill Clinton on the same day.
The ban applied only to weapons manufactured after the date of the ban's enactment.
It expired on September 13, 2004, in accordance with its sunset provision.
Several constitutional challenges were filed against provisions of the ban, but all were rejected by the courts.
There were multiple attempts to renew the ban, but none succeeded.

Studies have shown the ban had little effect in overall criminal activity, firearm homicides, and the lethality of gun crimes.
There is tentative evidence that it slightly decreases the frequency of mass shootings.

==
Background ==
Efforts to create restrictions on assault weapons at the federal government level intensified in 1989 after 34 children and a teacher were shot and five children killed in Stockton, California with a semi-automatic Kalashnikov pattern rifle.
The Luby's shooting in October 1991, which left 23 people dead and 27 wounded, was another factor.
The July 1993 101 California Street shooting also contributed to passage of the ban.
The shooter killed eight people and wounded six.
Two of the three firearms he used were TEC-9 semi-automatic handguns with Hell-Fire triggers.
The ban tried to address public concerns about mass shootings by restricting firearms that met the criteria for what it defined as a "semiautomatic assault weapon," as well as magazines that met the criteria for what it defined as a "large capacity ammunition feeding device.
"In
November 1993, the proposed legislation passed the U.S. Senate.
The bill's author, Dianne Feinstein (D-CA) and other advocates said that it was a weakened version of the original proposal.
In May 1994, former presidents Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, and Ronald Reagan, wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives in support of banning "semi-automatic assault guns.
"
They cited a 1993 CNN/USA Today/Gallup Poll that found 77 percent of Americans supported a ban on the manufacture, sale, and possession of such weapons.
US Representative Jack Brooks (D-TX), then chair of the House Judiciary Committee, tried unsuccessfully to remove the assault weapons ban section from the crime bill.
The National Rifle Association (NRA) opposed the ban.
In November 1993, NRA spokesman Bill McIntyre said that assault weapons "are used in only 1 percent of all crimes.
"
The low usage statistic was supported in a 1999 Department of Justice brief.

The legislation passed in September 1994 with the assault weapon ban section expiring in 2004 due to its sunset provision.
==
Provisions ==
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Act was enacted as part of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994.
The prohibitions expired on September 13, 2004.The Act prohibited the manufacture, transfer, or possession of "semiautomatic assault weapons," as defined by the Act. "
Weapons banned were identified either by specific make or model (including copies or duplicates thereof, in any caliber), or by specific characteristics that slightly varied according to whether the weapon was a pistol, rifle, or shotgun" (see below).
The Act also prohibited the manufacture of "large capacity ammunition feeding devices" (LCAFDs) except for sale to government, law enforcement or military, though magazines made before the effective date ("pre-ban" magazines) were legal to possess & transfer.
An LCAFD was defined as "any magazine, belt, drum, feed strip, or similar device manufactured after the date [of the act] that has the capacity of, or that can be readily restored or converted to accept, more than 10 rounds of ammunition.
"The
Act included a number of exemptions and exclusions from its prohibitions:

The Act included a "grandfather clause" to allow for possession and transfer of weapons and ammunition that "were otherwise lawfully possessed on the date of enactment."

The Act exempted some 650 firearm types or models (including their copies and duplicates) which would be considered manufactured in October 1993.
The list included the Ruger Mini-14 Auto Loading Rifle without side folding stock, Ruger Mini Thirty Rifle, Iver Johnson M-1 Carbine, Marlin Model 9 Camp Carbine, Marlin Model 45 Carbine, and others.
The complete list is in section 110106,
Appendix A to section 922 of Title 18.
This list was non-exhaustive.

The Act "also exempted any firearm that (1) is manually operated by bolt, pump, lever, or slide action; (2) has been rendered permanently inoperable; or (3) is an antique firearm.
"

The Act "also did not apply to any semiautomatic rifle that cannot accept a detachable magazine that holds more than ten rounds of ammunition or semiautomatic shotguns that cannot hold more than five rounds of ammunition in a fixed or detachable magazine."
Tubular magazine fed rimfire guns were exempted regardless of tubular magazine capacity.

The Act provided an exemption for the use of "semiautomatic assault weapons and LCAFDs to be manufactured for, transferred to, and possessed by law enforcement and for authorized testing or experimentation purposes" as well as transfers for federal-security purposes under the Atomic Energy Act and "possession by retired law enforcement officers who are not otherwise a prohibited possessor under law.
"In
1989
, the George H. W. Bush administration had banned the importation of foreign-made, semiautomatic rifles deemed not to have "a legitimate sporting use.
"
It did not affect similar but domestically-manufactured rifles.
(
The Gun Control Act of 1968 gives discretion to the Attorney General of the United States to choose whether to "authorize a firearm or ammunition to be imported or brought into the United States," under what is known as "the sporting purposes test.")
Following the enactment of the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, the ATF determined that "certain semiautomatic assault rifles could no longer be imported even though they were permitted to be imported under the 1989 'sporting purposes test' because they had been modified to remove all of their military features other than the ability to accept a detachable magazine" and so in April 1998, it "prohibited the importation of 56 such rifles, determining that they did not meet the 'sporting purposes test.'"
===
Definition of assault weapon ===
Under the Assault Weapons Ban of 1994, the definition of "assault weapon" included specific semi-automatic firearm models by name, and other semi-automatic firearms that possessed two or more from a set certain features:

Semi-automatic rifles able to accept detachable magazines and has two or more of the following:
Folding or telescoping stock
Pistol grip
Bayonet mount
Flash hider or threaded barrel designed to accommodate one
Grenade launcher
Semi-automatic pistols with detachable magazines and two or more of the following:
Magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip
Threaded barrel to attach barrel extender, flash suppressor, handgrip, or suppressor
Barrel shroud safety feature that prevents burns to the operator
A manufactured weight of 50 ounces (1.41kg) or more when the pistol is unloaded
A semi-automatic version of a fully automatic firearm.

Semi-automatic shotguns with two or more of the following:
Folding or telescoping stock
Pistol grip
Detachable magazine.
The law also categorically banned the following makes and models of semi-automatic firearms and any copies or duplicates of them, in any caliber:


===
Cosmetic features ===
Gun control advocates and gun rights advocates have referred to at least some of the features outlined in the federal Assault Weapon Ban of 1994 as cosmetic.
The NRA Institute for Legislative Action and the Violence Policy Center both used the term in publications that were released by them in September 2004, when the ban expired.
In May 2012, the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence said that "the inclusion in the list of features that were purely cosmetic in nature created a loophole that allowed manufacturers to successfully circumvent the law by making minor modifications to the weapons they already produced.
"
The term was repeated in several stories after the 2012 Aurora, Colorado shooting and the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.
Senator Marco Rubio cited that issue during a town hall forum, responding to questions from survivors of the 2018 Stoneman-Douglas High School shooting in Parkland, Florida.
==
Legal challenges ==
Several constitutional challenges were filed against provisions of the ban, but all were rejected by the courts.
There were multiple attempts to renew the ban, but none succeeded.

A February 2013 Congressional Research Service (CRS) report to Congress said that the "Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 was unsuccessfully challenged as violating several constitutional provisions" but that challenges to three constitutional provisions were easily dismissed.
The ban did not make up an impermissible bill of attainder.
It was not unconstitutionally vague.
Also, it was ruled to be compatible with the Ninth Amendment by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.
Challenges to two other provisions took more time to decide.
In evaluating challenges to the ban under the Commerce Clause, the court first evaluated Congress's authority to regulate under the clause and then analyzed the ban's prohibitions on manufacture, transfer, and possession.
The court held that "it is not even arguable that the manufacture and transfer of 'semiautomatic assault weapons' for a national market cannot be regulated as activity substantially affecting interstate commerce."
It also held that the "purpose of the ban on possession has an 'evident commercial nexus'.
"The
law was also challenged under the Equal Protection Clause.
It was argued that it banned some semi-automatic weapons that were functional equivalents of exempted semi-automatic weapons and
that to do so, based upon a mix of other characteristics, served no legitimate governmental interest.
The reviewing court held that it was "entirely rational for Congress... to choose to ban those weapons commonly used for criminal purposes and to exempt those weapons commonly used for recreational purposes.
"
It also found that each characteristic served to make the weapon "potentially more dangerous" and were not "commonly used on weapons designed solely for hunting.
"The
Federal Assault Weapons Ban was never directly challenged under the Second Amendment.
Since its 2004 expiration, there has been debate on how the ban would fare in light of cases decided in following years, especially District of Columbia v. Heller (2008).

== Effects ==


===
Overall crime ===
A 2017 review found that the ban did not have a significant effect on firearm homicides.
A 2014 study found no impacts on homicide rates with an assault weapon ban.
A 2014 book published by Oxford University Press noted that "There is no compelling evidence that [the ban] saved lives.
"A 2013 study showed that the expiration of the FAWB in 2004 "led to immediate violence increases within areas of Mexico located close to American states where sales of assault weapons became legal.
The estimated effects are sizable...
the additional homicides stemming from the FAWB expiration represent 21% of all homicides in these municipalities during 2005 and
2006."In 2013, Christopher S. Koper, a criminology scholar, reviewed the literature on the ban's effects and concluded that its effects on crimes committed with assault weapons were mixed due to its various loopholes.
He stated that the ban did not seem to affect gun crime rates, and suggested that it might have been able to reduce shootings if it had been renewed in 2004.In 2004, a research report commissioned by the National Institute of Justice found that if the ban was renewed, the effects on gun violence would likely be small and perhaps too small for reliable measurement, because rifles in general, including rifles referred to as "assault rifles" or "assault weapons," are rarely used in gun crimes.
That study, by the Jerry Lee Center of Criminology, University of Pennsylvania, found no significant evidence that either the assault weapons ban or the ban on magazines holding more than 10 rounds had reduced gun murders.
The report found that the share of gun crimes involving assault weapons had declined by 17 to 72 percent in the studied localities.
The authors reported that "there has been no discernible reduction in the lethality and injuriousness of gun violence, based on indicators like the percentage of gun crimes resulting in death or the share of gunfire incidents resulting in injury."
The report also concluded that it was "premature to make definitive assessments of the ban's impact on gun crime," since millions of assault weapons and large-capacity magazines manufactured prior to the ban had been exempted and would thus be in circulation for years following the ban's implementation.
In 2003, the Task Force on Community Preventive Services, an independent, non-federal task force, examined an assortment of firearms laws, including the AWB, and found "insufficient evidence to determine the effectiveness of any of the firearms laws reviewed for preventing violence.
"
A review of firearms research from 2001 by the National Research Council "did not reveal any clear impacts on gun violence outcomes.
"
The committee noted that guns were relatively rarely used criminally before the ban and that its maximum potential effect on gun violence outcomes would likely be very small.
In relation to a 2001 study the National Research Council in 2005, stated "evaluation of the short-term effects of the 1994 federal assault weapons ban did not reveal any clear impacts on gun violence outcomes.
"Research
published by John Lott in 1998 found no impact of these bans on violent crime rates.
Koper, Woods, and Roth studies focus on gun murders, while Lott's look at murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assaults.
Unlike their work, Lott's research accounted for state assault weapon bans and twelve other different types of gun control laws.

===
Mass shootings ===
A 2019 DiMaggio et al.
study looked at mass shooting data for 1981 to 2017 and found that mass-shooting fatalities were 70% less likely to occur during the 1994 to 2004 federal ban period, and that the ban was associated with a 0.1% reduction in total firearm homicide fatalities due to the reduction in mass-shootings' contribution to total homicides.
A 2018 Rand review found two studies that looked at the impact of assault weapons laws, including the 1994 federal law, on mass shootings that controlled for other factors which affected mass shootings.
The results were inconclusive with the 2015 Gius study showing an impact while the other study did not.
A study by Mark Gius, professor of economics at Quinnipiac University, studied the law's impact on public mass shootings.

Gius defined this subset of mass shootings as those occurring in a relatively public place, targeted random victims, were not otherwise related to a crime (a robbery or act of terrorism), and that involved four or more victim fatalities.

Guis found that while assault weapons were not the primary weapon used in this subset of mass shootings, fatalities and injuries were statistically lower during the period the federal ban was active.

The 2018 Rand analysis noted that the federal law portion of this analysis lacked a comparison group.
A 2015 study found a small decrease in the rate of mass shootings followed by increases beginning after the ban was lifted.
The same report also noted that all mass shootings in Australia occurred before the 1996 National Firearms Agreement which placed tight control on semi-automatic and fully automatic weapons.
However, since the report's publication, there have been two mass shooting events in Darwin and Osmington in Australia.
Even with this ban in place, the Columbine High School massacre happened, using weapons that were legal under the ban.

===
Economic ===
A 2002 study by Koper and Roth found that around the time when the ban became law, assault weapon prices increased significantly, but the increase was reversed in the several months afterward by a surge in assault weapons production that occurred just before the ban took effect.
John Lott found that the bans may have reduced the number of gun shows by over 20 percent.

==
Efforts at renewal ==
The assault weapons ban expired on September 13, 2004.
Legislation to renew or replace the ban was proposed numerous times unsuccessfully.

Between May 2003 and June 2008, U.S. Senator Dianne Feinstein, D-CA, and Representatives Michael Castle, R-DE, Alcee Hastings, D-FL, and Mark Kirk, R-IL, introduced bills to reauthorize the ban.
At the same time, Senator Frank Lautenberg, D-NJ, and Representative Carolyn McCarthy, D-NY, introduced similar bills to create a new ban with a revised definition for assault weapons.
None of the bills left committee.
After the November 2008 election, the website of President-elect Barack Obama listed a detailed agenda for the forthcoming administration.
The stated positions included "making the expired federal Assault Weapons Ban permanent.
"
Three months later, newly sworn-in Attorney General Eric Holder reiterated the Obama administration's desire to reinstate the ban.
The mention came in response to a question during a joint press conference with DEA Acting Administrator Michele Leonhart, discussing efforts to crack down on Mexican drug cartels.
Attorney General Holder said that "there are just a few gun-related changes that we would like to make, and among them would be to reinstitute the ban on the sale of assault weapons.
"Efforts to pass a new federal assault weapons ban were made in December 2012 after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, in Newtown, Connecticut.
On January 24, 2013, Senator Feinstein introduced S. 150, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 (AWB 2013).
The bill was similar to the 1994 ban, but differed in that it would not expire after 10 years, and it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the defunct ban.
The GOP Congressional delegation from Texas and the NRA condemned Feinstein's bill.
On March 14, 2013, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved a version of the bill along party lines.
On April 17, 2013, AWB 2013 failed on a Senate vote of 40 to 60.On March 23, 2021, President Joe Biden proposed a new ban on assault weapons after the 2021 Atlanta spa shootings and 2021 Boulder shooting both occurred in the previous week.

== See also ==
Assault weapon
Gun politics in the United States
National Firearms Agreement (Australia)


==
References ==
The Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF;
Khmer: កងយោធពលខេមរភូមិន្ទ, Kâng Yôthapôl Khemaraphumĭn; French: Forces armées royales cambodgiennes) is Cambodia's national military force.
The Supreme Commander-in-Chief is King Norodom Sihamoni.
Since 2018, General Vong Pisen has been the Commander-in-Chief of the RCAF as head of the Army, Navy, Air Force and the Gendarmerie.
The armed forces operate under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of National Defence.
Under the country's constitution, the RCAF is charged with protecting the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Cambodia.
It was created in 1993 by a merger of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces and the two non-communist resistance armies.
Two resistance forces, the Khmer Rouge and the royalist National United Army (NUA) opposed the government.
The forerunner of the Cambodian Armed Forces is Division 125, established in 1978 by Hun Sen (now prime minister) with support from the Vietnamese People's Army.
The Royal Cambodian Army is the largest RCAF branch, with troops stationed in each of the country's 25 provinces.
The Royal Cambodian Navy, the second-largest branch and operates along the Mekong and Bassac Rivers and in the Tonlé Sap lake.
The 10,000-person military police force parallels the civilian police, and has posts in every province and municipality across the country.
The Royal Cambodian Air Force, the smallest service branch with 5,000 members, operates in every province which has an airport.

==
History ==


===
Royal Khmer Armed Forces ===
The Royal Khmer Armed Forces (Forces armées royales khmères, or FARK) was established on 9 November 1953 under a Franco-Khmer convention.
This contributed to the end of the French colony and protectorate, and Cambodia obtained its own military organisation.
FARK's roles were to guarantee the sovereignty of the nation and the king; to ensure security, social order and the respect of law, and to defend the kingdom of Cambodia.
With 50,000 troops, FARK was organised at battalion level under the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces (the head of state).
At this early stage of the nation, its armed forces were often armed with little more than wooden rifles to fool aggressive Việt Minh forces.
This forced King Norodom Sihanouk to sign border-treaty agreements with Vietnam which were unfavorable to Cambodia, resulting in the loss of much territory.
===
Khmer National Armed Forces ===
The military situation changed dramatically after the March 1970 coup d'état.
Under the Khmer Republic regime, FARK was renamed the Khmer National Armed Forces (Forces armées nationales khmères, or FANK).
FANK was expanded to 200,000 military personnel, organized in brigades and divisions, in response to a state of emergency during the Cambodian Civil War; all armed forces were commanded by the president.
When facing the NVA, Viet Cong or Khmer Rouge, FANK operated at full strength and was often victorious.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk broadcast radio propaganda, urging listeners to go to the jungle and join the communists to fight the FANK forces.
Some corrupt FANK commanders who were royalist supporters sold their weapons and intelligence to the opposition Khmer Rouge.
Many FANK commanders, such as Norodom Chantaraingsey, were at the front lines launching operations against the communist forces.
The United States Congress lost confidence in FANK in late 1973, halting military aid due to corruption.

===
Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea ===
After the downfall of the Khmer Republic in April 1975, the Khmers Rouge régime established the Revolutionary Army of Kampuchea (RAK).
The army was composed of Khmer Rouge soldiers and defectors from Lon Nol's FANK.
Defectors who joined the Khmer Rouge were never fully trusted by the original Khmer Rouge.
They were later purged by Pol Pot, when thousands of Khmer Rouge soldiers and officers were ordered killed by the Khmer Rouge leadership.
Like the other forces, the RAK was organised to the division level and commanded by Chiefs of the General Staff Son Sen and Ta Mok.
The RAK's 375,000-person, fully armed force was supplied by China and several Eastern bloc countries.
When Democratic Kampuchea invaded Kampuchea Krom in southern Vietnam (known as Prey Nokor when it was Cambodian territory before 1949), the Vietnamese forces were caught off-guard and their double agents in the Khmer Rouge proved valuable.
The double agents were later learned to have become members of the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (KPRAF), the armed forces of the People's Republic of Kampuchea.

===
Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces ===
After the intervention of the Vietnamese forces in January 1979 (resulting in the collapse of the Khmer Rouge regime, the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (KPRAF) was formed.
It changed its name to the Cambodian People's Armed Forces (CPAF) of the Phnom Penh government when it was rebuilt, and evolved from battalions to divisions.

Anti-Vietnamese movements formed along the Cambodian-Thai border.
In addition to the remaining National Army of Democratic Kampuchea (NADK), two other non-communist resistance forces – the Khmer People's National Liberation Armed Forces (KPNLAF) and the Armées Nationale pour Khmer Independent (ANKI, previously the Armées Nationale Sihanoukist or ANS) – were established.

The military evolution of the latter two movements was similar: from small, armed groups to divisions.

Because of the Cold War and the interference of global powers, Cambodia found itself insecure since the 1970s.
This was only partially resolved with the October 1991 Paris Peace Agreements, because the KPRAF still dominated three resistance groups: the Khmer Rouge, the KPNLF, and the ANKI.

=== Re-establishment of the RCAF ===
The Royal Cambodian Armed Forces was re-established in 1993 after the democratic election of a government consisting of two prime ministers.
The armed forces of all parties except the NADK were integrated into a national armed force; the NADK joined in 1998, after Pol Pot's death.
The KPRAF dominated the three integrated guerrilla groups, with ANKI and the Khmer Rouge commanders later replaced by those loyal to the KPRAF.

To resolve security problems, the government began a win-win policy in mid-1995 of national reconciliation and unity efforts under the king.
Defections of NADK units began in early 1996.
The win-win policy of Prime Minister Hun Sen continued to succeed as the last groups of Khmer Rouge guerrillas were integrated into the RCAF in late 1998; this marked the dissolution of the Khmer Rouge's political and military organisation and the return of all seceded areas to government control.

The RCAF undergoes reforms in accordance with governmental guidelines which direct the armed forces to demobilize to an acceptable size, achieve capability and inculcate standards of ethics and dignity, with future advancement towards international standardization.
Its agenda includes regional security co-operation.

== Branches ==
The RCAF has four branches: the Royal Cambodian Army, the Royal Cambodian Navy, the Royal Cambodian Air Force and the Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia.

===
Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia ===
The Royal Gendarmerie of Cambodia, a paramilitary unit with 10,000 soldiers deployed in all provinces, is headquartered in Phnom Penh.
The unit's chain of command is through the Royal Cambodian Armed Forces High Command, and it is commanded by Lt-General Sao Sokha.
Sokha was one of the commanders who defeated FUNCINPEC forces during the July 1997 coup.

==
Strength ==
In 2001, co-Minister of Defence Sisowath Sirirath said that total Cambodian military strength stood at about 120,000 men.
Since the end of fighting and the surrender of the last Khmer Rouge remnants, the Cambodian military has undergone substantial changes as it shifts to a peacetime force.
Since 1999, the government has been working to demobilise large numbers of soldiers with support from the World Bank.
Demobilisation efforts began in February 2000, and the first 10,000 soldiers were demobilised in a pilot project later that year.
In 2001, the first phase of demobilisation got underway; twenty thousand soldiers returned to civilian life in large ceremonies around the country.
Although a second phase of demobilisation was planned for 2003 in which an additional 30,000 servicemen would leave the armed forces, the process has been stalled by allegations of corruption and procurement irregularities.

== See also ==
History of Cambodia
Cambodian Civil War
Khmer Republic
Khmer National Armed Forces
List of weapons of the Cambodian Civil War
Meas Sophea
Hun Sen


=
= References ==


==
Further reading ==
Dylan Hendrickson, 'Cambodia's security-sector reforms: limits of a downsizing strategy,' Conflict, Security, and Development, Volume 1, Issue 1.

Gerald Segal and Mats Berdal, 'The Cambodia Dilemma,' Jane's Intelligence Review, March 1993, p. 131-2.
Includes listing of formations and equipment of the various factions.

Robert Karniol, 'Confined to local waters,' Naval Forces Update, Jane's Defence Weekly, 20 June 1992, p. 1097.
Status of Cambodian navy.

==
External links ==
High Command Badge
Homepage - in Khmer
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to technology: collection of tools, including machinery, modifications, arrangements and procedures used by humans.
Engineering is the discipline that seeks to study and design new technology.
Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments.

== Components of technology ==
Knowledge
Engineering
Process
Science
Skill
Tools
Utensil
Equipment
Invention
Machinery
Structures (buildings, roads, bridges, canals, dams, etc.)

Man-made systems (see system)
Infrastructure
Public utility
==
Branches of technology ==
Aerospace – flight or transport above the surface of the Earth.

Space exploration – the physical investigation of the space more than 100 km above the Earth by either manned or unmanned spacecraft.

Applied physics – physics which is intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge or a connection between "pure" physics and engineering.

Agriculture – cultivation of plants, animals, and other living organisms.

Fishing – activity of trying to catch fish.
Fish are normally caught in the wild.
Techniques for catching fish include hand gathering, spearing, netting, angling and trapping.

Fisheries – a fishery is an entity engaged in raising or harvesting fish which is determined by some authority to be a fishery.
According to the FAO, a fishery is typically defined in terms of the "people involved, species or type of fish, area of water or seabed, method of fishing, class of boats, purpose of the activities or a combination of the foregoing features".

Fishing industry –  industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products.
It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors.

Forestry – art and science of tree resources, including plantations and natural stands.
The main goal of forestry is to create and implement systems that allow forests to continue a sustainable provision of environmental supplies and services.

Organic gardening and farming
Sustainable agriculture
Communication –
Books –
Telecommunication – the transfer of information at a distance, including signaling, telegraphy, telephony, telemetry, radio, television, and data communications.

Radio – Aural or encoded telecommunications.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

Technology of television –
Television broadcasting – Visual and aural telecommunications.

Computing – any goal-oriented activity requiring, benefiting from, or creating computers.
Computing includes designing and building hardware and software systems; processing, structuring, and managing various kinds of information; doing scientific research on and with computers; making computer systems behave intelligently; creating and using communications and entertainment media; and more.

Computer engineering –  discipline that integrates several fields of electrical engineering and computer science required to develop computer systems, from designing individual microprocessors, personal computers, and supercomputers, to circuit design.

Computers – general purpose devices that can be programmed to carry out a finite set of arithmetic or logical operations.
Since a sequence of operations can be readily changed, computers can solve more than one kind of problem.

Computer science – the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and of practical techniques for their implementation and application in computer systems.

Artificial intelligence – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Natural language processing –
Object recognition –
in computer vision, this is the task of finding a given object in an image or video sequence.

Cryptography – the technology to secure communications in the presence of third parties.

Human-computer interaction
Information technology – the acquisition, processing, storage and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numerical information by a microelectronics-based combination of computing and telecommunications.

Software engineering – the systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Programming – the process of designing, writing, testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code of computer programs.

Software development – development of a software product, which entails computer programming (process of writing and maintaining the source code),
but also encompasses a planned and structured process from the conception of the desired software to its final manifestation.

Web design and web development –
C++ – one of the most popular programming languages with application domains including systems software, application software, device drivers, embedded software, high-performance server and client applications, and entertainment software such as video games.

Perl – high-level, general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming language.

Used for text processing, CGI scripting, graphics programming, system administration, network programming, finance, bioinformatics, and more.

Software – one or more computer programs and data held in the storage of the computer for one or more purposes.
In other words, software is a set of programs, procedures, algorithms and its documentation concerned with the operation of a data processing system.

Free software – software that can be used, studied, and modified without restriction.

Search engines – information retrieval systems designed to help find information stored on a computer system.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

World Wide Web –
Computer industry
Apple Inc. – manufacturer and retailer of computers, hand-held computing devices, and related products and services.

Google – Google Inc. and its Internet services including Google Search.

Construction – building or assembly of any physical structure.

Design – the art and science of creating the abstract form and function for an object or environment.

Architecture – the art and science of designing buildings.

Electronics – Electronics comprises the physics, engineering, technology and applications that deal with the emission, flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter.

Energy –
In physics, energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on, or to heat, the object.

Energy development – ongoing effort to provide abundant, efficient, and accessible energy resources through knowledge, skills, and construction.

Energy storage – the storage of a form of energy that can then be used later.

Nuclear technology – the technology and application of the spontaneous and induced reactions of atomic nuclei.

Wind energy – wind energy is the use of wind to provide the mechanical power through wind turbines to turn electric generators and traditionally to do other work, like milling or pumping.

Solar energy – Solar energy is radiant light and heat from the Sun that is harnessed using a range of ever-evolving technologies such as solar heating, photovoltaics, solar thermal energy, solar architecture, molten salt power plants and artificial photosynthesis.

Engineering – the application of science, mathematics, and technology to produce useful goods and systems.

Chemical engineering – the technology and application of chemical processes to produce useful materials.

Computer engineering – Computer engineering (CE) is a branch of engineering that integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software.

Control engineering – Control engineering or control systems engineering is an engineering discipline that applies automatic control theory to design systems with desired behaviors in control environments.

Electrical engineering – the technology and application of electromagnetism, including electricity, electronics, telecommunications, computers, electric power, magnetics, and optics.

Climate engineering –  the large-scale manipulation of a specific process central to controlling Earth
’s climate for the purpose of obtaining a specific benefit.

Software engineering – the technology and application of a systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Firefighting – act of extinguishing fires.
A firefighter fights fires to prevent destruction of life, property and the environment.
Firefighting is a professional technical skill.

Forensic science – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health
Biotechnology – applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Ergonomics – the study of designing equipment and devices that fit the human body, its movements, and its cognitive abilities.

Hydrology – The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Industry – production of an economic good or service.

Automation – use of machinery to replace human labor.

Industrial machinery –
Machines – devices that perform or assist in performing useful work.

Manufacturing – use of machines, tools and labor to produce goods for use or sale.
The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.

Robotics – deals with the design, construction, operation, structural disposition, manufacture and application of robots.

Object recognition
Information science –
Cartography – the study and practice of making maps.
Combining science, aesthetics, and technique, cartography builds on the premise that reality can be modeled in ways that communicate spatial information effectively.

Library science – technology related to libraries and the information fields.

Military science – the study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Mining – extraction of mineral resources from the earth.

Nanotechnology –
The study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with structures sized between 1 and 100 nanometre in at least one dimension, and involves developing materials or devices possessing at least one dimension within that size.

Prehistoric technology – technologies that emerged before recorded history (i.e., before the development of writing).

Quantum technology  –
Sustainability – capacity to endure.
In ecology, the word describes how biological systems remain diverse and productive over time.
Long-lived and healthy wetlands and forests are examples of sustainable biological systems.
For humans, sustainability is the potential for long-term maintenance of well being, which has environmental, economic, and social dimensions.

Transport – the transfer of people or things from one place to another.

Rail transport –
means of conveyance of passengers and goods by way of wheeled vehicles running on rail tracks consisting of steel rails installed on sleepers/ties and ballast.

Vehicles – mechanical devices for transporting people or things.

Automobiles – human-guided powered land-vehicles.

Bicycles – human-powered land-vehicles with two or more wheels.

Motorcycles – single-track, engine-powered, motor vehicles.
They are also called motorbikes, bikes, or cycles.

Vehicle components
Tires – ring-shaped coverings that fit around wheel rims


==
Technology by region ==
Science and technology in Africa
Science and technology in Algeria
Science and technology in Angola
Science and technology in Morocco
Science and technology in South Africa
Science and technology in Asia
Science and technology in Bangladesh
Science and technology in China
Science and technology in India
Science and technology in Indonesia
Science and technology in Iran
Science and technology in Israel
Science and technology in Japan
Science and technology in Malaysia
Science and technology in Pakistan
Science and technology in the Philippines
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Turkey
Science and technology in Europe
Science and technology in Albania
Science and technology in Belgium
Science and technology in Brussels
Science and technology in Flanders
Science and technology in Wallonia
Science and technology in Bulgaria
Science and technology in France
Science and technology in Germany
Science and technology in Hungary
Science and technology in Iceland
Science and technology in Italy
Science and technology in Portugal
Science and technology in Romania
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Spain
Science and technology in Switzerland
Science and technology in Ukraine
Science and technology in the United Kingdom
Science and technology in North America
Science and technology in Canada
Science and technology in the United States
Science and technology in Jamaica
Science and technology in South America
Science and technology in Argentina
Science and technology in Colombia
Science and technology in Venezuela


==
History of technology ==
History of technology
Timelines of technology
Man vs. Technology
Technology museum –


===
History of technology by period ===
Prehistoric technology (outline)
Control of fire by early humans
Ancient technology – c. 800 BCE – 476 CE
Ancient Egyptian technology –
Obelisk making technology in ancient Egypt –
Ancient Greek technology – c. 800 BCE – 146 BCE
Ancient Roman technology – c. 753 BCE – 476 CE
Science and technology of the Han dynasty – 206 BCE – 220
CE
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty – 618–907
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
960–1279 CE
Medieval technology – 5th to 15th century
Byzantine technology – 5th to 15th century
Islamic Golden Age – 8th to 13th century
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire – 14th to 20th century
Industrial revolution – 18th to 19th century
Second Industrial Revolution – 1820–1914
Technology during World War I – 1914–1918
Technology during World War II – 1939–1945
Allied technological cooperation during World War II –
American military technology during World War II –
German military technology during World War II –
1970s in science and technology
1980s in science and technology
1990s in science and technology
2000s in science and technology
2010s in science and technology


====
Technological ages ====
Stone Age –
Bronze Age –
Iron Age –
The Renaissance –
Industrial Age –
Information Age –


===
Media about the history of technology ===
Connections – documentary television series and 1978 book ("Connections" based on the series) created, written and presented by science historian James Burke.
It took an interdisciplinary approach to the history of science and invention and demonstrated how various discoveries, scientific achievements, and historical world events were built from one another successively in an interconnected way to bring about particular aspects of modern technology.
There were 3 seasons produced, and they aired in 1978, 1994, and 1997.

The Day the Universe Changed –
documentary television series written and presented by science historian James Burke, originally broadcast in 1985 by the BBC.
The series' primary focus is on the effect of advances in science and technology on western society in its philosophical aspects.
Ran for one season, in 1986.
===
History of technology by region ===
History of science and technology in the Mediterranean
Ancient Greek technology –
Ancient Roman technology –
Timeline of Polish science and technology –
History of science and technology in Africa –
History of science and technology in Asia
History of science and technology in China –
Science and technology of the Han dynasty –
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty –
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
History of science and technology in the People's Republic of China –
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent –
Science and technology in ancient India –
History of science and technology in Korea –
Science and Technology in the Ottoman Empire –
Science and technology in the Soviet Union –
History of science and technology in North America
United States technological and industrial history –
History of science and technology in Mexico –
Technological and industrial history of Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 20th-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 21st-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of the People's Republic of China –
Technological and industrial history of the United States –


===
History of technology by field ===
History of invention
History of aerospace
History of artificial intelligence
History of agriculture
History of agricultural science
History of architecture, timeline
History of biotechnology
History of cartography
History of chemical engineering
History of communication
History of computing, timeline
History of computer science
History of computing hardware
History of the graphical user interface
History of hypertext, timeline
History of the Internet, Internet phenomena
History of the World Wide Web
History of operating systems
History of programming languages,
timeline
History of software engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of energy development
History of engineering
History of industry
History of library and information science
History of microscopy
History of manufacturing
History of the factory
History of mass production
History of materials science, timeline
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of motor and engine technology
History of military science
History of transport, timeline
History of biotechnology –
Timeline of biotechnology –
History of display technology –
History of film technology –
History of information technology auditing –
History of military technology –
History of nanotechnology –
History of science and technology –
History of web syndication technology –
Timeline of agriculture and food technology –
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology –
Timeline of communication technology –
Timeline of diving technology –
Timeline of heat engine technology –
Timeline of hypertext technology –
Timeline of lighting technology –
Timeline of low-temperature technology –
Timeline of materials technology –
Timeline of medicine and medical technology –
Timeline of microscope technology –
Timeline of motor and engine technology –
Timeline of particle physics technology –
Timeline of photography technology –
Timeline of rocket and missile technology –
Timeline of telescope technology –
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and
observing technology –
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology –
Timeline of time measurement technology –
Timeline of transportation technology –


==
Hypothetical technology ==
Potential technology of the future includes:
Hypothetical technology –
Femtotechnology – hypothetical term used in reference to structuring of matter on the scale of a femtometer, which is 10−15 m.
This is a smaller scale in comparison to nanotechnology and picotechnology which refer to 10−9 m and 10−12 m respectively.
Work in the femtometer range involves manipulation of excited energy states within atomic nuclei (see nuclear isomer) to produce metastable (or otherwise stabilized) states with unusual properties.

==
Philosophy of technology ==
Philosophy of technology –
Appropriate technology –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Jacques Ellul –
Paradigm –
Posthumanism –
Precautionary principle –
Singularitarianism –
Techno-progressivism –
Technocentrism –
Technocracy –
Technocriticism –
Technological determinism –
Technological evolution –
Technological nationalism –
Technological singularity –
Technology readiness level –
Technorealism –
Theories of technology –
Transhumanism –


==
Management of technology ==
Human enhancement –
Science and technology –
Strategy of Technology –
Technology management –
Technology integration –
Technology intelligence –
Technology life cycle –
Technology roadmap –


===
Advancement of technology ===
DARPA
Emerging technologies
List of emerging technologies
Horizon scanning
Hypothetical technology
Innovation
Invention
Inventor
Research and development
Technological superpowers
Technological transitions
==
Politics of technology ==
Politics and technology

AI takeover
Accelerating change
Format war
Information privacy
IT law
PEST analysis
Robot rights
Technological singularity
Technological sovereignty


==
Economics of technology ==
Energy accounting
Nanosocialism
Post-scarcity economy
Technocracy
Technocapitalism
Technological diffusion
Technology acceptance model
Technology lifecycle
Technology transfer


==
Technology education ==
Technology education


==
Technology organizations ==


===
Science and technology think tanks ===
Applied
Biomathematics
Battelle Memorial Institute
Cicada 3301
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Edge Foundation,
Inc.
Eudoxa
Federation of American Scientists
Free Software Foundation
GTRI Office of Policy Analysis and Research
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
Institute for Science and International Security
Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels
Keck Institute for Space Studies
Kestrel Institute
Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology
Moore Center for Theoretical Cosmology and Physics
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
Piratbyrån
RAND Corporation
Regional Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Res4Med
Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science
Swecha
Wau Holland Foundation


==
Technology media ==
For historical treatments, see Media about the history of technology, aboveTechnology journalism –


===
Books on technology ===
Engines of Creation –


===
Technology periodicals ===
Engadget –
TechCrunch –
Wired –


===
Websites ===
The Verge


===
Fictional technology ===
Fictional technology –
In Death technology –
Technology in Star Trek –
Technology in Star Wars –
Technology in science fiction –
Technology of Robotech –
List of technology in the Dune universe –


==
Persons influential in technology ==
List of engineers
List of inventors
List of scientists


==
See also ==
Outline of applied science


==
Further reading ==
Ambrose, Stanley H. (2 March 2001). "
Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution" (PDF).
Science.
291 (5509)
: 1748–53.
Bibcode:2001Sci...
291.1748A.
doi:10.1126/science.1059487.
PMID 11249821.
S2CID 6170692.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007.
Retrieved 10 March 2007.

Huesemann, M.H., and J.A. Huesemann (2011).
Technofix:
Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, ISBN 0865717044.

Kremer, Michael (1993). "
Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990".
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
108 (3): 681–716.
doi:10.2307/2118405.
JSTOR 2118405..
Kevin Kelly.
What Technology Wants.
New York, Viking Press, 14 October 2010, hardcover, 416 pages.
ISBN 978-0670022151
Mumford, Lewis.
(
2010).
Technics and Civilization.
University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226550273.

Rhodes, Richard.
(
2000).
Visions of Technology: A Century of Vital Debate about Machines, Systems, and the Human World.
Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0684863111.

Teich, A.H. (2008).
Technology and the Future.
Wadsworth Publishing, 11th edition, ISBN 0495570524.

Wright, R.T. (2008).
Technology.
Goodheart-Wilcox Company, 5th edition, ISBN 1590707184.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Technology newsBBC on technology
Bloomberg on technology
MIT Technology Review
New York Times technology section
Wired

Acoustic resonance technology –
Advanced steam technology –
Applications of nanotechnology –
Architectural technology –
Assisted reproductive technology –
Assistive technology –
Assistive technology and sports –
Automatic box-opening technology –
Barcode technology in healthcare –
Baseball telecasts technology –
Bead probe technology –
Beam lead technology –
Bio-fermentation technology –
Biomedical technology –
Biotechnology –
Biotechnology in pharmaceutical manufacturing –
Bleeding edge technology –
Braille technology –
Brain technology –
CASY cell counting technology –
Calm technology –
Ceramic mixing technology –
BOINC client–server technology –
Chirotechnology –
Circuit rider (technology) –
Civic technology –
Clean coal technology –
Clean technology –
Close coupled field technology –
Clothing technology –
Coal upgrading technology –
Community technology –
Computer technology for developing areas –
Construction collaboration technology –
Contesting technology –
Cultural technology –
Cycling probe technology –
Cytotechnology –
DNA nanotechnology –
Dance technology – application of modern information technology in activities related to dance: in dance education, choreography, performance, and research.

Demand flow technology –
Design technology –
Digital newspaper technology –
Digital scent technology –
Domestic technology –
Downhole oil–water separation technology –
Dual-use technology –
Dynamic video memory technology –
Ecotechnology –
Educational technology –
Electric transportation technology –
Electrical engineering technology –
Electrofluidic display technology –
Electron beam technology –
Electrothermal-chemical technology –
Enabling technology –
Energy applications of nanotechnology –
Energy security and renewable technology –
Energy technology –
Entertainment technology –
Environmental biotechnology –
Environmental technology –
Expandable tubular technology –
Field-induced polymer electroluminescent technology –
Food technology –
Frame technology (software engineering) –
G-Technology –
General purpose technology –
Genetic use restriction technology –
Germinal choice technology –
Gerontechnology –
Goal-line technology –
Green nanotechnology –
Greenfish recirculation technology –
Group technology –
Gustatory technology –
Haptic technology –
Headspace technology –
Health information technology –
Health technology –
Heart nanotechnology –
High-technology swimwear fabric –
Holiday lighting technology –
Honda advanced technology –
Human performance technology –
Hurdle technology –
Hybridoma technology –
Hyper-interactive teaching technology –
Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention –
Imaging technology –
Immersive technology –
Induction plasma technology –
Industrial technology –
Information and communications technology –
Information and communications technology in Kosovo –
Information processing technology and aging –
Information technology –
Intelligent Interweaving technology –
Internet services technology –
IsaKidd refining technology –
Keyboard technology –
Language technology –
Large-screen television technology –
Lithic technology –
Logovisual technology –
Low carbon technology –
Low technology –
Marine technology –
Mature technology –
Mechanical engineering technology –
Media technology –
Membrane technology –
Metamaterials surface antenna technology –
Microblade technology –
Microtechnology –
Military technology –
Mobile technology –
Molecular nanotechnology –
Music instrument technology –
Music technology –
NX technology –
Nana technology –
Nanobiotechnology –
Nanotechnology –
Near-infrared signature management technology –
Neurotechnology –
Non-profit technology –
Nuclear technology –
Omniview technology –
Open-source-appropriate technology –
Orphaned technology –
Orthodontic technology –
Particle technology –
Performance acceleration technology –
Persuasive technology –
Phage-ligand technology –
Pharmacopeia biotechnology –
Phonetic search technology –
Photoimageable thick-film technology –
Phytotechnology –
Picotechnology –
Plasma deep drilling technology –
Point-to-point laser technology –
Positioning technology –
Presentation technology –
Primatte chromakey technology –
Process analytical technology –
Pull technology –
Pulsion technology –
Pumpable ice technology –
Push technology –
Quantum technology –
Radio access technology –
Rapid transit technology –
Reproductive technology –
Resolution enhancement technology –
Rotary technology –
Rubber technology –
Search engine technology –
Self-drying concrete technology –
Semantic technology –
Site-specific recombinase technology –
Social technology –
Soft energy technology –
Space technology –
Speech technology –
Stealth technology –
Subsea (technology) –
Surface-mount technology –
Suspension array technology –
Tamper-evident technology –
Telepresence technology –
Tennis technology –
Terahertz spectroscopy and technology –
Terotechnology –
Thick film technology –
Thick-film dielectric electroluminescent technology –
Through-hole technology –
Time release technology –
Travel technology –
Trenchless technology –
Use of technology in treatment of mental disorders –
Vehicle safety technology –
Video sensor technology –
Visual technology –
Wearable technology –
Wet nanotechnology –
Wire rope spooling technology –
Workflow technology –
X-Wind technology –
Xpress technology –
Advanced technology –
Appropriate technology –
Alternative technology –
Antechnology –
Al Gore and information technology –
Assistive technology service provider –
Best available technology –
Biotechnology and genetic engineering in Bangladesh –
Biotechnology consulting –
Biotechnology industry in China –
Brazilian science and technology –
Buddhist influences on print technology –
Bullying in information technology –
Chief technology officer –
Community technology center –
Comparison of display technology –
Competitions and prizes in biotechnology –
Consumer adoption of technological innovations –
Corporate governance of information technology –
Counterparty (technology) –
Critique of technology –
Democratization of technology –
Differential technological development –
Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions –
Drexler–Smalley
debate on molecular nanotechnology –
Economic and Technological Development Zones –
Educational technology in Saudi Arabia –
Ethics of technology –
Environmental impact of nanotechnology –
Etiquette in technology –
Fail-safes in nanotechnology –
Feminism and technology –
Glossary of legal terms in technology –
Goans in science and technology –
Health impact of nanotechnology –
Health technology assessment –
Hydrogen energy vision and technology roadmap –
Impact of nanotechnology –
Industrial applications of nanotechnology –
Information technology architecture –
Information technology audit –
Information technology consulting –
Information technology controls –
Information technology in Bangladesh –
Information technology in India –
Information technology in Morocco –
Information technology in Pakistan –
Information technology management –
Information technology operations –
Information technology outsourcing –
Information technology planning –
Information technology security audit –
Information technology specialist –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Investment-specific technological progress –
List of DNA nanotechnology research groups –
List of United States technological universities –
List of advertising technology companies –
List of archaic technological nomenclature –
List of atheists in science and technology –
List of biotechnology companies –
List of computer technology code names –
List of cultural, intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions –
List of information technology acronyms –
List of institutions using the term "institute of technology" or "polytechnic" –
List of nanotechnology organizations –
List of philosophers of technology –
List of science and technology articles by continent –
List of steam technology patents –
List of technology centers –
List of the largest information technology companies –
Marx's notebooks on the history of technology –
Medical technology assessment –
Mobile technology in Africa –
Muslim women in science and technology –
Nanotechnology education –
Nanotechnology in fiction –
Next generation of display technology –
Operations and technology management –
Participatory technology development –
Radio and television technology in Turkey –
Regulation of nanotechnology –
Religious response to assisted reproductive technology –
Response time (technology) –
Science, technology and society –
Science, technology, society and environment education –
Sexism in the technology industry –
Social construction of technology –
Social shaping of technology –
Societal impact of nanotechnology –
Technological alliance –
Technological apartheid –
Technological applications of superconductivity –
Technological change –
Technological convergence –
Technological determinism –
Technological dualism –
Technological escalation –
Technological evolution –
Technological fix –
Technological history of the Roman military –
Technological innovation system –
Technological momentum –
Technological nationalism –
Technological paradigm –
Technological rationality –
Technological revolution –
Technological self-efficacy –
Technological singularity –
Technological somnambulism –
Technological studies –
Technological theory of social production –
Technological transitions –
Technological unemployment –
Technological utopianism –
Technology acceptance model –
Technology adoption lifecycle –
Technology alignment –
Technology and Construction Court –
Technology and Culture –
Technology and Entertainment Software –
Technology and Livelihood Education –
Technology and society –
Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life:
A Philosophical Inquiry –
Technology assessment –
Technology aware design –
Technology brokering –
Technology company –
Technology demonstration –
Technology doping –
Technology dynamics –
Technology education –
Technology evangelist –
Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes –
Technology for peace –
Technology forecasting –
Technology fusion –
Technology gap –
Technology governance –
Technology policy –
Technology readiness level –
Technology roadmap –
Technology scouting –
Technology shock –
Technology stack –
Technology strategy –
Technology support net –
Technology trajectory –
Technology-enhanced active learning –
Technology transfer –
Technology transfer in computer science –
Technology treadmill –
Technology tree –
Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology –
The Beatles' recording technology –Technology CAD –
Techno-lodge
Techno-organic virus
Techno-progressivism
Techno-thriller
Technoavia
Technobabble
Technobots
Technoboy
Technocapitalism
Technocentrism
Technoclash
Technocosmos
Technocracy
Technocracy movement
Technocrane
Technocriticism
Technoculture
Technodelic
Technodiktator
Technodon
Technodrome
Technoethics
Technoetic
Technofile
Technoflash
Technogaianism
Technogamia
Technogel
Technogenesis
Technographic segmentation
Technogym
Technogypsie
Technolangue/Easy
Technoliberalism
Technolibertarianism
Technologic
Technologie
Technologist
Technomage
Technomancer
Technomancy
Technomarket
Technomate
Technometrics
Technomimetics
Technomyrmex
Technomyrmex albipes
Technomyrmex gorgona
Technopaganism
Technoparade
Technopark
Technophilia
Technophobia
Technophoby
Technopol
Technopole
Technopolis
Technopoly
Technoport
Technopromexport
Technora
Technorama
Technorati
Technorealism
Technoromanticism
Technos
Technos
acxel
Technosaurus
Technoscience
Technoself
Technoseum
Technosexual
Technosignature
Technosoft
Technosol
Technosphere
Technostress
Technostructure
Technothlon
Technotise
Technotronic
Technovore
Technozion
The right to keep and bear arms (often referred to as the right to bear arms) is a right for people to possess weapons (arms) for their own defense.
Only a few countries recognize an individual right to keep and bear arms and protect it constitutionally, with more classifying it as a statutory privilege granted to some segment of the population.

==
Background ==
The Bill of Rights 1689 allowed Protestant citizens of England to "have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Conditions and as allowed by Law" and restricted the ability of the English Crown to have a standing army or to interfere with Protestants' right to bear arms "when Papists were both Armed and Imployed contrary to Law" and established that Parliament, not the Crown, could regulate the right to bear arms.
Sir William Blackstone wrote in the 18th century that the right to have arms was auxiliary to the "natural right of resistance and self-preservation" subject to suitability and allowance by law.
The term arms, as used in the 1600s, refers to the process of equipping for war.
It is commonly used as a synonym for weapon.
Inclusion of this right in a written constitution is uncommon.
In 1875, 17 percent of constitutions included a right to bear arms.
Since the early twentieth century, "the proportion has been less than 9 percent and falling".
In an article titled "U.S. Gun Rights Truly Are American Exceptionalism," a historical survey and comparative analysis of constitutions dating back to 1789, Tom Ginsburg and colleagues "identified only 15 constitutions (in nine countries) that had ever included an explicit right to bear arms.
Almost all of these constitutions have been in Latin America, and most were from the 19th century".

==
Countries recognizing the right to keep and bear arms ==


===
Americas ===


====
Guatemala ====
While protecting the right to keep arms, Guatemalan constitution specifies that this right extends only to "weapons not prohibited by law".

====
Honduras ====
The constitution of Honduras doesn't protect the right to keep and bear arms.

Although not explicitly mentioned in the legislation, every person is entitled to receive a license to keep and carry arms by Honduran Statute law, provided that they fulfill the conditions required by the law.

====
Mexico ====
Mexican constitution of 1857 first included right to be armed.
In its first version, the right was defined in similar terms as it is in the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution.
A new Mexican constitution of 1917 relativized the right, stating that its utilization must be in line with local police regulations.

Another change was included in 1971 Constitution.
Since then, Mexicans have the right to be armed only within their home and further utilization of this right is subject to statutory authorization in Federal law.

====
United States ====
Generally, where modern constitutions refer to arms at all, the purpose is "to allow the government to regulate their use or to compel military service, not to provide a right to bear them".
Constitutions which historically guaranteed a right to bear arms are those of Bolivia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua and the United States of America.
Nearly all of the Latin American examples were modeled on that of the United States.
At present, out of the world's nearly 200 constitutions, three still include a right to bear arms: Guatemala, Mexico, and the United States; of these three, only that of the United States does not include explicit restrictive conditions.
Until 2008, the U.S. Supreme Court had never struck down a law aimed at regulating guns.
The first ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court on the second amendment, United States v. Cruikshank in 1876, permitted states to restrict firearm ownership by minorities, ruling the first and second amendment only applied to the federal government, not state governments and laws.
This ruling was overturned in 2008, as a result of the case of District of Columbia v. Heller and, two years later, McDonald v. Chicago, the U.S. Supreme Court held that states could not restrict the ownership of handguns for self-defense.
===
Europe ===


====
Czech Republic ====
Historically, the Czech lands were at the forefront of the spreading of civilian firearms ownership.
In the 1420s and 1430s, firearms became indispensable tools for the mostly peasant Hussite armies, whose amateur combatants, including women, fended off a series of invasions of professional crusader armies of well-armored warriors with cold weapons.
Throughout and after the Hussite wars, firearms design underwent fast development and their possession by civilians became a matter of course.
First firearms regulation was enacted in 1517 as a part of general accord between the nobles and burghers and later in 1524 as a standalone Enactment on Firearms (zřízení o ručnicích).
The 1517 law explicitly stated that "all people of all standing have the right to keep firearms at home"
while at the same time enacting a universal carry ban.
The 1524 enactment set out a process of issuing of permits for carrying of firearms and detailed enforcement and punishment for carrying without such a permit.
Carrying later became again permitless until 1852, when Imperial Regulation No.
223 reintroduced carry permits.
This law remained in force until 1939 German invasion.
Since its inception during the Hussite revolution, the right to keep firearms endured over five-hundred years until the Nazi gun ban during the German occupation in the 20th century.
Firearms possession later became subject to government permission during the communist dictatorship with only those deemed loyal to the communist party being able to be armed.
After return of liberty, the Czech Republic instated shall issue permitting process, under which all residents can keep and bear arms subject to fulfillment of regulatory conditions.
In the Czech Republic, every resident that meets conditions laid down in Act
No.
119/2002 Coll.
has the right to have firearms license issued and can then obtain a firearm.
Holders of D (exercise of profession) and E (self-defense) licenses, which are also shall-issue, can carry up to two concealed firearms for protection.
The right to be armed is statutorily protected, however it is not listed in the constitution.

A proposal to have right to keep and bear arms included in the constitution was entered in the Czech Parliament in December 2016.
The proposal was approved by vote of 139 to 9 on 28 June 2017 by the Chamber of Deputies.
It later failed to reach necessary support in Senate, where only 28 out of 59 Senators present supported it (constitutional majority being 36 votes ).
A new proposal was entered by 35 Senators in September 2019.

====
Italy ====
Firearms are permitted to all Italian citizens who have the appropriate licensing and have passed the mental and physical checks provided by the Italian government.
Then Italians may keep as many as three handguns, twelve sporting guns, and an unlimited number of long firearms that use hunting calibers.
Such firearms must be registered at a local police station.
If a threat to life is proven or when working in an occupation where danger is common (such as a security guard or jeweler), some may be also able to concealed carry a single handgun on their person, although this is rare.
In 2019, the Italian senate passed a "legitimate defence" bill, protecting the right to self-defence for private citizens of Italy; similar to castle doctrine and stand-your-ground laws.

====
Switzerland
====
The Swiss have a statutory right to bear arms under Article 3 of the 1997 Weapons Act.
Switzerland practices universal conscription, which requires that all able-bodied male citizens keep fully automatic firearms at home in case of a call-up.
Every male between the ages of 20 and 34 is considered a candidate for conscription into the military, and following a brief period of active duty will commonly be enrolled in the militia until age or an inability to serve ends his obligation.
Until December 2009, these men were required to keep their government-issued selective fire combat rifles and semi-automatic handguns in their homes as long as they were enrolled in the armed forces.
Since January 2010, they have had the option of depositing their personal firearm at a government arsenal.
Until September 2007, soldiers received 50 rounds of government-issued ammunition in a sealed box for storage at home; after 2007 only about 2,000 specialist troops are allowed to keep the ammunition at home.
In a referendum in February 2011, voters rejected a citizens' initiative that would have obliged members of the armed services to store their rifles and pistols on military compounds and required that privately owned firearms be registered.

====
United Kingdom ====
The right to keep and bear arms is not legally or constitutionally protected in the United Kingdom.
While citizens may possess certain firearms on an appropriate licence, all handguns, automatic, and centerfire semi-automatic weapons are illegal to possess without special provisions.
The English Bill of Rights 1689 allowed:

That the Subjects which are Protestants may have Arms for their Defence suitable to their Conditions and as allowed by Law.

The first serious control on firearms was established with the passing of the Firearms Act 1920.Since 1953, it has been a criminal offence in the United Kingdom to carry a knife (with the exception of non-locking folding knives with a cutting edge of 3 inches (7.62 centimetres) or less) or any "offensive weapon" in a public place without lawful authority or reasonable excuse.
The cutting edge of a knife is separate to the blade length.
The only manner in which an individual may carry arms is on private property or any property to which the public does not have a lawful right of access, as the law only creates the offence when it occurs in public, e.g., a person's own home, private land, the area in a shop where the public have no access, etc.
Furthermore, Section 141 Criminal Justice Act 1988 specifically lists all offensive weapons that cannot technically be owned - even on private property - by way of making it illegal to sell, trade, hire, etc.
an offensive weapon to another person.
Furthermore, the law does not allow an offensive weapon or ordinary item intended or adapted as an offensive weapon to be carried in public before the threat of violence arises.
This would only be acceptable in the eyes of the law if the person armed themselves immediately preceding or during an attack (in a public place).
This is known as a "weapon of opportunity" or "instantaneous arming".
===
Other ===


====
Sharia law ====
Under Sharia law, there is an intrinsic freedom to own arms.
However, in times of civil strife or internal violence, this right can be temporarily suspended to keep peace and prevent harm, as mentioned by Imam ash-Shatibi in his works on Maqasid ash-Shari'ah (The Intents and Purposes of Shari'ah).
Citizens not practicing Islam are prohibited from bearing arms and are required to be protected by the military, the state for which they pay the jizyah.
In exchange they do not need to pay the zakat.

====
Yemen ====
Yemen recognizes statutory right to keep and bear arms.
Firearms are both easily and legally accessible.
==
Gun violence and the politics of the right to bear arms ==
Legal restrictions on the right to keep and bear arms are usually put in place by legislators in an attempt to reduce firearms based violence and crime.

Their actions may be the result of necessity, or due to political groups moving to push for such regulations.
The Brady, Snowdrop Campaigns, and the Million Mom March are examples of campaigns calling for tighter restrictions on the right to keep and bear arms.

Accident statistics are hard to obtain, but much data is available on the issue of gun ownership and gun related deaths.
The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute (UNICRI) has made comparisons between countries with different levels of gun ownership and investigated the correlation between gun ownership levels and gun homicides, and between gun ownership levels and gun suicides.
A strong correlation is seen in both.

During the 1989 and 1992 International Crime Surveys, data on gun ownership in eighteen countries have been collected on which WHO data on suicide and homicide committed with guns and other means are also available.
The results presented in a previous paper based on the fourteen countries surveyed during the first ICS and on rank correlations (Spearman's rho), suggested that gun ownership may increase suicides and homicides using firearms, while it may not reduce suicides and homicides with other means.
In the present analysis, four additional countries covered by the 1992 ICS only have been included, and Pearson's correlation coefficients have been used.
The results confirm those presented in the previous study.

UNICRI also investigated the relationship between gun ownership levels and other forms of homicide or suicide to determine whether high gun ownership added to or merely displaced other forms of homicide or suicide.
They reported that "widespread gun ownership has not been found to reduce the likelihood of fatal events committed with other means.
Thus, people do not turn to knives and other potentially lethal instruments less often when more guns are available, but more guns usually means more victims of suicide and homicide."
Speculating on possible causes the researchers concluded that "all we know is that guns do not reduce fatal events due to other means, but that they go along with more shootings.
Although we do not know why exactly this is so
, we have a good reason to suspect guns to play a—fatal—role in this".
The research reporter found that guns were the major cause of homicides in 3 of the 14 countries it studied; Northern Ireland, Italy, and the United States.
Although the data seem to indicate that reducing the availability of one significant type of arms—firearms—leads to reductions both in gun crimes and gun suicides and in overall crimes and overall suicides, the author did caution that "reducing the number of guns in the hands of the private citizen may become a hopeless task beyond a certain point", citing the American example.
In contrast to the 1993 study however, a more recent study by UNICRI researchers from 2001 examined the link between household gun ownership and overall homicide, overall suicide, as well as gun homicide and gun suicide rates amongst 21 countries.
Significant correlations between household gun ownership and rates of gun suicides for both genders, and gun homicide rates involving female victims were found.
There were no significant correlations detected for total homicide and suicide rates, as well as gun homicide rates involving male victims.
Public health critic and gun rights proponent Miguel Faria
writing in Surgical Neurology International contends that to keep and bear arms have not only constitutional protection but also that firearms have beneficial aspects that have been ignored by the public health establishment in which he played a part; that guns are beneficial in personal self-defense, collective defense, as well as in protecting life and property.

== See also ==
Index of gun politics articles
List of countries by gun ownership
Overview of gun laws by nation
Right of self-defense
Knife legislation


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Baker, Dennis (2009). "
Collective Criminalization and the Constitutional Right to Endanger Others".
Criminal Justice Ethics.
28 (2): 168–200.
doi:10.1080/07311290903181200.
S2CID 144553546.

Cramer, Clayton E. (1994).
For the Defense of Themselves and the State: The Original Intent and Judicial Interpretation of the Right to Keep and Bear Arms.
Praeger Publishers.
ISBN 0-275-94913-3.

Dizard, Jan E.; Muth, Robert Merrill; Andrews, Stephen P.,
Jr. (1999).
Guns in America:
A Reader.
New York University Press.
ISBN 0-8147-1878-7.

Halbrook, Stephan P. (1989).
A Right to Bear Arms: State and Federal Bills of Rights and Constitutional Guarantees.
Greenwood Press.
ISBN 0-313-26539-9.

Malcolm, Joyce (1996).
To Keep and Bear Arms:
The Origins of an Anglo-American Right.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0674893078.

Malcolm, Joyce (2004).
Guns and Violence: The English Experience.
Harvard University Press.
ISBN 978-0674016088.

Spitzer, Robert J. (1998).
The Politics of Gun Control.
Chatham House Publishers.
ISBN 1-56643-021-6.

Uviller, H. Richard; William G. Merkel (2002).
The Militia and the Right to Arms.
Duke University Press.
ISBN 0-8223-3017-2.
An academic discipline or field of study is a branch of knowledge, taught and researched as part of higher education.
A scholar's discipline is commonly defined by the university faculties and learned societies to which they belong and the academic journals in which they publish research.

Disciplines vary between well-established ones that exist in almost all universities and have well-defined rosters of journals and conferences, and nascent ones supported by only a few universities and publications.
A discipline may have branches, and these are often called sub-disciplines.

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to academic disciplines.
In each case an entry at the highest level of the hierarchy (e.g., Humanities) is a group of broadly similar disciplines; an entry at the next highest level (e.g., Music) is a discipline having some degree of autonomy and being the basic identity felt by its scholars; and lower levels of the hierarchy are sub-disciplines not normally having any role in the structure of the university's governance.

==
Humanities ==


===
Performing arts ===


===
Visual arts ===


===
History ===


===
Languages and literature ===


===
Law ===


===
Philosophy ===


===
Theology ===
Biblical studies
Biblical Hebrew, Koine Greek, Aramaic
Religious studies
Buddhist theology
Pali Studies
Christian theology
Anglican theology
Baptist theology
Catholic theology
Eastern Orthodox theology
Protestant theology
Hindu theology
Sanskrit Studies
Jewish theology
Muslim theology
Arabic Studies


==
Social Sciences ==


===
Anthropology ===
Biological anthropology
Linguistic anthropology
Cultural anthropology
Social anthropology
Archaeology


===
Economics ===


===
Geography ===


===
Political science ===


===
Psychology ===


===
Sociology ===


===
Social Work ===
Clinical Social Work
Community practice
Mental health
Psychosocial rehabilitation
Person-centered therapy
Family therapy
Financial social work


==
Natural Sciences ==


===
Biology ===


===
Chemistry ===


===
Earth science ===
Edaphology
Environmental chemistry
Environmental science
Gemology
Geochemistry
Geodesy
Physical geography (outline)
Atmospheric science / Meteorology (outline)
Biogeography / Phytogeography
Climatology /
Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography
Coastal geography / Oceanography
Edaphology / Pedology or Soil science
Geobiology
Geology (outline)
(Geomorphology, Mineralogy, Petrology, Sedimentology, Speleology, Tectonics, Volcanology)
Geostatistics
Glaciology
Hydrology
(outline)/
Limnology / Hydrogeology
Landscape ecology
Quaternary science
Geophysics (outline)
Paleontology
Paleobiology
Paleoecology


===
Space sciences ===
Astrobiology
Astronomy (outline)
Observational astronomy
Gamma ray astronomy
Infrared astronomy
Microwave astronomy
Optical astronomy
Radio astronomy
UV astronomy
X-ray astronomy
Astrophysics
Gravitational astronomy
Black holes
Interstellar medium
Numerical simulations
Astrophysical plasma
Galaxy formation and evolution
High-energy astrophysics
Hydrodynamics
Magnetohydrodynamics
Star formation
Physical cosmology
Stellar astrophysics
Helioseismology
Stellar evolution
Stellar nucleosynthesis
Planetary science


===
Physics ===


==
Formal Sciences ==


===
Computer Science ===
Also a branch of electrical engineering


===
Mathematics ===
Pure mathematics
Applied mathematics


== Applied Sciences ==


===
Business ===
Accounting
Business management
Finance
Marketing
Operations management


===
Engineering and technology ===


===
Medicine and health ===


==
See also ==
Academia (outline)
Academic genealogy
Curriculum
Interdisciplinarity
Transdisciplinarity
Professions
Classification of Instructional Programs
Joint Academic Coding System
List of fields of doctoral studies in the United States
List of academic fields
International Academic Association for the Enhancement of Learning in Higher Education


==
References ==
Abbott, Andrew (2001).
Chaos of Disciplines.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-00101-2.

Oleson, Alexandra; Voss, John (1979).
The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860-1920.
ISBN 0-8018-2108-8.

US Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences.
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP).
National Center for Education Statistics.

==
External links ==
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP 2000): Developed by the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics to provide a taxonomic scheme that will support the accurate tracking, assessment, and reporting of fields of study and program completions activity.

Complete JACS (Joint Academic Classification of Subjects) from Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) in the United Kingdom
Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC 2008)
(web-page)
Chapter 3 and Appendix 1: Fields of research classification.

Fields of Knowledge, a zoomable map allowing the academic disciplines and sub-disciplines in this article be visualised.

Sandoz, R. (ed.),
Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines, University of Geneva
In the United States, gun culture encompasses the behaviors, attitudes, and beliefs about firearms and their usage by civilians.
Gun ownership in the United States is the highest in the world, and constitutionally protected by the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution.
Firearms are widely used in the United States for self-defense, hunting, and recreational uses, such as target shooting.

Gun politics in the United States tends to be polarized between advocates of gun rights, often conservative, and those who support stricter gun control, often liberal.

The gun culture of the United States can be considered unique among developed countries in terms of the large number of firearms owned by civilians, generally permissive regulations, and high levels of gun violence.

==
History ==
American attitudes on gun ownership date back to the American Revolutionary War, and also arise from traditions of hunting, militias, and frontier living.
Justifying the unique attitude toward gun ownership in the United States, James Madison wrote in Federalist No.
46, in 1788, that:
Those who are best acquainted with the last successful resistance of this country against the British arms, will be most inclined to deny the possibility of it.
Besides the advantage of being armed, which the Americans possess over the people of almost every other nation, the existence of subordinate governments, to which the people are attached, and by which the militia officers are appointed, forms a barrier against the enterprises of ambition, more insurmountable than any which a simple government of any form can admit of.
Notwithstanding the military establishments in the several kingdoms of Europe, which are carried as far as the public resources will bear, the governments are afraid to trust the people with arms.
And it is not certain, that with this aid alone they would not be able to shake off their yokes.
But were the people to possess the additional advantages of local governments chosen by themselves, who could collect the national will and direct the national force, and of officers appointed out of the militia, by these governments, and attached both to them and to the militia, it may be affirmed with the greatest assurance, that the throne of every tyranny in Europe would be speedily overturned in spite of the legions which surround it.

The American hunting/sporting passion comes from a time when the United States was an agrarian, subsistence nation where hunting was a profession for some, an auxiliary source of food for some settlers, and also a deterrence to animal predators.
A connection between shooting skills and survival among rural American men was in many cases a necessity and a 'rite of passage' for those entering manhood.
Today, hunting survives as a central sentimental component of a gun culture as a way to control animal populations across the country, regardless of modern trends away from subsistence hunting and rural living.
The militia spirit derives from an early American dependence on arms to protect themselves from foreign armies and hostile Native Americans.
Survival depended upon everyone being capable of using a weapon.
Prior to the American Revolution there was neither budget nor manpower nor government desire to maintain a full-time army.
Therefore, the armed citizen-soldier carried the responsibility.
Service in militia, including providing one's own ammunition and weapons, was mandatory for all men—just as registering for military service upon turning eighteen is today.
Yet, as early as the 1790s, the mandatory universal militia duty gave way to voluntary militia units and a reliance on a regular army.
Throughout the 19th century the institution of the civilian militia began to decline.
Closely related to the militia tradition was the frontier tradition with the need for a means of self-protection closely associated with the nineteenth century westward expansion and the American frontier.
In popular literature, frontier adventure was most famously told by James Fenimore Cooper, who is credited by Petri Liukkonen with creating the archetype of an 18th-century frontiersman through such novels as The Last of the Mohicans (1826) and The Deerslayer (1840).

==
Ownership levels ==
"Americans made up 4 percent of the world's population but owned about 46 percent of the entire global stock of 857 million civilian firearms.
"
U.S civilians own 393 million guns.
American civilians own more guns "than those held by civilians in the other top 25 countries combined.
""American
civilians own nearly 100 times as many firearms as the U.S. military and nearly 400 times as many as law enforcement.
"
Americans bought more than 2 million guns in May 2018, alone.
That is more than twice as many guns, as possessed by every law enforcement agency in the United States put together.
In April and May 2018, U.S. civilians bought 4.7 million guns, which is more than all the firearms stockpiled by the United States military.
In 2017, Americans bought more than 18 million firearms in the year 2020.
,
which is more guns than possessed by every law enforcement agency in the world put together.
Between 2012 and 2017, U.S. civilians bought 135 million guns, 2 million more guns than the combined stockpile of all the world's armed forces.

==
Popular culture ==
In the late 19th century, cowboy and "Wild West" imagery entered the collective imagination.
The first American female superstar, Annie Oakley, was a sharpshooter who toured the country starting in 1885, performing in Buffalo Bill's Wild West show.
The cowboy archetype of individualist hero was established largely by Owen Wister in stories and novels, most notably The Virginian (1902), following close on the heels of Theodore Roosevelt's The Winning of the West (1889–1895), a history of the early frontier.
Cowboys were also popularized in turn of the 20th century cinema, notably through such early classics as The Great Train Robbery (1903) and A California Hold Up (1906)—the most commercially successful film of the pre-nickelodeon era.
Gangster films began appearing as early as 1910, but became popular only with the advent of sound in film in the 1930s.
The genre was boosted by the events of the prohibition era, such as bootlegging and the St. Valentine's Day Massacre of 1929, the existence of real-life gangsters (e.g., Al Capone) and the rise of contemporary organized crime and escalation of urban violence.
These movies flaunted the archetypal exploits of "swaggering, cruel, wily, tough, and law-defying bootleggers and urban gangsters.
"With
the arrival of World War II, Hollywood produced many morale boosting movies, patriotic rallying cries that affirmed a sense of national purpose.
The image of the lone cowboy was replaced in these combat films by stories that emphasized group efforts and the value of individual sacrifices for a larger cause, often featuring a group of men from diverse ethnic backgrounds who were thrown together, tested on the battlefield, and molded into a dedicated fighting unit.
Guns frequently accompanied famous heroes and villains in late 20th-century American films, from the outlaws of Bonnie and Clyde (1967) and The Godfather (1972), to the fictitious law and order avengers like Dirty Harry (1971) and RoboCop (1987).
In the 1970s, films portrayed fictitious and exaggerated characters, madmen ostensibly produced by the Vietnam War in films like Taxi Driver (1976) and Apocalypse Now (1979), while other films told stories of fictitious veterans who were supposedly victims of the war and in need of rehabilitation (Coming Home and The Deer Hunter, both 1978).
Many action films continue to celebrate the gun toting hero in fantastical settings.
At the same time, the negative role of the gun in fictionalized modern urban violence has been explored in films like Boyz n
the Hood (1991) and Menace 2 Society (1993).
==
Political and cultural theories ==
Gun culture and its effects have been at the center of major debates in the US's public sphere for decades.
In his 1970 article "America as a Gun Culture," historian Richard Hofstadter used the phrase "gun culture" to characterize America as having a long-held affection for guns, embracing and celebrating the association of guns and an overall heritage relating to guns.
He also noted that the US "is the only industrial nation in which the possession of rifles, shotguns, and handguns is lawfully prevalent among large numbers of its population".
In 1995, political scientist Robert Spitzer said that the modern American gun culture is founded on three factors: the proliferation of firearms since the earliest days of the nation, the connection between personal ownership of weapons and the country's revolutionary and frontier history, and the cultural mythology regarding the gun in the frontier and in modern life.

More recently, in 2008, the US Supreme Court affirmed that considerable freedom for individuals to possess firearms is guaranteed by the Second Amendment.

==
Terms applied to opponents ==
The terms that gun rights and gun control advocates use to refer to opponents are part of the larger topic of gun politics.

The term gun nut refers to firearms enthusiasts who are deeply involved with the gun culture.
It is regarded as a pejorative stereotype cast upon gun owners by gun control advocates as a means of implying that they are fanatical, exhibit abnormal behavior, or are a threat to the safety of others.
Some gun owners embrace the term affectionately.
The term hoplophobia refers to an "irrational aversion to firearms, as opposed to justified apprehension about those who may wield them."
==
Foreign perspective ==
The US attitude to guns generally perplexes those in developed countries, who cannot understand the unusual permissiveness of American gun laws, and why the American public does not push for harsher gun control measures in the face of mass shootings.
Critics contrast the US reaction to terrorism given how few deaths it causes, with their high death rates from non-terror related gun crime.
For some people in countries such as Brazil, who experienced gun restrictions, the US is a benchmark in gun legislation.

== See also ==
Global gun cultures
Gun control
Gun ownership
Gun politics
Gun show loophole
Gun violence in the United States
Index of gun politics articles


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Gun Culture".
TIME.
March 18, 2009.

Pilkington, Ed (10 January 2011).
"
US gun crime: death for sale".
The Guardian.
London.

DeBrabander, Firmin (2015).

Do Guns Make Us Free?:
Democracy and the Armed Society.
Yale University Press.

ASIN: B07CGH7R79
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to military science:
Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.
It strives to be a scientific system that if properly employed, will greatly enhance the practitioner's ability to prevail in an armed conflict with any adversary.
To this end, it is unconcerned whether that adversary is an opposing military force, guerrillas or other irregulars, or any adversary who knows of or utilizes military science in response.

==
Topics within military science ==
Military organization
Military education and training
Military history
Military geography
Military technology and equipment
Military strategy and doctrine
Intelligence cycle management
Foreign policy analysis
Diplomacy
== Types of military technology ==
Weapon
Armour – protective clothing intended to defend its wearer from intentional harm in combat and military engagements, typically associated with soldiers
Artillery – large caliber weapons firing projectiles one at a time.

Artillery pieces are crew serviced weapons that provide direct or indirect trajectories for the shell
Medieval siege weaponry
Fortifications – military constructions and buildings designed for defense in warfare–
Martial arts – also known as fighting systems, martial arts are bodies of codified practices or traditions of training for unarmed and armed combat, usually without the use of guns and other modern weapons–
Mêlée – hand-to-hand combat or mano-a-mano; weapons commonly used in mêlée include swords, clubs, spears, axes, or fists: almost any tool with which one can hit someone else
Military vehicles – are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces
Armoured fighting vehicle
Armoured personnel carrier
Tank
Military aviation and military aircraft – Military aviation include such areas as transport, bombing, surveillance, and aerial warfare
Military communications – the transmission medium that links military components on the battlefield
Communications
Military engineer
Military robots – autonomous or remote-controlled devices designed for military applications
Unmanned Ground Vehicles
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicles
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles
Military thought and planning –
military tactics, strategy, and doctrine
Military doctrine – level of military planning between national strategy and unit-level
Military strategy – collective name for planning the conduct of warfare
Military tactics – collective name for methods of engaging and defeating an enemy in battle
Military unit – an organization within an armed force.
It may consist of any number of soldiers, ships, vehicles, or aircraft.
Armies, navies, and air forces, are organised hierarchically into groups of various sizes for functional, tactical and administrative purposes
Military rank
Comparative military ranks
Munitions – often defined as a synonym for ammunition.
A slightly broader definition would include bombs, missiles, warheads, and mines
Bullet
Missile
Bomb
Mine
Landmine
Naval mine
Naval warfare – combat in and on seas and oceans
Navy
Naval ship
Submarine
Small arms and firearms
– a firearm is a kinetic energy weapon that fires either a single or multiple projectiles propelled at high velocity by the gases produced by action of the rapid confined burning of a propellant


==
Military by region ==
List of militaries by country
List of air forces
List of armies by country
List of navies
List of military special forces units
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army


==
History of military science and technology ==
Military history
===
By historical period ===
Prehistoric warfare
Ancient warfare
Medieval warfare
Gunpowder warfare
Industrial warfare
Total war
Irregular warfare
Modern warfare
===
By battlespace ===
Air power history
History of aerial warfare
Army history
History of land warfare
History of information warfare
History of espionage
Nuclear espionage
Atomic spies
History of surveillance
Naval history
History of naval warfare
History of space warfare
===
By terrain ===
History of arctic warfare
History of cyber-warfare
History of desert warfare
History of jungle warfare
History of mountain warfare
History of urban warfare


===
By weapon technology ===
History of armoured warfare
History of artillery
History of biological warfare
History of cavalry
History of chemical warfare
History of electronic warfare
History of infantry
History of mechanized warfare
History of sea-based and land-based mine warfare
History of nuclear warfare
History of nuclear weapons
History of psychological warfare
History of radiological warfare
History of ski warfare
History of submarine warfare


===
History of military tactics ===
History of amphibious warfare
History of asymmetric warfare
History of attrition warfare
History of cavalry tactics
History of conventional warfare
History of fortification
History of guerrilla warfare
History of hand to hand combat
History of invasion
History of joint warfare
History of maneuver warfare
Siege warfare
Total warfare
Trench warfare
History of unconventional warfare


===
History of military strategy ===
History of economic warfare
History of grand strategy
History of operational warfare


==
General military science and technology concepts ==
Aircraft
Bomber
Fighter aircraft
Aircraft carrier
Air superiority
Basic training
Battlespace
Defense
Draft
Exchange officer
Maginot line
Militaria
Military Aid to the Civil Power
Military Aid to the Civil Community
Military academy
Military courtesy
Military fiat
Military history
Military incompetence
Military logistics
Junta
Military organization
Military rule (disambiguation)
Military science
Military tactics
Military technology and equipment
Mutually assured destruction (MAD)
Napalm
Nuclear missile
SLBM
ICBM
MIRV
Tactical nuclear weapon
Radar
Recruiting
Sonar
Strategic Bombing
Troop density
War crime (list)
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
Mass murder
War rape


==
Influential military strategists ==
Following are examples from throughout history of prominently influential military strategists:

Cyrus the Great
Sun Tzu – Chinese military general, strategist, and philosopher during the Zhou dynasty's Spring and Autumn Period.
He is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War, an extremely influential ancient Chinese book on military strategy.

Sun Bin
Chanakya
Alexander the Great
Chandragupta Maurya
Hannibal
Qin Shi Huang
Julius Caesar
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa
Zhuge Liang
Khalid ibn al-Walid
Genghis Khan
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
Frederick the Great
Napoleon Bonaparte
Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington
Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher
Antoine-Henri Jomini
Nathan Bedford Forrest
Carl von Clausewitz – German-Prussian soldier and military theorist who stressed the psychological and political aspects of war.
His ideas have been widely influential in military theory and have had a strong influence on German military thought specifically.

Robert E. Lee
Ulysses S. Grant
William Tecumseh Sherman
Helmuth von Moltke
the Elder
Alfred von Schlieffen
Hans Delbrück
Alfred Thayer Mahan
Ferdinand Foch
Giulio Douhet
Billy Mitchell
J. F. C. Fuller
B. H. Liddell Hart
Hans von Seeckt
Heinz Guderian
Erwin Rommel
Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke
Bernard Montgomery,
1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein
George Marshall
Dean Acheson


==
Military science and technology lists ==
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army
List of air forces
List of navies
List of armies
List of battles


==
See also ==
Outline of war
Military science fiction


==
External links ==
Collection of military handbooks etc.
This is a list of equipment used by the Venezuelan Army.

==
Artillery ==


== Vehicles ==


==
Aircraft ==
==
Infantry weapons ==


==
References ==
In the United States, access to guns is controlled by law under a number of federal statutes.
These laws regulate the manufacture, trade, possession, transfer, record keeping, transport, and destruction of firearms, ammunition, and firearms accessories.
They are enforced by state agencies and the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF).

In addition to federal gun laws, all state governments and some local governments have their own laws that regulate firearms.

The right to keep and bear arms is protected by the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution.

==
Major federal gun laws ==
Most federal gun laws are found in the following acts:
National Firearms Act ("NFA") (1934):
Taxes the manufacture and transfer of, and mandates the registration of Title II weapons such as machine guns, short-barreled rifles and shotguns, heavy weapons, explosive ordnance, suppressors, and disguised or improvised firearms.

Federal Firearms Act of 1938 ("FFA")
: Requires that gun manufacturers, importers, and those in the business of selling firearms have a Federal Firearms License (FFL).
Prohibits the transfer of firearms to certain classes of people, such as convicted felons.

Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (1968):
Prohibited interstate trade in handguns, increased the minimum age to 21 for buying handguns.

Gun Control Act of 1968 ("GCA"):
Focuses primarily on regulating interstate commerce in firearms by generally prohibiting interstate firearms transfers except among licensed manufacturers, dealers and importers.

Firearm Owners Protection Act ("FOPA") (1986):
Revised and partially repealed the Gun Control Act of 1968.
Prohibited the sale to civilians of automatic firearms manufactured after the date of the law's passage.
Required ATF approval of transfers of automatic firearms.

Undetectable Firearms Act (1988):
Effectively criminalizes, with a few exceptions, the manufacture, importation, sale, shipment, delivery, possession, transfer, or receipt of firearms with less than 3.7 oz of metal content.

Gun-Free School Zones Act (1990):
Prohibits unauthorized individuals from knowingly possessing a firearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to believe, is a school zone.

Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act (1993): Requires background checks on most firearm purchasers, depending on seller and venue.

Federal Assault Weapons Ban (1994–2004):
Banned semiautomatics that looked like assault weapons and large capacity ammunition feeding devices.
The law expired in 2004.

Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act (2004):
Granted law enforcement officers and former law enforcement officers the right to carry a concealed firearm in any jurisdiction in the United States, regardless of state or local laws, with certain exceptions.

Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act (2005)
: Prevents firearms manufacturers and licensed dealers from being held liable for negligence when crimes have been committed with their products.

===
Overview of current regulations ===
Fugitives, those convicted of a felony with a sentence exceeding 1 year, past or present, and those who were involuntarily admitted to a mental facility are prohibited from purchasing a firearm; unless rights restored.
Forty-four states have a provision in their state constitutions similar to the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, which protects the right to keep and bear arms.
The exceptions are California, Iowa, Maryland, Minnesota, New Jersey, and New York.
In New York, however, the statutory civil rights laws contain a provision virtually identical to the Second Amendment.
Additionally, the U.S. Supreme Court held in McDonald v. Chicago (2010) that the protections of the Second Amendment to keep and bear arms for self-defense in one's home apply against state governments and their political subdivisions.

==
History ==
Important events regarding gun legislation occurred in the following years.
In 1791, the United States Bill of Rights were ratified which included the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution which stated that "A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed."

In 1934, with the abundance of gang related crime, such as the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre, the National Firearms Act ("NFA") was signed into law under President Franklin D. Roosevelt's Administration.
The NFA is considered to be the first federal legislation to enforce gun control in the United States, imposing a $200 tax, equivalent to nearly $4,000 in 2019, on the manufacture and transfer of Title II weapons.
It also mandated the registration of machine guns, short-barreled rifles and shotguns, heavy weapons, explosive ordnance, suppressors, and disguised or improvised firearms.

In 1938, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Federal Firearms Act of 1938 ("FFA") into law, requiring that all gun related businesses must have a Federal Firearms License (FFL).

In 1939, through the court case United States v. Miller, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that Congress could regulate interstate selling sawed-off shotguns through the National Firearms Act of 1934, deeming that such a weapon has no reasonable relationship with the efficiency of a well regulated militia.

In 1968, following the spree of political assassinations including: the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy, and the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr, President Lyndon B. Johnson, pushed Congress for the Gun Control Act of 1968 ("GCA").
It repealed and replaced the FFA, regulated “destructive devices” (such as bombs, mines, grenades, and other explosives), expanded the definition of machine gun, required the serialization of manufactured or imported guns, banned importing military style weapons, and imposed a 21 age minimum on the purchasing of handguns from FFLs.
The GCA also prohibited selling of firearms to felons and the mentally ill.

In 1986, contrary to prior gun legislation, the Firearm Owners Protection Act ("FOPA") (1986), passed under the Ronald Reagan administration, enacted protections for gun owners.
It prohibited a national registry of dealer records, limited ATF inspections to conduct annual inspections (unless multiple infractions have been observed), allowed licensed dealers to sell firearms at "gun shows" in their state, and loosened regulations on the sale and transfer of ammunition.
However the FOPA also prohibited civilian ownership or transfer of machine guns made after May 19, 1986, and redefined "silencer" to include silencer parts.

In 1993, the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act, named after a White House press secretary who was disabled during the attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan, was signed into law under the presidency of Bill Clinton.
This act required that background checks must be conducted on gun purchases and established a criminal background check system maintained by the FBI.

In 1994, the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act was signed into law under the presidency of Bill Clinton, which included the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, effectively banned the manufacturing, selling, and possession of specific military-style assault weapons such as AR-15 style rifles and banned high-capacity ammunition magazines that held over 10 rounds.
Banned arms that were previously legally possessed were grandfathered.
The ban expired in September 2004.

In 2003, the Tiahrt Amendment proposed by Kansas Representative, Todd Tiahrt, limited the ATF to only release information from its firearms trace database to only law enforcement agencies or a prosecutors in connection with a criminal investigation.

In 2005, The Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act was signed into law under the presidency of George W. Bush.
This act protected gun manufacturers from being named in federal or state civil suits by those who were victims of crimes involving guns made by that company.

In 2008, the Supreme Court ruled in the case District of Columbia v. Heller that the Second Amendment is an "individual right to possess a firearm unconnected with service in a militia" and struck down Washington D.C.'s handgun ban.
But the Supreme Court also stated "that the right to bear arms is not unlimited and that guns and gun ownership would continue to be regulated."

In 2010, the Supreme Court ruled in the case McDonald v. Chicago that the Second Amendment is incorporated and thus applies against the states.

In 2016, the Supreme Court ruled in the case Caetano v. Massachusetts that "the Second Amendment extends, prima facie, to all instruments that constitute bearable arms, even those that were not in existence at the time of the founding".
==
Second Amendment ==
The right to keep and bear arms in the United States is protected by the Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
While there have been contentious debates on the nature of this right, there was a lack of clear federal court rulings defining the right until the two U.S. Supreme Court cases of District of Columbia v. Heller (2008) and McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010).

An individual right to own a gun for personal use was affirmed in the landmark District of Columbia v. Heller decision in 2008, which overturned a handgun ban in the federal District of Columbia.
In the Heller decision, the court's majority opinion said that the Second Amendment protects "the right of law-abiding, responsible citizens to use arms in defense of hearth and home."

However, in delivering the majority opinion, Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia wrote on the Second Amendment not being an unlimited right:
Like most rights, the Second Amendment right is not unlimited.
It is not a right to keep and carry any weapon whatsoever in any manner whatsoever and for whatever purpose: For example, concealed weapons prohibitions have been upheld under the Amendment or state analogues.
The Court's opinion should not be taken to cast doubt on longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms.

The four dissenting justices argued that the majority had broken prior precedent on the Second Amendment, and took the position that the amendment refers to an individual right, but in the context of militia service.
In the McDonald v. City of Chicago decision in 2010, the Supreme Court ruled that, because of the incorporation of the Bill of Rights, the guarantee of an individual right to bear arms applies to state and local gun control laws and not just federal laws.
The Supreme Court has not ruled on whether the Second Amendment protects the right to carry guns in public for self-defense.
Federal appeals courts have issued conflicting rulings on this point.
For example, the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit ruled in 2012 that it does, saying, "The Supreme Court has decided that the amendment confers a right to bear arms for self-defense, which is as important outside the home as inside."
However, the Tenth Circuit Court ruled in 2013 that it does not, saying, "In light of our nation's extensive practice of restricting citizen's freedom to carry firearms in a concealed manner, we hold that this activity does not fall within the scope of the Second Amendment's protections.
"
More recently, the Ninth Circuit Court ruled in its 2016 decision Peruta v. San Diego County that the Second Amendment does not guarantee the right of gun owners to carry concealed firearms in public.

==
Eligible people ==
The following are eligible to possess and own firearms within the United States, though further restrictions apply:

Citizens of the United States
Nationals but not citizens of the United States
Lawful permanent residents of the United States (also known as "green card" holders)
Aliens (or foreign nationals) who have been lawfully admitted to the United States as refugees
Aliens (or foreign nationals) who have been lawfully admitted to the United States under nonimmigrant visas but only if they fall under one of the following exceptions:admitted into the United States for lawful hunting or sporting purposes
possesses a lawful hunting license or permit issued by any US state
an official representative of a foreign government who is accredited to the United States Government or the Government's mission to an international organization having its headquarters in the United States or is en route to or from another country to which that alien is accredited
an official of a foreign government or a distinguished foreign visitor who has been so designated by the Department of State
a foreign law enforcement officer of a friendly foreign government entering the United States on official law enforcement business
has received a waiver from the United States Attorney General as long as the waiver petition shows this would be in the interests of justice and would not jeopardize the public safety under 18 U.S. Code § 922(y)(3)(c)
non-resident of any US state unless the receipt of firearms are for lawful sporting purposesEach state has its own laws regarding who is allowed to own or possess firearms, and there are various state and federal permitting and background check requirements.
Controversy continues over which classes of people, such as convicted felons, people with severe or violent mental illness, and people on the federal no-fly list, should be excluded.
Laws in these areas vary considerably, and enforcement is in flux.

==
Prohibited persons ==
The Gun Control Act of 1968 prohibits certain classes of people from buying, selling, using, owning, receiving, shipping, carrying, possessing or exchanging any firearm or ammunition.
Those prohibited include any individual who:

has been convicted in any court of a "crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year";
is a fugitive from justice;
is an unlawful user of or addicted to any controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act, codified at 21 U.S.C. § 802);
has been adjudicated as a mental defective or has been committed to any mental institution;
is an illegal alien (i.e. any person who is unlawfully in the United States);
has been lawfully admitted as an alien under a nonimmigrant visa and is not exempt under 18 U.S.C. § 922(y)(2);
has been discharged from the Armed Forces under dishonorable conditions;
has renounced his or her United States nationality (i.e., became a foreign national);
is subject to a court order restraining the person from harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner or child of the intimate partner; or
has been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violenceThese categories are listed on ATF Form 4473
— Firearms Transaction Record background check form.
According to the US Sentencing Commission, approximately 5,000 to 6,000 prohibited people a year are convicted of receiving or possessing a firearm.
In 2017, over 25.2 million background checks were performed.

==
Manufacturers ==
Under United States law, any company or gunsmith which in the course of its business manufactures guns or gun parts, or modifies guns for resale, must be licensed as a manufacturer of firearms.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence - Key Congressional Acts Related to Firearms
National Rifle Association - Citizen's Guide To Federal Firearms Laws - Summary
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to science fiction:
Science fiction – a genre of fiction dealing with the impact of imagined innovations in science or technology, often in a futuristic setting.
or depicting space exploration.
Exploring the consequences of such innovations is the traditional purpose of science fiction, making it a "literature of ideas".

==
What is science fiction?
==
Definitions of science fiction:
Science fiction includes such a wide range of themes and subgenres that it is notoriously difficult to define.
Accordingly, there have been many definitions offered.
Science fiction is a type of:

Fiction – form of narrative which deals, in part or in whole, with events that are not factual, but rather, imaginary and invented by its author(s).
Although fiction often describes a major branch of literary work, it is also applied to theatrical, cinematic, and musical work.

Genre fiction – fictional works (novels, short stories)
written with the intent of fitting into a specific literary genre in order to appeal to readers and fans already familiar with that genre.
Also known as popular fiction.

Speculative fiction
Genre – science fiction is a genre of fiction.

== Genres of science fiction ==
Science fiction genre – while science fiction is a genre of fiction, a science fiction genre is a subgenre within science fiction.
Science fiction may be divided along any number of overlapping axes.
Gary K. Wolfe's Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy identifies over 30 subdivisions of science fiction, not including science fantasy (which is a mixed genre).

===
Science ===
Genres concerning the emphasis, accuracy, and type of science described include:

Hard science fiction—a particular emphasis on scientific detail and/or accuracy.

Mundane science fiction—a subgenre of hard sci-fi which sets stories on Earth or the Solar System using current or plausible technology.

Soft science fiction—focus on human characters and their relations and feelings, often exploring psychology or sociology, while de-emphasizing the details of technological hardware and physical laws.
In some cases, science and technology are depicted without much concern for accuracy.

===
Characteristics ===
Themes related to science, technology, space and the future, as well as characteristic plots or settings include:

Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic science fiction
Biopunk — centered around  biotechnology and genetic engineering in general, biopunk uses some both (post)cyberpunk elements and post-modernist prose to describe a typically dystopian world of biohackers, man-made viruses, mutations, designer babies, artificial life forms, bio-genetic engineered human-animal hybrids and bio-genetically manipulated humans.

Cyberpunk — uses elements from the hard-boiled detective novel, film noir, Japanese anime, and post-modernist prose to describe the nihilistic, underground side of a cybernetic society
Climate fiction — emphasizes effects of anthropogenic climate change and global warming at the end of the Holocene era
Dying Earth science fiction
Military science fiction
Steampunk —
denotes works set in (or strongly inspired by) an era when steam power was still widely used — usually the 19th century, and often set in Victorian England — though with otherwise high technology or other science fiction elements
Time travel
Space colonization
Space opera — emphasizes romantic adventure, exotic settings, and larger-than-life characters
Social science fiction — concerned less with technology and more with sociological speculation about human society
Mundane science fiction


===
Movements ===
Genres concerning politics, philosophy, and identity movements include:

Christian science fiction
Feminist science fiction
Gay/lesbian science fiction
Libertarian science fiction


===
Eras ===
Genres concerning the historical era of creation and publication include:

Scientific romance — an archaic name for what is now known as the science fiction genre, mostly associated with the early science fiction of the United Kingdom.

Pulp science fiction
Golden Age of Science Fiction — a period of the 1940s during which the science fiction genre gained wide public attention and many classic science fiction stories were published.

New Wave science fiction — characterised by a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content.

Cyberpunk — noted for its focus on "high tech, low life" and taking its name from the combination of cybernetics and punk.

===
Combinations ===
Genres that combine two different fiction genres or use a different fiction genre's mood or style include: 

Alternate history science fiction—fiction set in a world in which history has diverged from history as it is generally known
Comic science fiction
Science fiction erotica
Adventure science fiction—science fiction adventure is similar to many genres
Gothic science fiction—a subgenre of science fiction that involves gothic conventions
New Wave science fiction—characterized by a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content
Science fantasy—a mixed genre of story which contains some science fiction and some fantasy elements
Science fiction opera—a mixture of opera and science fiction involving empathic themes
Science fiction romance—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and romance genres
Science fiction mystery—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and mystery genres, encompassing Occult detective fiction and science fiction detectives
Science fiction Western—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and Western genres
Space Western—a subgenre of science fiction that transposes themes of American Western books and film to a backdrop of futuristic space frontiers.

Spy-fi a subgenre of spy fiction that includes some science fiction.

==
Related genres ==
Fantasy
Science fantasy
Mystery fiction
Horror
fiction
Slipstream fiction
Utopian and dystopian fiction
Superhero fiction
==
Science fiction by country ==
Australian science fiction
Bengali science fiction
Canadian science fiction
Chilean science fiction
Chinese science fiction
Croatian science fiction
Czech science fiction
Estonian science fiction
French science fiction
Japanese science fiction
Norwegian science fiction
Polish science fiction
Romanian science fiction
Russian science fiction
Serbian science fiction
Spanish science fiction


==
History of science fiction ==
History of science fiction films
==
Elements of science fiction ==


===
Character elements in science fiction ===
List of stock characters in science fiction
Extraterrestrials in fiction


===
Plot elements in science fiction ===


====
Plot devices in science fiction ====
Hyperspace


===
Setting elements in science fiction ===
The setting is the environment in which the story takes place.

Elements of setting may include culture (and its technologies), period (including the future), place (geography/astronomy), nature (physical laws, etc.),
and hour.

Setting elements characteristic of science fiction include:


====
Place ====
Parallel universes
Planets in science fiction
Hyperspace
Slipstream
Earth in science
fiction


====
Cultural setting elements ====
Political ideas in science fiction
Utopian and dystopian fiction
World government in science fiction
World government in fiction
Religious ideas in science fiction
List of religious ideas in science fiction
Religion in speculative fiction
Xenology


====
Sex and gender in science fiction ====
Gender in science fiction
Sex in science fiction
Pregnancy in science fiction
LGBT themes in speculative fiction


=====
Technology in science fiction =====
Computer technology
Artificial intelligence in fiction
List of fictional computers
Mind
uploading in fiction
Transportation
Flying car (aircraft)
Space dock
Weapons in science fiction
Resizing
Simulated reality in fiction
Space warfare in fiction
Weapons in science fiction


===
Themes in science fiction ===
First contact


===
Style elements in science fiction ===
==
Works of science fiction ==


===
Science fiction art ===
List of science fiction and fantasy artists
Science fiction comics
===
Science fiction games ===


====
Science fiction computer games ====


====
Science fiction role-playing games ====


===
Science fiction literature ===
Science fiction comics
Speculative poetry
====
Science fiction novels ===
=
List of science fiction novels


====
Science fiction
short stories ====
List of science fiction short stories


=====
Venues for science fiction
short stories =====
Science fiction magazine
Science fiction fanzine


===
Science fiction video ===
Science fiction film
Science fiction on television
List of science fiction television programs
List of science fiction sitcoms
U.S. television science fiction
British television science fiction
===
Science fiction radio ===
Science fiction radio programs
==
Information sources ==
Baen Free Library
Internet Speculative Fiction DataBase
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
==
Science fiction in academia ==
Science fiction studies
New Wave science fiction
Science in science fiction
Materials science in science
fiction
Science fiction and fantasy journals
Science fiction libraries and museums


==
Science-fiction subculture ==
Science fiction conventions
List of science fiction conventions
List of fan conventions by date of founding
Science fiction fandom
Science fiction fanzine
Science fiction organizations
==
Science-fiction awards ==
The science fiction genre has a number of recognition awards for authors, editors, and illustrators.

Awards are usually granted annually.

===
International awards ===
Major awards given in chronological order:

since 1953:
Hugo Award for general science fiction
since 1965:
Nebula Award for general science fiction
since 1966:
Edward E. Smith Memorial Award (the Skylark)
since 1970:
BSFA Award for British science fiction
since 1970:
Seiun Award for Japanese science fiction
since 1971: Locus Award for science fiction, fantasy, and new authors (separate awards)
since 1972:
Saturn Award for film and television science fiction
since 1973:
John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel
since 1978:
Rhysling Award for best science fiction poetry, given by the Science Fiction Poetry Association
since 1982:
Philip K. Dick Award
since 1987:
Arthur C. Clarke Award
since 1987: Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award for best short science fiction
since 1996:
Méliès d'Or for science fiction, fantasy and horror films
since 2003:
Robert A. Heinlein Award
since 2006: Parsec Award
since 2016: Dragon Awards
since 2017:
Nommo Awards


===
Nationality-specific awards ===
AustralianAurealis
Award—Australian
Chandler Award—for contributions to Australian Science fiction
Ditmar Award—for SF by AustraliansBritishKitschies—for speculative fiction novels published in the UKCanadianConstellation Awards—for the best SF/fantasy film or television works released in Canada
Prix Aurora Awards—for Canadian science fiction
Sunburst Award— Juried award for Canadian science fictionChineseThe Galaxy Awards (银河奖)—given by magazine Science Fiction World for Chinese SF&FCroatianSFERA Award—given by SFera, a Croatian SF societyDutchPaul Harland Prize—for Dutch SFEstonianStalker Award—for the best Estonian SF novel, given out on Estcon by Eesti Ulmeühing, the Estonian SF society.
FinnishTähtivaeltaja Award—for the best SF novel released in FinlandFrenchGrand Prix de l'Imaginaire—France since 1974
Prix Jules-Verne—France 1927–1933 and 1958–1963
Prix Tour-Apollo Award—France 1972-1990GermanKurd-Laßwitz-Preis—German SF awardIsraeliGeffen Award—Israel since 1999ItalianPremio Urania—for Italian SFJapaneseNihon SF Taisho Award—Japan since 1980New
ZealanderSir Julius Vogel Award—for SF by New ZealandersPacific NorthwesternEndeavour Award—for SF by Pacific Northwest
authorPolishJanusz A. Zajdel Award—award of Polish fandom
Nautilus Award—Polish awardRomanianSRSFF Award—
RomâniaRussianBig Roscon award for outstanding contribution to science fictionTurkishTBD Science Fiction Story Award—
Turkey


===
Themed awards ===
(Chronological)
Prometheus Award—best libertarian SF—since 1979
Lambda Literary Award—since 1988
Tiptree Award—since 1991
Golden Duck Awards—best children's SF—1992-2017
Sidewise Award for Alternate History—since 1995
Gaylactic Spectrum Awards—since 1999
Emperor Norton Award—San Francisco—2003-2011
Science Fiction & Fantasy Translation
Awards—2011-2014


===
New artists /
first works
awards ===
Compton Crook Award—for best first novel
Jack Gaughan Award—for best emerging artist
John W. Campbell Award—for best new writer
Writers of the Future—contest for new authors


===
Career awards ===
Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award—associated with the Nebula


==
People influential in science fiction ==


===
Creators of science fiction ===


====
Science fiction artists ===
=
List of science fiction and fantasy artists


====
Science fiction filmmakers ====


====
Creators of science fiction literature ====
List of science fiction authors
Women science fiction authors
List of science fiction editors


===
Science fiction scholars ===
Brian Aldiss
Isaac Asimov—Asimov on Science Fiction
Brian Attebery
Everett F. Bleiler
John W. Campbell
John Clute—co-editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (with Peter Nicholls)
Samuel R. Delany
Hugo Gernsback—founder of the pioneering science fiction magazine Amazing Stories, and the person who the Hugo Awards are named after.

David Hartwell
Larry McCaffery
Judith Merril
Sam Moskowitz
Peter Nicholls—co-editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (with John Clute)
Alexei Panshin
David Pringle—editor of Foundation and Interzone; author of Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels
Andrew Sawyer
Dorothy Scarborough
Brian Stableford
Darko Suvin
Gary K. Wolfe


==
Franchises ==
There are a number of science fiction media franchises of this type, typically encompassing media such as cinema films, TV shows, toys, and even theme parks related to the content.
The highest-grossing science fiction franchise is Star Wars.

Space science fiction franchises:
Alien (6 films since 1979 and 2 Alien vs Predator films since 2004)
Babylon 5 (2 television series, 7 TV movies since 1993)
Battlestar Galactica (5 television series and two TV movies since 1979)
Doctor
Who (TV series since 1963, 2 Dr.
Who films since 1965, and 1 1996 television film, five spinoff TV shows (K-9 and Company, The Sarah Jane Adventures, Torchwood, K-9 and Class), video games and hundreds of books)
Dune (23 novels since 1965, 1 film in 1984, 3 comics since 1984, 2 TV series since 2000)
Godzilla (36 films since 1954 and 3 TV series since 1978)
Halo (since 2001, started from video game)
Independence Day (2 films since 1996)
Legend of the Galactic Heroes (2 novel series since 1983 and 3 anime OVA series since 1988)
Macross (4 anime TV series since 1982, 6 anime films since 1984, 3 manga series since 1994)
Mass Effect (since 2007, started from video game)
Men in Black (4 films since 1997 and animated TV series)
Mobile Suit Gundam (21 anime TV series since 1979, 7 anime films since 1988, successful model kits since 1980)
Neon Genesis Evangelion (1 anime TV series since 1995 and 5 anime films since 1997)
Planet of the Apes (9 films since 1968)
Predator (4 films since 1987 and 2 Alien vs Predator films since 2004)
Robotech (1 anime TV series and 5 anime films since 1985)
Space Battleship Yamato (5 anime TV series since 1974 and 7 anime films since 1977)
Space Odyssey (2 short stories since 1954, 2 films since 1968, 4 novels since 1968, 1 1972 book)
Star Trek (7 live-action TV series since 1966, 2 animated TV series, 6 Original Series films since 1979, 4 Next Generation films since 1994 and 3 reboot films since 2009)
Star Wars (9 episodic "Saga" films since 1977, 1 1978 TV film, 2 Ewok films since 1985, 1 2008
The Clone Wars film, 2 "Anthology" films since 2016, 3 canon animated TV series since 2008, 1 canon live-action TV series since 2019, 3 Legends TV series since 1985)
Stargate (4 TV series and three theater film since 1994)
The Expanse (8 novels and 1 television series since 2011)
Transformers (28 TV series since 1984, 4 animated films since 1986, 5 live action films since 2007, started from toy line)
Ultra Series (34 TV series since 1966 and 29 films since 1967)


== See also ==
List of science fiction themes
Outline of fiction
Outline of fantasy
Timeline of science fiction


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Science Fiction (Bookshelf) at Project Gutenberg
SF Hub—resources for science-fiction research, created by the University of Liverpool Library
Science fiction fanzines (current and historical) online
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America—their "Suggested Reading" page
Science Fiction Museum & Hall of Fame
Science Fiction Research Association
Science Fiction at the Internet Archive
(in Russian)
Ковтун Е. Н. Художественный
вымысел в
литературе 20 века.
—
Высшая школа, 2008. —
1500 экз.
—
ISBN 978-5-06-005661-7.

(in Russian) Жанры — рубрика
журнала «
Мир фантастики»
(in Russian)
Вячеслав Бабышев Внешние и
внутренние жанры фантастики //
Уральский следопыт.
—
2014.
—
№ 11 (689).
—
С. 81-84.

(in Russian)
Жанры фантастики на Фантлабе.

(in Russian)
Классификация фантастики на сайте «Фэнта Зиландия».
Since the Vietnam War, most of Vietnamese vessels were supplied by the Soviet Union and presently by Russia, while hundreds more were integrated into the navy after it was left over from South Vietnam although many have been decommissioned due to lack of parts.
However, due to rising tensions in the South China Sea, many nearby nations such as Japan have shown support in developing Vietnam's Navy and Coast Guard.
The Vietnam People's Navy is the branch of the Vietnam People's Army with the fastest modernisation as the Vietnamese government put it as a main priority, with constant improvement to its weapons, munitions and combat capability.

==
Vessels ==


==
Aircraft ==
== Munitions ==


==
Soldier Equipment ==


===
Gear ===


===
Firearms ===


===
Vehicles ===


==
Procurement ==
As the Vietnam People's Navy is responsible for protecting the nation's sovereignty and economic activities at sea, as well to repulse unauthorised foreign vessels intruding into Vietnamese waters, Vietnam's policy has considered the modernisation of the Navy a priority task in the overall military modernisation plan.
As stated on 5 August 2011 by Minister of Defence Phùng Quang Thanh:

The direction of building up the armed forces is one to follow the revolutionary spirit, regularisation and effectiveness and gradual modernisation.
Within this context, the Navy, the Air Force, the Signal Corps and Electronic Warfare will proceed directly into modernisation to protect the country.

Frigates and corvettes
: Two Gepard-class frigates were laid down in 2011 by the Zelenodolsk shipyard in Russia, named HQ-011 Dinh Tien Hoang and
HQ-012 Lý Thái Tổ, and two more were ordered.
A contract was made in 2011 with Schelde Naval Shipbuilding in the Netherlands to build two Sigma-class corvettes in the Netherlands and two more in Vietnam.
The Vietnam People's Navy has itself built six Tarantul-class corvettes (Molniya class) with Russian supervision and has designed and built the first warships of the TT-400TP gunboat class.

Submarines: Vietnam deployed its first submarine flotilla, Flotilla 182, on 1 June 1982.
This flotilla was trained in Cam Ranh Bay under the guidance of Soviet submarine officers and used North Korea's Yugo-class submarine.
In April 2011, Vietnam ordered six Kilo-class submarines worth about 1.8 billion dollars, said to be the entire defence budget of Vietnam in 2009.
With six submarines, the first to be delivered in 2012 and the last one to be delivered by 2016, Vietnam will own the largest and most modern submarines in Southeast Asia.

Offshore patrol vessel: When Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyễn Tấn Dũng visited India in October 2014 it was announced that India will supply 4 naval vessels to Vietnam, and quickly operationalise a $100 million line of credit which will allow Vietnam to purchase new vessels from India.

Naval air force:
The Vietnam People's Navy prepared to build the Naval Air Force to increase the capacity of coastal defence.
On 27 February 2010, the Vietnamese People's Army General Staff decided to build and make the 954th Naval Air Force Regiment a regular member of the Vietnamese Navy.
Vietnam has purchased three CASA
C-212 Aviocar Series 400 aircraft.
The aircraft are equipped with MSS 6000 radar and the Naval Air Force will use them for general patrol purposes.
Vietnamese Navy received two Eurocopter EC225 Super Puma to offshore patrol and search and rescue missions.
Viking Air Company of Canada contracted to sell to Vietnam six Seaplane DHC-6
Twin Otter Series 400 aircraft from 2012 to 2014.
While eight Kamov Ka-28 helicopters also transferred to the naval air force.

Coastal defence missile force: Vietnam People's Navy is building a coastal defence missile force (the 679th Coastal Missile Regiment) to become a core force in its maritime security strategy, with Russian and Indian missile systems.
The Vietnamese Navy has already produced for itself the
P-5 Pyatyorka/Shaddock anti-ship missile, with a range of 550 km.
Vietnam was the only customer to which the Soviet Union exported this missile system.
The then Russia delivered two K-300P Bastion-P coastal defence systems to Vietnam.
The Bastion system uses the P-800 Oniks/Yakhont supersonic anti-ship missile, primarily used to attack targets on land and sea, has an attack range of 300 km, and can be used to protect a coastline of over 600 km.
During a 2014 visit of Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyễn Tấn Dũng to India, the Indian government under Prime Minister Narendra Modi showed willingness to sell their BrahMos supersonic cruise missiles developed by the Russia-India joint venture BrahMos Aerospace Private Limited to Vietnam.
The Vietnamese are now starting to locally produce the anti-ship missile Kh-35 Uran-E after receiving 33 missiles in 2010.

==
See also ==
Vietnam People's Navy


== References ==
Special Forces of the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces (Russian:
Части и подразделения специального назначения (спецназ)
Главного управления
Генерального штаба
Вооружённых сил
Российской Федерации (СпН ГУ ГШ ВС РФ)), commonly known as the Spetsnaz G.U. or Spetsnaz GRU is the special forces (spetsnaz) of the G.U., the foreign military intelligence agency of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.

The Spetsnaz GRU was formed in 1949, the first spetsnaz force in the Soviet Union, as the military force of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU), the foreign military intelligence agency of the Soviet Armed Forces.
The force was designed in the context of the Cold War to carry out reconnaissance and sabotage against enemy targets in the form of special reconnaissance and direct action attacks.
The Spetsnaz GRU inspired additional spetsnaz forces attached to other Soviet intelligence agencies, such as the Vympel and Alpha Group of the KGB.

==
Modus operandi ==
The concept of using special forces tactics and strategies in the Soviet Union was originally proposed by the military theorist Mikhail Svechnykov, who envisaged the development of unconventional warfare capabilities in order to overcome disadvantages that conventional forces faced in the field.
Svechnykov was executed during the Great Purge in 1938, but practical implementation of his ideas was begun by Ilya Starinov, dubbed the "grandfather of the spetsnaz".
Following the entrance of the Soviet Union into World War II, basic forces dedicated to acts of reconnaissance and sabotage were formed under the supervision of the Second Department of the General Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces, and were subordinate to the commanders of Fronts.
The primary function of Spetsnaz troops in wartime was infiltration/insertion behind enemy lines (either in uniform or civilian clothing), usually well before hostilities are scheduled to begin and, once in place, to commit acts of sabotage such as the destruction of vital communications logistics centers, as well as the assassination of key government leaders and military officers.
Spetsnaz GRU training included: weapons handling, fast rappelling, explosives training, marksmanship, counter-terrorism, airborne training, hand-to-hand combat, climbing (alpine rope techniques), diving, underwater combat, emergency medical training, and demolition.

==
History ==


===
Soviet era ===
The situation was reviewed after the war ended, and between 1947 and 1950 the whole of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) was reorganized.

The first "independent reconnaissance companies of special purpose" were formed in 1949, to work for tank and combined-arms armies, which were tasked to eliminate amongst others enemy nuclear weapons systems such as the MGR-3 Little John and MGM-1 Matador.
In 1957, the first Spetsnaz battalions were formed under the GRU, five to operate beyond the 150–200 km range of the reconnaissance companies.
The first brigades were formed in 1962, reportedly to reach up to 750 kilometres in the rear to destroy U.S. weapons systems such as the MGM-52 Lance, MGM-29 Sergeant, and MGM-31 Pershing.

Two 'study regiments' were established in the 1960s to train specialists and NCOs, the first in 1968 at Pechora near Pskov, and the second in 1970 at Chirchik near Tashkent.
According to Vladimir Rezun, a GRU defector who used the pseudonym "Viktor Suvorov", there were 20 GRU Spetsnaz brigades plus 41 separate companies at the time of his defection in 1978.

====
Known missions ====
In May 1968, at the peak of the Vietnam War, nine GRU special forces operatives raided a secret US airbase in Cambodia in a bid to capture a brand new Super Cobra attack helicopter, equipped with the latest guidance systems and guided missiles at the time.
As a result of the operation, one helicopter was stolen and taken to Vietnam which was eventually brought back to the Soviet Union.
The rest were destroyed and 15 Americans soldiers were killed in the operation.
According to the Soviets, the U.S. learnt about the attack on the base by Soviet special forces years later thanks to a KGB leak.
The first major foreign operation of the unit came in August 1968, when Moscow decided to crack down on the Prague Spring and move the troops of Warsaw Pact countries into Czechoslovakia.
The Spetsnaz GRU was tasked with capturing the Prague Airport.
On the night of 21 August, a Soviet passenger plane requested an emergency landing at the Prague Airport, allegedly due to engine failure.
After landing, the commandos, without firing a shot, seized the airport and took over air traffic control.
At the same time, other Spetsnaz GRU units that had infiltrated into Prague a few days before the operation seized control of other key city points.
In December 1979, the undercover Spetsnaz GRU unit codenamed "Muslim Battalion" participated in Operation Storm-333, the successful mission to assassinate Hafizullah Amin, the President of Afghanistan, and to capture Amin's residential palace which triggered the Soviet–Afghan War.
Most of Spetsnaz GRU's operations remain classified even after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
It is believed the special forces had participated in operations in more than nineteen countries around the world in Africa, Asia and South America.
From time to time, the men also served as military instructors and set up training camps for Soviet-backed fighters in Vietnam and Angola.
===
Russian Federation era ===
Following the deactivation of the Soviet GRU in 1992, control of the special forces was transferred to the newly formed G.U. of Russia and were maintained to their respective assigned units as before.
According to Stanislav Lunev, who defected to the U.S. in 1992, the GRU also commanded some 25,000 Spetsnaz troops as of 1997.Following the 2008 Russian military reform, a brand new Directorate of Special Operations was established in 2009 following studies of American and various Western special operations forces units and commands.
The newly formed Special Operations Forces which is directly subordinated to the General Staff, bypassing the GRU.
In 2013, the Directorate became the Special Operations Forces Command with a GRU unit transferring to the command.
In 2010, Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to the military districts of the Ground Forces and was subordinate to the operational-strategic commands until 2012, due to then Defence Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov's military reforms.
This decision was reversed in 2013 and Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to their original GRU divisions.

====
Known operations ====
Throughout the mid-1990s to the 2000s, Spetsnaz GRU were involved in both the First Chechen War and more prominently in the Second Chechen War and also the Invasion of Dagestan in August 1999.
The special forces learned invaluable lessons from the first war and transformed into a better and more effective fighting force and were instrumental in Russia's and the Russian backed government's success in the second war.

In 2003, during the Second Chechen War, the GRU formed the Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad, two ethnic Chechen units that belonged to the Spetsnaz GRU which fought primarily in Chechnya, and also in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War as well as peacekeeping operations after the 2006 Lebanon War.

Spetsnaz GRU maintains an airborne unit, the Separate Spetsnaz Airborne Reconnaissance Unit (codenamed No.
48427), which participated in the 2008 Georgian War.
The unit is housed at Matrosskaya Tishina 10 in Moscow.
During the period of insurgency in the North Caucasus region, Spetsnaz GRU along with special forces from the FSB and MVD conducted numerous special operations and counter-terrorism operations against mainly the Caucasus Emirate, Wilayat al-Qawqaz and other smaller terrorist groups.

After the Crimean crisis, during which some units of Spetsnaz GRU were a part of the "Little green men", and the start of the rebel insurgency by pro-Russian rebels, Ukraine has on numerous occasions accused various Spetsnaz forces of aiding the rebels and even fighting on the ground in Eastern Ukraine.
In December 2014, the Ukrainian military claimed that the Spetsnaz GRU was involved in attacks on an airport in Donetsk which was later captured by DPR in the battle.

In late 2015, GRU special forces operators were reportedly involved in the Syrian Civil War, appearing in the government offensives of Aleppo and Homs.
GRU officials have also visited Qamishli, near the border with Turkey.

==
List of GRU special units ==
Below is a list of current "Spetsnaz" units in the Russian Armed Forces that fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations:
Russian Ground Forces - fields
7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

2nd Spetsnaz Brigade – based in Promezhitsa, Pskov Oblast
Brigade
HQ
Signals Battalion (2× Company)
Support Company
70th
Special Purpose Detachment
329th Special Purpose Detachment
700th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
3rd Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tolyatti 
Brigade HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
1st Special Purpose Detachment (1st Battalion)
790th
Special Purpose Detachment (2nd Battalion)
791st Special Purpose Detachment (3rd Battalion)
Training Battalion (2× Company)
10th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Mol'kino, Krasnoyarsk Territory
Brigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
K-9 Unit
325th
Special Purpose Detachment
328th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
14th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Ussuriysk
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
282nd Special Purpose Detachment
294th Special Purpose Detachment
308th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
16th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tambov, with all units deployed in Tambov except for the 664th SPD.

Brigade HQ
EOD company
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
370th Special Purpose Detachment
379th Special Purpose Detachment
585th Special Purpose Detachment
664th Special Purpose Detachment
669th
Special Purpose Detachment
22nd Special Purpose Brigade – entire unit is based in Stepnoi, Rostov Oblast 
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Support Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
Engineer Unit
108th Special Purpose Detachment
173rd Special Purpose Detachment
305th Special Purpose Detachment
411th Special Purpose Detachment
24th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Irkutsk, with all units and units deployed in IrkutskBrigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
281st Special Purpose Detachment
297th Special Purpose Detachment
641th Special Purpose Detachment
25th Special Purpose Regiment
Russian Airborne
Troops45th Guards Special Purpose Brigade – based in Kubinka 
Russian Navy
The navy also fields dedicated maritime sabotage and counter-sabotage diver units which are attached to the naval infantry.
These units also include combat swimmers, trained to conduct underwater combat, mining and clearance diving.
The task is to protect ships and other fleet assets from enemy frogmen and special forces.
The term "combat swimmers" is correct term in relation to the staff of the OSNB PDSS.
Every PDSS unit has approximately 50–60 combat swimmers.
There are PDSS units in all major naval bases across Russia.
The OMRP is composed of reconnaissance divers that fall under operational subordination to the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU).
There are four OMRPs in Russia serving each fleet: Northern Fleet, Baltic Fleet, Black Sea Fleet and Pacific Fleet, with each consisting of 120–200 personnel.

Naval Special Reconnaissance (OMRP)42nd Marine Reconnaissance point (Pacific Fleet)
388th Marine Reconnaissance point (Black Sea Fleet) – reorganized from the former 431st MRP
420th Marine Reconnaissance point (Northern Fleet)
561st
Marine Reconnaissance point (Baltic Fleet)
Counteraction Underwater Diversionary Forces and Facilities
(PDSS)
101st PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
102nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Sevastopol
136th PDSS Detachment - based in Novorossiysk
137th PDSS Detachment - based in Makhachkala
140th PDSS Detachment - based in Vidyayevo
152nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Polyarny, Murmansk Oblast
153rd PDSS Detachment - based in Ostrovnoy, Murmansk Oblast
159th PDSS Detachment - based in Razboynik
160th
PDSS Detachment - based in Murmansk
269th
PDSS Detachment - based in Gadzhiyevo
311th PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
313rd PDSS Detachment - based in Baltiysk
473rd PDSS Detachment - based in Kronstadt


===
Dissolved units ===
The Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad were two Spetsnaz units; Vostok headquartered at Eastern Chechnya and Zapad headquartered at Western Chechnya.

It was subordinate to the GRU and responsible for carrying out mountain warfare and special operations in Chechnya.
A power struggle then broke out between rival pro-Russian Chechen warlords then Head of the Chechen Republic Kadyrov and Sulim Yamadaev which led to a series of assassinations and shootouts in the ensuing years forcing the GRU to disband the controversial battalions in November 2008.

== See also ==
Similar foreign special forces units:
List of special forces units


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Carey Schofield, The Russian Elite:
Inside Spetsnaz and the Airborne Forces, Greenhill, London, 1993
Scott and Scott, The Armed Forces of the Soviet Union
Viktor Suvorov, Spetsnaz:
The Story Behind the Soviet SAS, 1987, Hamish Hamilton Ltd, ISBN 0-241-11961-8
Steve Zaloga, James W. Loop, Soviet Bloc Elite Forces, Volume 5 of Elite Series, Osprey Publishing, 1985, ISBN 0850456312, 9780850456318
The Ukrainian Ground Forces (Ukrainian:
Сухопутні Війська ЗСУ Sukhoputni
Viys’ka [ZSU]) are the land force component of the Armed Forces of Ukraine.
They were formed from Soviet Ground Forces formations, units, and establishments, including three military districts (the Kyiv, Carpathian, and Odessa Military Districts), that were on Ukrainian soil when the Soviet Union collapsed.

Since Ukraine's independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 Ukraine retained its Soviet-era army equipment.
Also, the Armed Forces have been systematically downsized since 1991 and as a result it was largely dilapidated in July 2014.
Since the start of the War in Donbass in April 2014 in eastern Ukraine, Ukraine continues to upgrade its Armed Forces.
Its size of 129,950 in March 2014 had grown to 204,000 active personnel in May 2015, with the Ground Forces branch having 169,000 soldiers as of 2016.
In 2016, 75% of the army consisted of contract servicemen.
Ukraine's ground forces have also received more modern tanks, APCs, and many other types of combat equipment.

==
History ==
Prior to the October Revolution of 1917, three separate self-governing Ukrainian states existed on what is Ukraine today.
Each of these states possessed armed forces.
The largest of these, the Ukrainian People's Republic, itself comprised three separate regimes.
The Ukrainian People's Army is an example of one of the early national armed forces.
Other armed independence movements existed in the wake of both the First World War and the Second World War, and these armies each had distinct organisation and uniforms.
These armed forces, and the independent Ukrainian homeland for which they fought, were eventually incorporated into the neighboring states of Poland, Soviet Union, Hungary, Romania and Czechoslovakia.

===
Collapse of the USSR ===
On their establishment in 1991, the Armed Forces of Ukraine included approximately 780,000 personnel, 7,000 armored vehicles, 6,500 tanks, and 2,500 tactical nuclear missiles.
However, the problem that Ukraine face was that while it had vast armed forces, it lacked a proper command structure.
Therefore, on 24 August 1991, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine ratified the resolution of taking under its control, all military units of former Soviet Armed Forces, situated on the territory of Ukraine; and in turn the establishment of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine.

===
Creation of the Ground Forces ===
Following the declaration of Ukrainian independence in 1991, Ukraine inherited the 1st Guards Army, 13th Army, 38th Army, two tank armies (the 6th Guards Tank Army and the 8th Tank Army), and the 32nd Army Corps (32-й Кенигсберский армейский корпус) at Simferopol.
In addition, the 28th Guards Motor Rifle Division (MRD) and the 180th MRD were left in Ukraine, having been previously under the 14th Guards Army headquartered at Tiraspol in the Moldovan SSR.
The post of commander of ground troops was designated in early 1992.
By the end of 1992, the Kyiv Military District disbanded, and Ukraine used its structures as the basis for the Ministry of Defence and the General Staff.
Between June and August 1993, the first redesignation of armies to army corps appears to have taken place.
While the chief of ground forces post had been created in early 1992, it was over two years before the first holder, Colonel General Vasily Sobkov, was appointed on 7 April 1994.
The legal framework for the Ground Forces was defined in Article 4 of the law 'On the Armed Forces of Ukraine.'
At that time, the Ground Forces had no separate command body, and were directly subordinate to the Ukrainian General Staff.

The creation of the Ground Forces as a separate armed service was enacted by Presidential Decree 368/96 of 23 May 1996, 'On the Ground Forces of Ukraine.'
That year both the Ground Forces Command was formed and the 1st Army Corps was reorganised as the Northern Territorial Operational Command (which became the Northern Operational Command in 1998).
In 1997 the Carpathian Military District was reorganised as the Western Operational Command.

From 1992 to 1997, the forces of the Kyiv MD were transferred to the Odessa MD, and the Odessa MD's headquarters moved to Donetsk.
A new 2nd Army Corps was formed in the Odessa MD.
Armies were converted to army corps, and motor rifle divisions converted into mechanised divisions or brigades.
Pairs of attack helicopter regiments were combined to form army aviation brigades.

President Leonid Kuchma revealed in a December 1996 speech that as many as 191 mechanised infantry and tank battalions were rated not ready, adding,"This is especially dangerous in the forward-based units securing the nation's borders."
===
Reform ===
According to a plan promulgated in 2000 the Ground Forces were to reduce the number of troops from the then 300,000 to 240,000 by 2015, and an ultimate change from a partial conscript-based force to a fully professional military.
The Armed Forces received little more than half of the Hr 68 million it was promised for reform in 2001, but managed to disband nine regiments and close 21 local military bases.
In 2005–06, the Northern Operational Command was reorganised as Territorial Directorate "North".
It was tasked with territorial defence, mobilisation training, and preparation of reserves.
From 1991 the Ukrainian Ground Forces bought its military equipment only from Russia and other CIS states, as well as locally producing some of their own equipment.
Until 2014 and the start of the War in Donbass, the defence industry in Ukraine produced equipment mostly for export.
===
Russian occupation of Crimea ===
In the aftermath of the 2014 Ukrainian Revolution, Russian special forces in unmarked uniforms began surrounding Ukrainian military bases on the Crimean peninsula before capturing them individually using a mixture of attrition and threats.
Over the following weeks the Russian Armed Forces consolidated control of the peninsula and established road blocks to cut off the possibility of Ukraine sending reinforcements from the mainland.
By the end of March, all remaining Ukrainian troops were ordered to pull out of Crimea.
The Ukrainian Army was considered to be in a poor state during and after the annexation with only 6,000 of its troops ready for combat and many of its vehicles lacking batteries.
After Russia's annexation only 6,000 of the 20,300 Ukrainian soldiers stationed in Crimea before the annexation left the peninsula.
The rest stayed in Crimea.

===
War in Donbass ===
In the early months of the War in Donbass that erupted in 2014 the Armed Forces were widely criticised for their poor equipment and inept leadership, forcing Internal Affairs Ministry forces like the National Guard and the territorial defence battalions to take on the brunt of the fighting in the first months of the war.
By February 2018 the Ukrainian armed forces were larger and better equipped, numbering 200,000 active-service military personnel and most of the volunteer soldiers of the territorial defence battalions were integrated into the official Ukrainian army.
Within the reporting period of 16 November 2017 to 15 February 2018
a United Nations OHCHR
monitoring mission documented 115 cases of credible allegations of human rights abuses committed by Ukrainian military personnel.
The nature of the crimes ranges from enforced disappearances, looting of civilian property, torture, rape and sexual violence up to political repression and extrajudicial killings.

==
Military training and education centers ==
Training in 2006 was aimed at developing mobility and combat readiness of the forces.
The Ukrainian armed forces took advantage of the opportunities provided by UN exercises and exercises where Ukraine and NATO nations and other partners participated.
Training resulted in 6,000 combat-ready troops in the spring of 2014 of Ukraine's (then) 129,950 active military personnel.
In 2016 the Ukrainian army had more than 200,000 combat-ready soldiers of its 260,000 active personnel.
In 2015 Ukraine, the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada established the Joint Multinational Training Group – Ukraine (JMTG-U) and they set up three new training sites, in Khmelnytskyi, Yavoriv and Kamianets-Podilskyi.
===
Education centers ===
In 2007 the system of exercise/training ranges was optimized, decreasing their number and providing a specialized role.
Schooling occurs at:

169th Training Center –
(Desna / 50°55'35"N 30°45'27"E) –
Home to army initial training, for all personnel entering the Army, it is also houses the 169th Teaching Brigade which homes in the tactics and skills of tankers and mechanized/motorized infantrymen.

Hetman Petro Sahaidachnyi National Ground Forces Academy – (Lviv / 49°49'28"N 24°1'2"E) –
It is an academy for all officer cadets seeking a commission, an equivalent of the American West Point and British Sandhurst.

Ivan Chernyakhovsky National Defense University of Ukraine – (Kyiv / 50°25'57"N 30°
27'52"E
) – Teaches specialization like foreign languages, book keeping, cryptology, study of armaments, logistics, etc.

Ivan Bohun Military High School – (Kyiv / 50°25'24"N 30°32'43"E) – A JROTC style boarding school which has curriculum identical to Ukraine's public schools with added focus on military teachings and discipline.

Korolev Signals Institute –
(Zhytomyr / 50°17'6"N 28°36'54"E)
– Teaches theory and practice of electromagnetic waves and their uses in communication, radio location, eavesdropping, and jamming.

Military Institute of Telecommunications and Information Technologies – (Kyiv / 50°25'18"N 30°33'25"E) –
Teaches subjects of: Computer Science, Systems engineering, Telecommunications, Security Information and Communication Systems, Systems of technical protection of information, Electronic military administration.

Odessa Artillery AcademyTraining ranges are at:


==
Branches of the Ground Forces ==


===
Armoured and mechanised forces ===
Mechanised Infantry and armoured forces are the primary components of the Ukrainian Ground Forces.
Their primary objectives in case of war are capturing and holding targets, maintaining positions, defending against attack, penetrating enemy lines and defeating enemy forces.

The mechanised and armoured forces are equipped with a combination of Soviet-made (part of them modernized) and modern Ukrainian armored vehicles which includes T-80, T-64, (T-64BV Model 2017, T-64BV), T-64BM "Bulat" and
T-72UA1 main battle tanks, BTR-4, BTR-60, BTR-70 and BTR-80 wheeled armored personnel carriers and BMP-1,
BMP-2 and BMD-2 infantry combat vehicles.

Since the fall of the Soviet Union, a large number of the previous Soviet mechanised formations on Ukrainian soil have been disbanded – the IISS says totals have dropped from 14 divisions, in 1992, to two divisions, six brigades, and one independent regiment in 2008.
Today, all mechanised and armoured formations are called brigades.

===
Mountain and Jager Brigades ===
The Ukrainian Ground Forces also include two mountain infantry brigades and the newly formed 61st Jager brigade, reformed from the 61st Motorized Infantry in 2019.

10th
Mountain Brigade
128th Mountain Brigade
61st Jager Infantry Brigade


===
Army Aviation Regiment ===
Army Aviation provides reconnaissance, tactical fire support and air transport for the Ukrainian Ground Forces.
As of 2017 Ukraine's army fields four Army Aviation brigades:
11th Army Aviation Brigade, Kherson
12th Army Aviation Brigade,
Novyi Kalyniv
16th Army Aviation Brigade, Brody
18th Army Aviation Brigade,
PoltavaThe Army Aviation's maintenance facility is the 57th Aviation Base in Brody.
The service's equipment includes: Mi-2, Mi-8, Mi-9, Mi-24 and Mi-26 helicopters.

===
Rocket Forces and Artillery ===


===
Army Air Defence ===
The Army Air Defence units are responsible for protecting troops against enemy air attacks anywhere on the battlefield, and while in combat.
The Ukrainian Ground Forces army air defence branch is equipped with a variety of effective surface-to-air missile systems of division level and anti-aircraft missile and artillery complexes of regiment level.
Regiment level units are characterized by their high rate of fire, vitality, maneuverability, and capability of action under all conditions of modern combat arms operations.
Surface-to-air missile systems and complexes of division level are characterized by their long range and firepower and are equipped with surface-to-air missile complexes; S-300V, Osa, Buk, Buk-M1 and Tor.
While anti-aircraft missile and artillery complexes that are of regiment level are equipped with the Tunguska-M1, Igla MANPADS system, Strela, and Shilka anti-aircraft missile systems.
The army's only separate radar system, meaning it isn't a part of any anti-aircraft system, is the Ukrainian Kolchuga-M.
It was designed sometime between the years 1993–1997, the system is said to be one of the most advanced passive sensors in the world, as it is claimed to be able to detect stealth aircraft.

== Structure ==
2017 structure of the Ukrainian Ground Forces after the reorganization caused by the Donbass War.
It built and expanded on the 2011 structure.

Ground Forces Command, Kyiv.15th
Rocket Artillery Regiment "Kyiv" (BM-30 Smerch), Drogobych
19th Missile Brigade "Zaporizhia" (OTR-21 Tochka-U), Khmelnytskyi
27th
Rocket Artillery Brigade "Sumy" (BM-27 Uragan), Sumy
38th Artillery Brigade, Popilnia
43rd Heavy Artillery Brigade (2S7 Pion), Pereiaslav
107th
Rocket Artillery Regiment (BM-30 Smerch), Kremenchuk
11th Army Aviation Brigade, Kherson
12th Army Aviation Brigade,
Novyi Kalyniv
16th Army Aviation Brigade, Brody
18th Army Aviation Brigade, Poltava
169th Training Centre, Desna300th Tank Training Regiment
354th
Mechanized Training Regiment
6th Artillery Training Regiment, Divychky
507th
Maintenance Training Battalion
718th Transport Training Battalion
1121st Anti-aircraft Missile Artillery Training Regiment
184th Training Centre (Ukraine), Starychi
49th Reconnaissance Training Center (Ukraine)
355th Mechanized Training Regiment
356th Artillery Training Regiment
Tank Training Battalion
138th Material Supply Training Battalion
Anti-Tank Missile Specialists School
other units
1st Independent Presidential Guard Regiment, Kyiv
Operational Command West, Rivne10th Mountain Assault Brigade, Kolomyia
14th Mechanized Brigade, Volodymyr-Volynskyi
24th Mechanized Brigade, Yavoriv
128th Mountain Brigade, Mukachevo
44th Artillery Brigade, Ternopil
39th Anti-aircraft Missile Artillery Regiment, Volodymyr-Volynskyi
55th Signals Regiment, Rivne
146th Maintenance Regiment, Zolochiv
703rd Engineer Regiment, Sambir
136th Reconnaissance Battalion, Rivne
Operational Command North, Chernihiv1st Tank Brigade, Honcharivske
30th
Mechanized Brigade, Novohrad-Volynskyi
58th Motorized Brigade, Konotop
72nd Mechanized Brigade, Bila Tserkva
26th Artillery Brigade, Berdychiv
1129th Anti-aircraft Missile Artillery Regiment, Bila Tserkva
61st
Jager Infantry Brigade, Chernihiv
5th Signal Regiment, Chernihiv
12th Engineer Regiment, Novohrad-Volynskyi
50th Maintenance Regiment, Huiva
20th Electronic Warfare Battalion, Zhytomyr
54th Reconnaissance Battalion, Novohrad-Volynskyi
Operational Command South, Odessa28th
Mechanized Brigade, Chornomorske
56th Motorized Brigade, Melitopol
57th Motorized Brigade, Kropyvnytskyi
59th Motorized Brigade, Haisyn
40th Artillery Brigade, Pervomaisk
38th Anti-aircraft Missile Artillery Regiment, Nova Odesa
7th Signal Regiment, Odessa
16th
Engineer Regiment,
145th
Maintenance Regiment,
131st Reconnaissance Battalion, Gushchintsy
Operational Command East, Dnipro (as the result of War in Donbass, a split from the OC "South")
17th Tank Brigade, Kryvyi Rih
53rd Mechanized Brigade, Sievierodonetsk
54th Mechanized Brigade, Bakhmut
92nd Mechanized Brigade,
Chuhuiv
93rd Mechanized Brigade, Cherkaske
55th Artillery Brigade, Zaporizhia
1039th Anti-aircraft Missile Artillery Regiment,
Hvardiiske
91st Engineer Regiment, Okhtyrka
121st
Signal Regiment, Cherkaske
532nd Maintenance Regiment, Cherkaske
74th Reconnaissance Battalion, Cherkaske
502nd Electronic Warfare Battalion, Cherkaske


===
Reserve army ===
4th Army Reserve Corps3rd Tank Brigade
5th
Tank Brigade
14th Tank Brigade
15th Mechanized Brigade
33rd Mechanized Brigade
45th Artillery Brigade
60th Mechanized Brigade
62nd Mechanized Brigade
63rd Mechanized BrigadeThe 4th Army Reserve Corps
(Ukrainian:
4-й армійський корпус резерву) is a new formation, directly subordinated to the General Staff.
It is also called the Army Strategic Reserve Corps.
Its main function is to prepare and administer the reservists of the ground forces.
According to plans it should be fully operational by 2020 with reserve servicemen in three separate categories:
Operational Reserve of the First Line (оперативний резерв першої черги) – by 2020 it should include about 50,000 reserve servicemen with extensive combat training (60 days of combat training every 2 years) in the reserve companies and batteries of the operational army brigades and regiments and those reservists are to become casualty replacements in wartime
Operational Reserve of the Second Line (оперативний резерв другої черги) – it should include reserve servicemen with combat training of 30 days every 2 years in territorial defence brigades.
In addition the command personnel will undergo 10 days training cycles yearly.
The 4th Army Corps should also act as the pool formation for those territorial brigades and transfer them to the ground forces' operational commands in wartime as needed.

Mobilization Reserve (мобілізаційний резерв)
– it should include all the Ukrainian citizens, who are eligible to mobilization in case of a war, but do not belong to the first or the second line operational reserve.
They could be used to form support units or to boost the service numbers of the territorial brigades as casualty replacements.

===
Geographic distribution ===


== List of commanders ==
Title "Commander-in-chief" (Ukrainian:
Головнокомандувач) 1992 – 2005, "Commander" (Ukrainian:
Командувач) 2005 – present

1992 – 1994
no appointment (see above text)
1994 – 1998
Colonel General Vasyl Tymofiyovych Sobkov (uk:Собков Василь Тимофійович)
1998 –
2001 Colonel General Petro Ivanovych Shulyak
2001 – 2002 Colonel General Oleksandr Ivanovych Zatynayko
2002 – 2004
Colonel General Petro Ivanovych Shulyak
2004 – 2006 Colonel General Mykola Mykolayovych Petruk
2006 – 2007
Lieutenant General Valeriy Semenovych
Frolov
2007 – 2009
Colonel General Ivan Yuriyovych Svyda
2009 – 2014 Colonel General Henadiy Petrovych Vorobyov
2014 – 2016 Lieutenant General Anatoliy Sabbatiyovych Pushnyakov
2016
– 2019 Colonel General Serhiy Mikolayovych Popko
2019 - present Colonel General Ruslan Khomchak


==
Military ranks ==
As a non-member state, NATO rank codes are not used in Ukraine, they are presented here for reference purposes only
In the new uniforms the Ukrainian Army unveiled in August 2016 the stars that traditionally adorn shoulder straps have been replaced by diamonds.
A new set of insignia are being adopted.

===
General and officer ranks ===


===
Other ranks and NCOs ===


==
Equipment ==


===
Uniforms ===
The Ukrainian Army unveiled its new uniforms on 24 August 2016
(Independence Day of Ukraine).
The new uniforms are modeled on British military styles.
They also incorporate details from the uniforms worn by the Ukrainian People's Army.
The new cap includes an insignia of a Ukrainian Cossack grasping a cross.

==
Deployment outside of Ukraine ==


===
Iraq ===
Ukraine deployed a sizable contingent of troops to the Iraq War, these were stationed near Kut.
Ukraine's troop deployment was the second largest of all former Soviet states besides Georgia and they deployed more soldiers to the nation then many members of NATO such as Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
Ukraine also suffered the fifth highest casualty toll during the war, with only Polish, Italian, UK, and US forces suffering heavier losses.
From 2003 to 2005 over 1,700 Ukrainian soldiers were deployed to Iraq, the third-largest contingent at the time, they were designated to the 5th Mechanized Brigade (Ukraine), as in Ukraine's mission to Kosovo the troops deployed were contract soldiers and not conscripts.
Ukraine began to severely draw down its troop levels in Iraq in 2005 due to mounting casualties and the political toxicity of the conflict.
By 2005 only 876 soldiers, roughly half of the original contingent were deployed, by years end troop levels dropped to below 100.
In 2008, one year before the official end of the US military mission, President Viktor Yushchenko ordered all remaining troops deployed to Iraq to be returned home and Ukraine's mission to the nation officially over.
===
Afghanistan ===
Since 2001, Ukraine allowed United States military cargo planes to fly over and refuel on Ukrainian soil on their way to Afghanistan.
In 2007 Ukraine deployed a detachment of the 143rd De-mining Center of the Armed Forces of Ukraine to Afghanistan.
Ukraine has kept a team of soldiers deployed to Afghanistan as part of ISAF since 2007, these mostly consisted of pilots, medical officers, and bomb disposal experts.
Ukrainian pilots were responsible for training the pilots of the Afghan Air Force on the operation of several air craft as Afghanistan's forces consisted of many Soviet designed aircraft such as the Mi-17 with which Ukrainian troops were very familiar with.
In 2013, the contingent of troops in Afghanistan totaled 26 troops.
As of 2014 the Ukrainian contingent was further drawn down and the team included 8 bomb disposal experts and several medical officers.

===
Kosovo ===
Ukrainian forces have also been deployed to Kosovo since 2000 as part of the 600 man Polish–Ukrainian Peace Force Battalion.
In August 2014, Ukraine ended its mission to Kosovo due to the 2014 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

===
Africa ===
Ukrainian peacekeeping forces have been deployed to the Democratic Republic of Congo, Liberia, Sudan and South Sudan and Cote d'Ivoire.
Ukrainian forces have also been requested to take a more active role in the Northern Mali Conflict of 2012 in battling Islamic forces.
One of the largest deployments is the 18th Separate Helicopter Unit of the Armed Forces of Ukraine which consisted of 160 servicemen and four Mi-24P helicopters and was deployed to the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2011.

==
Military decorations ==

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


==
Veterans ==
Ukraine provides combat veterans with various benefits.
Ukrainians who have served in World War II, the Soviet–Afghan War, or as liquidators at the Chernobyl disaster are eligible for benefits such as a monthly allowance, a discount on medical and pharmacy services, free use of public transportation, additional vacation days from work, having priority for retention in case of work layoffs, easier loan access and approval process, preference when applying for security related positions, priority when applying to vocation school or trade school, and electricity, gas, and housing subsidies.
Veterans are also eligible to stay at military sanatoriums, provided there is available space.
Since gaining independence, Ukraine has deployed troops to Kosovo, Iraq, and Afghanistan gaining a new generation of veterans separate from those who have served in the Soviet forces.
Most recently the government passed a law extending veteran benefits to Ukrainian troops participating in the War in Donbass.
Moreover, veterans from other nations who move to or reside in Ukraine may be eligible for some of the listed benefits, this provision was likely made to ensure World War II, Chernobyl, and Afghanistan veterans from other Soviet states who moved to Ukraine received similar benefits, however as Ukraine has participated in numerous NATO led conflicts since its independence it is unclear if NATO veterans would be extended these benefits.
Veteran groups are not as developed as in the United States which has numerous well known national organizations such as the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
World War II veterans, and even persons who have lived through the war are generally treated with the highest respect.
Other veterans are not as well known.
Ukrainian veterans from the Soviet War of Afghanistan are strikingly similar to the Vietnam veterans of the United States, although the Soviet Union generally kept the public in the dark through the war, unlike in Vietnam, where coverage was very high.
Afghanistan is often labeled as a mistake by the Soviet Union and its successor states, but the lack of media coverage, and the censorship through the war have ensured that many still remain unaware of their nation's involvement in the conflict.
Despite Ukraine having the 3rd largest contingent of troops in Iraq in 2004, few also realize that their nation has many veterans of the Iraq war.

Soldiers that took part in the War in Donbass can receive free land plots.
On 22 November 2018 the (Ukrainian) Ministry for Veterans Affairs was officially established.

== See also ==
Military ranks of Ukraine
Ukrspetsexport
KMDB
Malyshev Factory


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===
International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2006.

Yuriy Yurchnya, 'The Armed Forces of Ukraine,' Geneva Centre for DCAF, 2010.

==
Further reading ==
Andrew Duncan, 'Ukraine's forces find that change is good,' Jane's Intelligence Review, April 1997, 162–165.

Ben Lombardi, Ukrainian armed forces: Defence expenditure and military reform, Journal of Slavic Military Studies, Vol.
14, No.
3,
version of record date 18 Dec 2007.

James Sherr, Ukraine's Defence Reform:
An Update, Conflict Studies Research Centre,
2002


==
External links ==
The Army of the Armed Forces of Ukraine at the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine
Armament of Ukrainian Ground Forces at the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine
Ukraine:
Ground Forces Equipment
Vepr Assault Rifle
The Ukrainian Army – uarmy.iatp.org.ua
Analysis of the Ukrainian Security Policy
Ukraine's strategic Defence bulletin
May 2016 analysis by Glen Grant, a former colonel in the British Army and lecturer at Riga Business School about powerfulness of Ukraine’s armed forces, produced by 5 Kanal
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to engineering:
Engineering is the scientific discipline and profession that applies scientific theories, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to design, create, and analyze technological solutions cognizant of safety, human factors, physical laws, regulations, practicality, and cost.

==
Branches of Engineering ==
Aerospace engineering – branch of engineering behind the design, construction and science of aircraft and spacecraft.
It is broken into two major and overlapping branches:
Aeronautical engineering – deals with craft that stay within Earth's atmosphere
Astronautical engineering – deals with craft that operate outside of Earth's atmosphere
Applied engineering – application of management, design, and technical skills for the design and integration of systems,
the execution of new product designs, the improvement of manufacturing processes, and the management and direction of physical and/or technical functions of a firm or organization.

Biological engineering
Agricultural engineering
Bionics
Genetic engineering
Biomedical engineering
Metabolic engineering
Neural engineering
Tissue engineering
Civil engineering
Environmental engineering
Architectural engineering
Construction engineering
Geotechnical engineering
Transportation engineering
Hydro engineering
Structural engineering
Urban engineering (Municipal engineering)
Architectonics
Chemical engineering (outline)
Materials engineering
Molecular engineering
Process engineering- also appears under industrial engineering
Electrical engineering (outline)
Broadcast engineering
Computer engineering (outline)
Power systems engineering
Telecommunications engineering
Electronic engineering (includes microelectronics engineering, microelectronics and semiconductor engineering)
Optical engineering
Electromechanical engineering
Control engineering(outline)
Mechatronics
Electromechanics
Instrumentation engineering
Industrial engineering
Engineering psychology
Ergonomics
Facilities engineering
Logistic engineering
Performance engineering
Process engineering- also appears under chemical engineering
Quality engineering (quality assurance engineering)
Reliability engineering
Safety engineering
Security engineering
Support
engineering
Information engineering
Materials
Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Surface Engineering
Biomaterials Engineering
Crystal Engineering
Amorphous Metals
Metal Forming
Ceramic Engineering
Plastics Engineering
Forensic Materials Engineering
Composite Materials
Casting
Electronic Materials
Nano materials
Corrosion Engineering
Vitreous Materials
Welding
Mechanical engineering
Acoustical engineering- includes audio engineering
Aeronautical engineering
Automotive engineering (automotive systems engineering)
Manufacturing engineering
Marine engineering
Thermal engineering
Naval architecture
Sports engineering
Vacuum engineering
Military engineering
Combat engineering
Military technology engineering
Radiation engineering
Nuclear Engineering
Radiation Protection Engineering
Planetary engineering / Climate engineering (Geoengineering)
– planetary engineering is the application of technology for the purpose of influencing the global properties of a planet.
The goal of this theoretical task is usually to make other worlds habitable for life.
Perhaps the best-known type of planetary engineering is terraforming, by which a planet's surface conditions are altered to be more like those of Earth.

Software engineering
Computer-aided engineering
Knowledge engineering
Language
engineering
Release engineering
Teletraffic engineering
Usability engineering
Systems engineering – analysis, design, and control of gigantic engineering systems.

==
History of Engineering ==
History of engineering

Greatest Engineering Achievements
History of chemical engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of software engineering
Roman engineering
Roman military engineering


==
Engineering Concepts ==
Compensation
Crystallization
Earthworks
Exploratory engineering
Fasteners
Flexibility
Freeze
Gate
Good Engineering Practice
Hand tools
Machine tools - Punch
Measuring -- measurement
Materials -- material science --
Tie
Corrosion
Design
Drawings -- drawing -- CAD -- drafting
Cost
Ecological engineering methods
Engineering, procurement and construction
Engineering
economics
Engineering overhead
Engineering society
Management -- planning -- teamwork -- peopleware
Model engineering
Non-recurring engineering
Personalization
Process
Quality -- validation -- quality control
Reverse
engineering
Risk analysis
Systems engineering process
Tolerance
Traction
Value-driven design
Yield


===
Engineering education and certification ===
Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Certified Engineering Technologist
Engineer's degree
Engineering
doctorate
Engineering education
Engineering science and mechanics
Fundamentals of Engineering exam
Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
==
Engineering Awards ==
Academy Scientific and Technical Award
Award of Merit in Structural Engineering
British Construction Industry Awards
British Engineering Excellence Awards
Charles Stark Draper Prize
Engineering Heritage Awards
Engineering Leadership Award
Federal Engineer of the Year Award
Gordon Prize
IEEE Control Systems Award
Louis Schwitzer Award
Mondialogo Engineering Award
NAS Award in Aeronautical Engineering
Percy Nicholls Award
Russ Prize
Seymour Cray Computer Engineering Award
Software Process Achievement Award
Technology & Engineering Emmy Award
The Science, Engineering & Technology Student of the Year
Awards


==
Engineering publications ==
Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century


==
Persons influential in the field of engineering ==
Lists of engineers


==
Lists ==
Index of aerospace engineering articles
Index of electrical engineering articles
Index of genetic engineering articles
Index of mechanical engineering articles
Outline of nanotechnology
Index of software engineering articles


==
See also ==
Outline of architecture
Outline of construction
Outline of design
Infrastructure
Outline of science
Outline of technology
The Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 (AWB 2013) was a bill introduced in the 113th United States Congress as S. 150 by Senator Dianne Feinstein, D-CA, on January 24, 2013, one month after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.

It was defeated in the Senate on April 17, 2013 by a vote of 40 to 60.
==
Background ==
Efforts to create a new federal Assault Weapons Ban (AWB 1994) were renewed on December 14, 2012, when 20 children and six adults were shot and killed at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut.
At the time, it was the deadliest shooting to occur at a primary or secondary school, the second-deadliest mass shooting by a single person, and one of the 25 deadliest mass shootings in U.S. history.
Within hours of the shooting, a We the People user started a petition asking the White House to "immediately address the issue of gun control through the introduction of legislation in Congress.
"
That afternoon, President Barack Obama made a televised statement offering condolences on behalf of the nation to Connecticut governor, Dannel Malloy and saying, "we're going to have to come together and take meaningful action to prevent more tragedies like this, regardless of the politics."
Speaking at a December 16 memorial service in Newtown, Obama said he would "use whatever power this office holds" to prevent similar tragedies.
By December 17, the White House petition had more than 150,000 signatures, and one week after the shooting it had almost 200,000, along with those on 30 similar petitions.
On December 21, 2012, Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the National Rifle Association (NRA), expressed the gun-rights group's sympathy for the families of Newtown.
He said, "The only thing that stops a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun," and that debating legislation that won't work would be a waste of time.
Feinstein and Senator Richard Blumenthal, D-CT, held a separate news conference in response to LaPierre's.
There, Feinstein said that the bill was a work in progress and that one idea was to register grandfathered assault weapons under the National Firearms Act (NFA) and another was a buy-back program.
A December 26, two-page bill summary on the senator's web site also mentioned registering grandfathered assault weapons under the NFA, but not a buy-back program.
(
Neither proposal appeared in the text of the bill introduced to the Senate.)

On January 16, 2013, Obama announced a plan for reducing gun violence in four parts, one of which was banning assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.
The plan included 23 executive orders, signed immediately by the president, and 12 proposals for Congress, including reinstating and strengthening the ban on assault weapons that was in place from 1994 to 2004, and limiting ammunition magazines to 10 rounds.
The proposals were opposed by the NRA and the National Shooting Sports Foundation (NSSF), and opposition was expected by legislators of both parties.

==
Introduction of the bill, and debate ==
On January 24, 2013, Dianne Feinstein and 24 Democratic cosponsors introduced S. 150, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013, into the U.S. Senate.
The bill was similar to the 1994 federal ban, but differed in that it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the 1994 ban.
Such a move would deter the average gun owner from wanting to purchase a neutered rifle.
In addition, it banned: the sale, transfer, importation or manufacture of about 150 named firearms; firearms with thumbhole stocks and bullet buttons; the importation of assault weapons and large-capacity magazines; and high-capacity ammunition magazines (defined as those capable of holding more than 10 rounds).
It would grandfather in weapons legally owned on the day of enactment and exempt more than 2,000 specific firearms "used for hunting or sporting purposes.
"On
March 14, 2013, the Senate Judiciary Committee approved the bill, though it was expected not to clear the full Senate.
(
Had the bill passed in the Senate, it was not expected to pass in the House of Representatives.)
===
Advocacy ===
The NRA's reaction to the proposed bill was swift.
Its Institute for Legislative Action division started a "Stop The Gun Ban" campaign before the legislation was introduced in the Senate, asking its members to call their representatives and urge them to oppose the ban.
Gun Owners of America (GOA) asked its members to do the same.
The Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence issued a press release in support of the bill.

===
Public opinion ===
A USA Today/Gallup poll conducted days after the shooting showed that public support for strengthening gun laws rose 15 percent compared to a similar poll in 2011.
A law banning assault weapons was opposed by 51 percent of Americans, but one banning high-capacity magazines (defined by the poll as those capable of holding more than 10 rounds) was supported by 62 percent of Americans.

==
Defeat of the bill and aftermath ==
In March 2013, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid decided to leave the proposed ban out of the broader gun control bill, saying that it was unlikely to win 40 votes in the 100-member chamber and that it would jeopardize more widely supported proposals.
On the morning of April 17, 2013, Feinstein displayed on the Senate floor a blow-up of a New York Daily News front page with photos of the 20 dead Sandy Hook Elementary School children and the headline, "Shame on U.S." Before the vote, she said to her colleagues, "Show some guts."
However, as expected, S. 150, the Assault Weapons Ban of 2013, failed on a vote of 40 in favor to 60 in opposition.
It was supported by Democrat Reid and Republican Senator Mark Kirk, but 15 Democrats, one independent, and all the Republicans except Kirk voted against the ban.
After the vote, Feinstein said that Congress' failure to pass the law would lead a number of states passing their own assault weapons bans.
She vowed to keep trying, and said "I believe the American people are far ahead of their elected officials on this issue."
==
Criticisms of the bill ==
Critics of the bill said there were over 100 million "high-capacity magazines" (as defined by the bill) already in circulation in the United States.

They also said that very few of these magazines were registered and a ban like this would be ineffective in keeping these magazines out of criminal hands.

==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
"America's debate on gun control".
USA Today.
Gunfight in America.
Series started after Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.

Feinstein, Dianne (2013).
"
Assault Weapons Ban of 2013".
feinstein.senate.gov.

Flock, Elizabeth (April 18, 2013).
"
The NRA Wasn't the Only Group That Killed New Gun Legislation".
U.S. News & World Report.
Retrieved April 13, 2014.

Gold, Matea (December 21, 2012).
"
A defiant NRA calls for armed guards in every school".
Los Angeles Times.

Jamieson, Dave (December 16, 2012). "
Dianne Feinstein To Introduce Assault Weapons Ban
On First Day Of Congress".
Huffington Post.

Sedensky, Stephen J. (November 25, 2013).
"
State's Attorney's Report on Sandy Hook Elementary School Shootings".
New York Times.
Retrieved April 13, 2014.

Sullivan, Sean (December 16, 2012).
"
Bloomberg: Gun control should be Obama's 'number one agenda'".
Washington Post.
The following outline is provided as a topical overview of science:
Science is both the systematic effort of acquiring knowledge through observation, experimentation and reasoning, and the body of knowledge thus acquired.
The word "science" comes from the Latin word "scientia" meaning knowledge.
A practitioner of science is called a "scientist".
Modern science respects objective logical reasoning, and follows a set of core procedures or rules to determine the nature and underlying natural laws of the universe and everything in it.
Some scientists do not know of the rules themselves, but follow them through research policies.
These procedures are known as the scientific method.

==
Essence of science ==
Research – systematic investigation into existing or new knowledge.

Scientific discovery – observation of new phenomena, new actions, or new events and
providing new reasoning to explain the knowledge gathered through such observations with previously acquired knowledge from abstract thought and everyday experiences.

Laboratory – facility that provides controlled conditions in which scientific research, experiments, and measurement may be performed.

Objectivity – the idea that scientists, in attempting to uncover truths about the natural world, must aspire to eliminate personal or cognitive biases, a priori commitments, emotional involvement, etc.

Inquiry – any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem.
==
Scientific method ==
Scientific method
(outline) – body of techniques for investigating phenomena and acquiring new knowledge, as well as for correcting and integrating previous knowledge.
It is based on observable, empirical, measurable evidence, and subject to laws of reasoning, both deductive and inductive.

Empirical method –
Experimental method –
The steps involved to produce a reliable and logical conclusion include:
Conducting initial research and asking a question about a natural phenomenon
Making observations of the phenomenon
and/or collecting data about it
Forming a hypothesis – proposed explanation for a phenomenon.
For a hypothesis to be a scientific hypothesis, the scientific method requires that one can test it.
Scientists generally base scientific hypotheses on previous observations that cannot satisfactorily be explained with the available scientific theories.

Predicting a logical consequence of the hypothesis
Testing the hypothesis through an experiment – methodical procedure carried out with the goal of verifying, falsifying, or establishing the validity of a hypothesis.
The 3 types of scientific experiments are:
Controlled experiment – experiment that compares the results obtained from an experimental sample against a control sample, which is practically identical to the experimental sample except for the one aspect the effect of which is being tested (the independent variable).

Natural experiment – empirical study in which the experimental conditions (i.e., which units receive which treatment) are determined by nature or by other factors out of the control of the experimenters and yet the treatment assignment process is arguably exogenous.
Thus, natural experiments are observational studies and are not controlled in the traditional sense of a randomized experiment.

Observational study – draws inferences about the possible effect of a treatment on subjects, where the assignment of subjects into a treated group versus a control group is outside the control of the investigator.

Field experiment – applies the scientific method to experimentally examine an intervention in the real world (or as many experimentalists like to say, naturally occurring environments) rather than in the laboratory.

See also field research.

Gather and analyze data from experiments or observations, including indicators of uncertainty.

Draw conclusions by comparing data with predictions.

Possible outcomes:
Conclusive:
The hypothesis is falsified by the data.

Data are consistent with the hypothesis.

Data are consistent with alternative hypotheses.

Inconclusive:
Data are not relevant to the hypothesis, or data and predictions are incommensurate.

There is too much uncertainty in the data to draw any conclusion.

Further steps include peer review and enabling others to reproduce or falsify the observations and/or conclusions
Deductive-nomological model
Scientific modelling –
Models of scientific method
Hypothetico-deductive model – proposed description of scientific method.
According to it, scientific inquiry proceeds by formulating a hypothesis in a form that could conceivably be falsified by a test on observable data.
A test that could and does run contrary to predictions of the hypothesis is taken as a falsification of the hypothesis.
A test that could but does not run contrary to the hypothesis corroborates the theory.

==
Branches of science ==
Branches of science – divisions within science with respect to the entity or system concerned, which typically embodies its own terminology and nomenclature.
===
Formal science ===
Formal science – branches of knowledge that are concerned with formal systems, such as those under the branches of: logic, mathematics, computer science, statistics, and some aspects of linguistics.
Unlike other sciences, the formal sciences are not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the real world, but instead with the properties of formal systems based on definitions and rules.

Branches of formal science (also known as the formal sciences)


===
Natural science ===
Natural science
(outline) – major branch of science, that tries to explain and predict nature's phenomena, based on empirical evidence.
In natural science, hypotheses must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.
Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are among the criteria and methods used for this purpose.
Natural science can be broken into two main branches: biology, and physical science.
Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

Branches of natural science (also known as the natural sciences)


===
Social science ===
Social science – study of the social world constructed between humans.
The social sciences usually limit themselves to an anthropomorphically centric view of these interactions with minimal emphasis on the inadvertent impact of social human behavior on the external environment (physical, biological, ecological, etc.).
'
Social' is the concept of exchange/influence of ideas, thoughts, and relationship interactions (resulting in harmony, peace, self enrichment, favoritism, maliciousness, justice seeking, etc.)
between humans.
The scientific method is used in many social sciences, albeit adapted to the needs of the social construct being studied.

Branches of social science (also known as the social sciences)


===
Applied science ===
Applied science – branch of science that applies existing scientific knowledge to develop more practical applications, including inventions and other technological advancements.

Branches of applied science (also known as the applied sciences)


==
Types of scientific fields ==
Exact science – any field of science capable of accurate quantitative expression or precise predictions and rigorous methods of testing hypotheses, especially reproducible experiments involving quantifiable predictions and measurements.

Fundamental science – science that describes the most basic objects, forces, relations between them and laws governing them, such that all other phenomena may be in principle derived from them following the logic of scientific reductionism.

Hard and soft science –
colloquial terms often used when comparing scientific fields of academic research or scholarship, with hard meaning perceived as being more scientific, rigorous, or accurate.
==
Politics of science ==
Disruptive technology – innovation that helps create a new market and value network, and eventually goes on to disrupt an existing market and value network (over a few years or decades),
displacing an earlier technology.

Kansas evolution hearings – series of hearings held in Topeka, Kansas, United States 5 to 12 May 2005 by the Kansas State Board of Education and its State Board Science Hearing Committee to change how evolution and the origin of life would be taught in the state's public high school science classes.

List of books about the politics of science – list of books about the politics of science.

Politicization of science – politicization of science is the manipulation of science for political gain.

Science by press release – refers to scientists who put an unusual focus on publicizing results of research in the media.

==
History of science ==
History of science – history of science in general
History of scientific method – history of scientific method is a history of the methodology of scientific inquiry, as differentiated from a history of science in general.

Theories/sociology of science – sociology and philosophy of science, as well as the entire field of science studies, have in the 20th century been occupied with the question of large-scale patterns and trends in the development of science, and asking questions about how science "works" both in a philosophical and practical sense.

Historiography – study of the history and methodology of the sub-discipline of history, known as the history of science, including its disciplinary aspects and practices (methods, theories, schools) and to the study of its own historical development ("History of History of Science", i.e., the history of the discipline called History of Science).

History of pseudoscience – history of pseudoscience is the study of pseudoscientific theories over time.
A pseudoscience is a set of ideas that presents itself as science, while it does not meet the criteria to properly be called such.

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific thought – lists the major landmarks across all scientific philosophy and methodological sciences.

===
By period ===
History of science in early cultures – history of science in early cultures refers to the study of protoscience in ancient history, prior to the development of science in the Middle Ages.

History of science in Classical Antiquity – history of science in classical antiquity encompasses both those inquiries into the workings of the universe aimed at such practical goals as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses and those abstract investigations known as natural philosophy.

History of science in the Middle Ages – Science in the Middle Ages comprised the study of nature, including practical disciplines, the mathematics and natural philosophy in medieval Europe.

History of science in the Renaissance – During the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, mathematics, manufacturing, and engineering.

Science and inventions of Leonardo da Vinci – Italian polymath, regarded as the epitome of the "Renaissance Man", displaying skills in numerous diverse areas of study.

Scientific revolution –
scientific revolution is an era associated primarily with the 16th and 17th centuries during which new ideas and knowledge in physics, astronomy, biology, medicine and chemistry transformed medieval and ancient views of nature and laid the foundations for modern science.

Governmental impact on science during WWII –
Governmental impact on science during World War II represents the effect of public administration on technological development that provided many advantages to the armed forces, economies and societies in their strategies during the war.

====
By date ====
List of years in science – events related to science or technology which occurred in the listed year
(current year in the box on the right).

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific experiments – shows the date of publication of major scientific experiments.

Timeline of the history of the scientific method – shows an overview of the cultural inventions that have contributed to the development of the scientific method.

List of science timelines
– more timeline articles
===
By field ===
History of natural science – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural philosophy – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural history – scientific research of plants or animals, leaning more towards observational rather than experimental methods of study, and encompasses more research published in magazines than in academic journals.

History of biology – traces the study of the living world from ancient to modern times.

History of ecology – history of the science of ecology.

History of molecular biology – begins in the 1930s with the convergence of various, previously distinct biological disciplines: biochemistry, genetics, microbiology, and virology.

History of astronomy –
Timeline
History of chemistry –
By 1000 BC, ancient civilizations used technologies that would eventually form the basis of the various branches of chemistry.

History of geography
History of geology –
Timeline
History of meteorology – Timeline
History of physics –
As forms of science historically developed out of philosophy, physics was originally referred to as natural philosophy, a field of study concerned with "the workings of nature."

History of science and technology
History of the social sciences – has origin in the common stock of Western philosophy and shares various precursors, but began most intentionally in the early 19th century with the positivist philosophy of science.

History of archaeology –
Timeline
History of cognitive science
History of criminal justice –
Throughout the history of criminal justice, evolving forms of punishment, added rights for offenders and victims, and policing reforms have reflected changing customs, political ideals, and economic conditions.

History of economics – study of different thinkers and theories in the subject that became political economy and economics from the ancient world to the present day.

History of education – development of systematic methods of teaching and learning.

History of law – study of how law has evolved and why it changed.

History of linguistics – endeavors to describe and explain the human faculty of language.

History of marketing – recognized discipline, along with concomitant changes in marketing theory and practice.

History of parapsychology
History of political science – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

History of psychology – Timeline
History of sociology –
Timeline


===
By region ===


====
History of science in present states, by continent ====
See –
Category:Science and technology by continent


====
History of science in historic states ====
Science and technology of the Han Dynasty
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire
Science and technology of the Song Dynasty
Science and technology in the Soviet Union
Science and technology of the Tang Dynasty


==
Philosophy of science ==
Philosophy of science – questions the assumptions, foundations, methods and implications of science.

Models of scientific inquiry


==
Adoption, use, results and coordination of science ==
Science and technology studies
Scientometrics
Altmetrics
Article-level metrics
Expert elicitation
Lists of science and technology awards
Research and development
Innovation
Science policy
Knowledge#Scientific
knowledge
Funding of science


==
Technology and mechanisms of science ==
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Laboratory automation
History of communication
Internet research
Scientific journal
Peer review
Metascience


== Scientific community ==
Scientific community – group of all interacting scientists.

===
Scientific organizations ===
Academy of Sciences – national academy or another learned society dedicated to sciences.

===
Scientists ===
Scientist – practitioner of science; an individual who uses scientific method to objectively inquire into the nature of reality—be it the fundamental laws of physics or how people behave.

There are many names for scientists, often named in relation to the job that they do.
One example of this is a biologist, a scientist who studies biology (the study of living organisms and their environments).

====
Types of scientist ====


=====
By field =====
The scientific fields mentioned below are generally described by the science they study.

Agricultural scientist – broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.

Archaeologist – study of human activity, primarily through the recovery and analysis of the material culture and environmental data that they have left behind, which includes artifacts, architecture, biofacts and cultural landscapes (the archaeological record).

Astronomer – astronomer is a scientist who studies celestial bodies such as planets, stars and galaxies.

Astrophysicist – branch of astronomy that deals with the physics of the universe, including the physical properties of celestial objects, as well as their interactions and behavior.

Biologist – scientist devoted to the study of living organisms and their relationship to their environment.

Astrobiologist – study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of extraterrestrial life.

Biophysicist – interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physical science to study biological systems.

Biotechnologist – field of applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Botanist – discipline of biology, is the science of plant life.

Cognitive scientists – scientific study of the mind and its processes.

Ecologist – scientific study of the relations that living organisms have with respect to each other and their natural environment.

Entomologist – scientific study of insects, a branch of arthropodology.

Evolutionary biologist – sub-field of biology concerned with the study of the evolutionary processes that have given rise to the diversity of life on Earth.

Geneticist – biologist who studies genetics, the science of genes, heredity, and variation of organisms.

Herpetologist – branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians (including frogs, toads, salamanders, newts, and gymnophiona) and reptiles (including snakes, lizards, amphibians, turtles, terrapins, tortoises, crocodiles, and the tarantulas).

Immunologist – branch of biomedical science that covers the study of all aspects of the immune system in all organisms.

Ichthyologist – study of fish.

Lepidopterist – person who specializes in the study of Lepidoptera, members of an order encompassing moths and the three superfamilies of butterflies, skipper butterflies, and moth-butterflies.

Marine biologist – scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water.

Medical scientist – basic research, applied research, or translational research conducted to aid and support the body of knowledge in the field of medicine.

Microbiologist – study of microscopic organisms.

Mycologist – branch of biology concerned with the study of fungi, including their genetic and biochemical properties, their taxonomy and their use to humans as a source for tinder, medicinals (e.g., penicillin), food (e.g., beer, wine, cheese, edible mushrooms) and entheogens, as well as their dangers, such as poisoning or infection.

Neuroscientist – individual who studies the scientific field of neuroscience or any of its related sub-fields.

Ornithologist – branch of zoology that concerns the study of birds.

Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life.

Pathologist – precise study and diagnosis of disease.

Pharmacologist – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

Physiologist – science of the function of living systems.

Zoologist – branch of biology that relates to the animal kingdom, including the structure, embryology, evolution, classification, habits, and distribution of all animals, both living and extinct.

Chemist – scientist trained in the study of chemistry.

Analytical chemist – study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

Biochemist – study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.

Inorganic chemist – branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

Organic chemist – subdiscipline within chemistry involving the scientific study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

Physical chemist – study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

Earth scientist – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.

Geologist – scientist who studies the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth as well as the processes and history that has shaped it.

Glaciologist – study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

Hydrologist – study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Limnologist – study of inland waters
Meteorologist – study of weather
Mineralogist – study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

Oceanographer – branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life
Seismologist – scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies.

Volcanologist – study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

Informatician – science of information, the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems.

Computer scientist – scientist who has acquired knowledge of computer science, the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation
Library scientist – interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools of management, information technology, education, and other areas to libraries; the collection, organization, preservation, and dissemination of information resources; and the political economy of information.

Management scientist – study of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions.

Mathematician – person with an extensive knowledge of mathematics, a field that has been informally defined as being concerned with numbers, data, collection, quantity, structure, space, and change.

Statistician – someone who works with theoretical or applied statistics.

Military scientist – process of translating national defense policy to produce military capability by employing military scientists, including theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and military personnel responsible for prototyping.

Physicist – scientist who does research in physics
Psychologist – professional or academic title used by individuals who practice psychology
Abnormal psychologist – branch of psychology that studies unusual patterns of behavior, emotion and thought, which may or may not be understood as precipitating a mental disorder.

Educational psychologist – psychologist
whose differentiating functions may include diagnostic and psycho-educational assessment, psychological counseling in educational communities (students, teachers, parents and academic authorities), community-type psycho-educational intervention, and mediation, coordination, and referral to other professionals, at all levels of the educational system.

Biopsychologist – application of the principles of biology (in particular neurobiology), to the study of physiological, genetic, and developmental mechanisms of behavior in human and non-human animals.

Clinical psychologist – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Comparative psychologist – scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior.

Cognitive psychologist – subdiscipline of psychology exploring internal mental processes.
It is the study of how people perceive, remember, think, speak, and solve problems.

Developmental psychologist – scientific study of systematic psychological changes, emotional changes, and perception changes that occur in human beings over the course of their life span.

Evolutionary psychologist – approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological traits such as memory, perception, and language from a modern evolutionary perspective.

Experimental psychologist – study of behavior and the processes that underlie it, by means of experiment
Neuropsychologist – studies the structure and function of the brain as they relate to specific psychological processes and behaviors.

Social psychologist – scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others.

Social scientist –  field of study concerned with society and human behaviors.

Anthropologist – study of humanity.

Ethnologist – branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the origins, distribution, technology, religion, language, and social structure of the ethnic, racial, and/or national divisions of humanity.

Communication scientist – academic field that deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning.

Criminologist – study of criminal behavior
Demographer – statistical study of populations
Economist –
professional in the social science discipline of economics.

Geographer – geographer is a scholar whose area of study is geography, the study of Earth's natural environment and human society.

Political economist – study of production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.

Political scientist – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

Sociologist –
Technologist
Architectural technologist – specialist in the technology of building design and construction
Educational technologist – specialist in tools to enhance learning
Engineering technologist – specialist who implements technology within a field of engineering
Industrial technologist – specialist in the management, operation, and maintenance of complex operation systems
Medical Technologist – healthcare professional who performs diagnostic analysis on a variety of body fluids
Radiologic technologist – medical professional who applies doses of radiation for imaging and treatment
Surgical technologist – health specialist who facilitates the conduct of invasive surgical procedures
=====
By employment status =====
Academic – community of students and scholars engaged in higher education and research.

Corporate Scientist – someone who is employed by a business to do research and development for the benefit of that business
Layperson – someone who is not an expert or someone who has not had professional training
Gentleman scientist – financially independent scientist who pursues scientific study as a hobby.

Government scientist – scientist employed by a country's government


====
Famous scientists ====
Aristotle – Greek philosopher and polymath, a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great.

Archimedes – Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer.

Andreas Vesalius – Flemish anatomist, physician, and author of one of the most influential books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica
(On the Structure of the Human Body).

Nicolaus Copernicus – Renaissance astronomer and the first person to formulate a comprehensive heliocentric cosmology which displaced the Earth from the center of the universe.

Galileo Galilei – Italian physicist, mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher who played a major role in the Scientific Revolution.

Johannes Kepler – German mathematician, astronomer and astrologer.
A key figure in the 17th century scientific revolution, he is best known for his eponymous laws of planetary motion, codified by later astronomers, based on his works Astronomia nova, Harmonices Mundi, and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy.

René Descartes – French philosopher, mathematician, and writer who spent most of his adult life in the Dutch Republic.

Isaac Newton – English physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural philosopher, alchemist, and theologian, who has been "considered by many to be the greatest and most influential scientist who ever lived."

Leonhard Euler – pioneering Swiss mathematician and physicist.

Pierre-Simon Laplace – French mathematician and astronomer whose work was pivotal to the development of mathematical astronomy and statistics.

Alexander von Humboldt – German geographer, naturalist and explorer, and the younger brother of the Prussian minister, philosopher and linguist Wilhelm von Humboldt.

Charles Darwin – Charles Robert Darwin FRS (12 February 1809 - 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist.[I]
He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors, and proposed the scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process that he called natural selection.

James Clerk Maxwell – Scottish physicist and mathematician.

Marie Curie – Polish physicist and chemist famous for her pioneering research on radioactivity.

Albert Einstein – German-born theoretical physicist who developed the theory of general relativity, effecting a revolution in physics
Linus Pauling – American chemist, biochemist, peace activist, author, and educator.
He was one of the most influential chemists in history and ranks among the most important scientists of the 20th century.

John Bardeen – American physicist and electrical engineer, the only person to have won the Nobel Prize in Physics
twice
Frederick Sanger – English biochemist and a two-time Nobel laureate in chemistry, the only person to have been so.

Stephen Hawking – British theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author.

==
Science education ==
Science education

Scientific literacy – encompasses written, numerical, and digital literacy as they pertain to understanding science, its methodology, observations, and theories.
Pseudo-scholarship – is a work (e.g., publication, lecture) or body of work that is presented as, but is not, the product of rigorous and objective study or research; the act of producing such work; or the pretended learning upon which it is based.

Science communication


==
See also ==
Outline of academic disciplines
Sci-Mate – open collaboration of scientists using Web 2.0 software to address well known challenges in academic publishing and technology transfer
Science Daily – news website for topical science articles
Phys.org – news website for topical science articles with some public metrics
Science.tv – virtual community for people interested in science
Sci-Hub – Scientific research paper file sharing website
Science studies


=
=
References ==
Gun laws in California regulate the sale, possession, and use of firearms and ammunition in the state of California in the United States.
The gun laws of California are some of the most restrictive in the United States.
A 5-year Firearm Safety Certificate, obtained by paying a $25 fee, submission of applicant data to the state, and passing a written test proctored by a DOJ Certified Instructor, is required for the sale, delivery, loan, or transfer of any firearm.
Handguns sold by dealers must be "California legal" by being listed on the state's Roster of Handguns Certified for Sale.
This roster, which requires handgun manufacturers to pay a fee and submit specific models for safety testing, has become progressively more stringent over time and is currently the subject of a federal civil rights lawsuit on the basis that it is a de facto ban on new handgun models.
Private sales of firearms must be done through a licensed dealer.
All firearm sales are recorded by the state, and have a ten-day waiting period.
Unlike most other states, California has no provision in its state constitution that explicitly guarantees an individual right to keep and bear arms.
The California Supreme Court has maintained that most of California's restrictive gun laws are constitutional, because the state's constitution does not explicitly guarantee private citizens the right to purchase, possess, or carry firearms.
However, U.S. Supreme Court decisions of Heller (2008) and McDonald (2010) established that the Second Amendment applies to all states within the Union, and many of California's gun laws are now being challenged in the federal courts.
Additionally, California law heavily restricts the sale and possession of other items regarded as dangerous weapons, including but not limited to: certain knives, swords, clubs, explosives, fireworks, bows and arrows, slingshots, spears, and nunchucks.
Semi-automatic firearms that the state has classified as assault weapons; .50 BMG caliber rifles; and large-capacity magazines (magazines that can hold more than ten rounds of ammunition) may not be sold in California.
The ban on large-capacity magazines was ruled unconstitutional March 29, 2019
but the ruling is on hold while the case is under appeal.
On August 14, 2020, the 9th circuit court ruled that the ban was unconstitutional.
However, this decision was vacated by the Circuit Court on February 25, 2021 until the case can be reheard.
Possession of automatic firearms, and of short-barreled shotguns and rifles, is prohibited without a Dangerous Weapons Permit, that is received from the California Department of Justice pending a good reason for their possession such as: manufacture, repair, collecting in limited cases (pre-1990), movie prop guns or dealing to police/military.
California Penal Code §
25850 defines what constitutes a loaded weapon.

California is a "may issue" state for permits to carry concealed guns.
The willingness of issuing authorities in California ranges from No Issue in most urban areas to Shall Issue in rural counties.
Additionally, the issuing authority can also impose restrictions on the CCW permit-holder, such as limiting concealed carry only to the purposes listed on the approved CCW permit application.
However, concealed carry permits are valid statewide, regardless of where they were issued.
This creates a situation where residents in presumptively No Issue locations such as Los Angeles and San Francisco cannot lawfully carry a concealed firearm, but residents from other counties with more permissive CCW issuance policies can lawfully carry within these same jurisdictions.
California does not recognize concealed carry permits issued by other states, and non-residents are generally forbidden from obtaining a California concealed carry permit.
Those eligible to carry a rifle, shotgun, or handgun under the federal Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act are not subject to some California laws.

California has state preemption for many, but not all, firearms laws.
Actual enforcement of California's firearms laws also varies widely across the state.
Urban areas, such as the San Francisco and Los Angeles metropolitan areas strictly enforce firearms laws, and some communities within these areas have passed local ordinances that make legally owning a firearm difficult.
Meanwhile, some rural jurisdictions narrowly enforce the same firearms laws by prosecuting only those who demonstrate malicious intent, or not enforcing portions of the state's firearms laws at all.
State law enforcement agencies, such as the California Highway Patrol, the California Department of Justice, and the California Department of Fish and Game strictly enforce state firearms law everywhere in California.

==
Summary table ==


==
State Constitutional Provisions ==
The Constitution of California does not contain a provision explicitly guaranteeing an individual right to keep and bear arms.
Article 1, Section 1, of the California Constitution implies a right to self-defense (without specifically mentioning a right to keep and bear arms) and defense of property, by stating, "All people are by nature free and independent and have inalienable rights.
Among these are enjoying and defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and pursuing and obtaining safety, happiness, and privacy."
==
Preemption ==
California law (§53071 GC) prohibits county and city authorities from enacting regulations regarding the registration or licensing of firearms.
This provides for uniform firearm laws and prevents situations found in other states (such as New York) where traveling with an otherwise legal firearm could put a citizen at risk of violating local city ordinances.
Because of their inability to regulate firearms directly, some cities, such as Los Angeles, have prohibited residents from possessing a handgun or rifle magazine that fit more than 10 rounds, require firearms be stored in locked containers or with trigger locks installed when not in use, and have enacted ammunition regulations.
Many jurisdictions have enacted ordinances restricting or banning the discharge of firearms, and use zoning laws to impose significant restrictions to the establishment of gun stores and shooting ranges within their boundaries.

==
Firearm sales ==
Due to one of California's earliest gun-control bills passed in 1923, gun sellers may not advertise the sale of handguns on their property.
However this law was declared unconstitutional in September 2018.
In the year 2020, over eight hundred thousand firearms were sold in the state of California.
The buyer of a firearm must fill out an application to purchase a particular gun.
The firearms dealer electronically submits the application to the California Department of Justice (DOJ), which performs a background check on the buyer.
The approved application is valid for 30 days.
There is a 10-day waiting period for the delivery of any firearm.
The buyer must pick up the firearm within 30 days of the original submission of paperwork (if approved), or he or she will have to have a dealer resubmit the paperwork and another 10-day waiting period starts.

Sales of firearms from one person to another (private party transfers) must be through a licensed firearms dealer using a Private Party Transfer form.
The licensed dealer may charge a $10 fee, in addition to the $25 transfer fee that the state charges.
Any number of firearms may be transferred at one time using this method.
The dealer submits a Dealer's Record of Sale (DROS) form to the state, and the purchaser must wait 10 days before picking up the guns.
Handgun purchases, except for private party transfers and Certificate of Eligibility (COE) holders, are limited to one per 30-day period.
To purchase a handgun, a buyer must have a Handgun Safety Certificate.
This is obtained by passing a written test, given by a Department of Justice certified instructor, on the safe and legal use of handguns.
The certificate is valid for five years.
A buyer must also perform a Safe Handling Demonstration when taking possession of a handgun.
Some individuals are exempt from the Safety Certificate and Handling Demonstration requirements, including active and retired military and law enforcement personnel, hunter safety certificate holders, and concealed carry license holders.
As of July 1, 2021, purchasing semiautomatic centerfire rifles will also be limited to one per 30-day period.
Effective January 1, 2015, the Handgun Safety Certificate program was replaced with the Firearm Safety Certificate (FSC) program.
Under the FSC program, requirements that previously applied to handguns only now apply to all firearms (handguns and long guns), unless exempt.
A valid Handgun Safety Certificate can still be used to purchase/acquire handguns only until it expires.
For long gun purchases/acquisitions made January 1, 2015, and thereafter, an FSC will be required.
Once an FSC is obtained, it can be used for both handgun and long gun purchases/acquisitions.
Residents of California purchasing long guns in other states are subject to the same requirements as for purchasing firearms in-state, if the buyer returns to California with the weapons in possession.
For example, a California resident who purchases a long gun in Nevada would be required to go through a registered FFL in Nevada to have the weapon shipped to an FFL in California, who would then complete the DROS and administer the 10-day waiting period.
However, a California resident would not be subject to California law for long guns purchased out-of-state and are never brought into California.
In other words, a California resident who purchases a long gun in Nevada and stores the weapon at the home of a family member or friend in Nevada, would not be violating California law, as long as the weapon never enters the state.
Such would also be the case for a California resident purchasing a California-defined assault weapon in another state where such weapons are legal, and the weapon is never brought into California.
The California Department of Justice has been known to conduct sting operations by sending undercover agents to gun stores and gun shows in neighboring states to observe California residents purchasing firearms at such venues, and then tracking buyers back into California, where they are then arrested and prosecuted.
The differences in gun laws and gun control philosophy between California and neighboring states has been a source of heated arguments between political figures in California who mostly support strict limitations on gun ownership and usage, and politicians in Arizona and Nevada who mostly favor individual gun rights.

===
Roster of handguns certified for sale ===
Dealers may not sell any new handgun unless it is listed in the state Department of Justice roster of handguns certified for sale.
Listed handguns must include certain mechanical features and pass a set of laboratory tests.
Private party transfers, curio/relic handguns, certain single-action revolvers, and pawn/consignment returns are exempt from this requirement.
Sale to law enforcement personnel are exempt from list restrictions.

Handguns which were legally owned and registered before the roster's implementation in 2001, or which were taken off the roster (or discontinued) after their legal purchase and registration, can legally be sold in a private transfer as long as it is done through an FFL in accordance with state law.

Since private transfers (conducted through an FFL in accordance with state law) are exempted from the roster, there have been instances of law enforcement officers purchasing off-roster handguns and then re-selling them (typically at a premium) to regular buyers.
This practice has led to occasional criminal convictions of officers who were found to be doing so repeatedly.

===
Microstamping ===
On May 17, 2013, the state attorney general began enforcing a new law requiring that semi-automatic pistols incorporate microstamping.
With this technology, very small markings are engraved, using a laser, on the tip of the firing pin and on the breechface of the firearm.
When the gun is fired, these etchings may be transferred to the primer by the firing pin, and to the cartridge case head by the breechface, using the pressure created when a round is fired.
If successful, this imprints two identifying numbers, unique to that gun, on each spent cartridge casing.
This requirement applies to new guns being added to the California Department of Justice's roster of handguns certified for sale; semi-automatic handgun models already listed on the roster are not required to incorporate microstamping.
This law was passed in 2007 and the wording in the law stated that it would become effective when the technology was available to at least two manufacturers, unencumbered by a patent.
To date, no manufacturer actually uses this technology in firearms available to the public.
In June 2018, in the case of National Shooting Sports Foundation v. California, the California Supreme Court upheld the state's microstamping law.
The court wrote, "Impossibility can occasionally excuse noncompliance with a statute.
But impossibility does not authorize a court to go beyond interpreting a statute and simply invalidate it."
A spokesman for the National Shooting Sports Foundation said that no new models of semiautomatic handguns will be marketed in California.
In August 2018, in the case of Pena v. Lindley, the Ninth Circuit found the requirement to be constitutional.

==
Concealed carry ==
California is a "may issue" state for concealed carry based on an applicant's justified need and suitability.
A license to carry a concealed firearm may be issued or denied to qualified applicants at the discretion of a county's sheriff or an incorporated city's chief of police in their place of residence.
Residents of incorporated cities and towns have the option to apply for a concealed carry license through their local police department or through the sheriff's office in their county of residence.
Applicants must generally be residents of the jurisdiction in which the permit application is filed.
The only exception to this is for non-resident applicants with a bona-fide place of business in the jurisdiction where the permit application is filed, in which case the permit is valid only in that jurisdiction.
In practice, the attitudes of different sheriffs and police chiefs toward the issuance of permits vary widely and, consequentially, different jurisdictions in California can vary anywhere from de facto shall-issue to de facto no-issue.
A permit may be issued, by a county Sheriff or city Chief or head of municipal police, in one of two formats:
A license to carry concealed a pistol, revolver, or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person.

Where the population of the county is less than 200,000 persons according to the most recent federal decennial census, a license to carry loaded and exposed in that county a pistol, revolver, or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person.
"California does not recognize any concealed carry permits issued by other states or their political subdivisions.
With exceptions for nonresident Active Duty military members permanently stationed within California, state law generally forbids nonresidents from obtaining a California CCW permit.
As of September 2011, there were around 35,000 active concealed carry permits in California, compared to a total population of 39 million.
California law (Penal Code 26155) provides that the Sheriff of a county or a city Police Chief may issue a license to carry a concealed weapon upon proof that the person applying is of "good moral character" and that "good cause" exists for the issuance.
While it is generally believed to be extremely difficult to obtain a license to carry a concealed weapon (CCW) in California, the difficulty varies greatly by city and county of residence.
In most rural counties where the good cause requirements tend to be less restrictive, qualified applicants are usually successful in obtaining a license, while some cities and counties, such as San Francisco and Los Angeles, are extremely restrictive in what they perceive to be good cause, such as a clear and immediate threat on the applicant's life that cannot be avoided or mitigated by other means.
There are also jurisdictions with "moderately restrictive" policies, where an applicant must show circumstances that demonstrate a need for a permit above that for the general populace, such as residing or conducting lawful business in high-crime areas, where a general risk of victimization exists even if no specific threat has been identified.
An increasing number of counties are adopting policies that allow more residents to qualify for carry permits.
For example: the San Diego county Sheriff changed their policy from one that was very restrictive in 2017 to one that is significantly less restrictive in 2019.
The number of carry permits in San Diego county has increased greatly since the changes were implemented.
Some jurisdictions have established additional local requirements the applicant must meet, as a matter of demonstrating suitability, before the issuing authority grants a CCW permit.
For example, Alameda county requires an applicant to obtain a mental health assessment at the applicant's expense as part of each county's permit application process.
Additionally, the definition of "Good Moral Character", much like the definition of "Good Cause", is not defined in the law but is instead left to be interpreted by each individual Sheriff or Chief of Police that chooses to issue.
Agencies that have restrictive policies can use this Good Morals clause as an additional tool for denial, but even agencies with less restrictive policies utilize the Good Moral clause to "weed out" those who, while they can pass a background investigation, may not otherwise be desirable for the agency to issue a permit to.
In general the definition of Good Morals is thought to mean that an individual shows that they are responsible in there areas of their life.
Things like honesty, convictions, lawsuits, civil issues, negative interaction with law enforcement, speeding tickets, DUIs, credit scores, employment history, back taxes and the like can be used to show that an individual lacks "Good Morals" and can be used to deny issuance of a CCW permit.

In Los Angeles County, many licenses were issued to people who donated to former Sheriff Lee Baca.
Some departments are now being challenged in federal lawsuits, under the Equal Protection clause of the 14th Amendment.
Some argue that the California system for CCW issuance fosters political corruption and systematic discrimination of applicants, as it has been publicized that numerous celebrities, government officials, and campaign donors have been issued CCW licenses in cities and counties where the general public have been consistently denied.
CCW issuance is also extremely low in areas where the population has a high concentration of minorities and minority applicants are more frequently denied, causing some to allege institutional racism.

Carrying a concealed firearm without a permit is a misdemeanor with a minimum penalty of 90 days in jail.
It may be prosecuted as a felony if any one of over a dozen specific circumstances exists, such as carry by a felon, carry in relation to gang activity, carry with the intent to commit a violent crime, etc.

Riverside County's policy of preventing non-citizens from applying for permits was struck down on May 22, 2019.
===
Peruta v. San Diego ===
On February 13, 2014, a three-judge panel of a federal appeals court, in the case of Peruta v. San Diego, ruled that California's may-issue concealed carry rules as implemented by the County of San Diego, in combination with its ban on open carry in most areas of the state, violate the Second Amendment, because they together deny law-abiding citizens the right to bear arms in public for the lawful purpose of self-defense.
The San Diego County Sheriff's Department issued a press release dated February 21, 2014 stating it will not seek review of the decision by the entire membership of judges sitting in the Ninth Circuit, and "Should the decision of the Ninth Circuit become final, the Sheriff's Department will begin to issue CCW's in situations where the applicant has met all other lawful qualifications and has requested a CCW for purposes of self-defense.
"
This paves the way for California's may-issue law to be replaced with a shall-issue law.

On February 27, 2014 California Attorney General Kamala Harris filed a petition for en banc review of the decision.
As the state was not a formal party of the case, her action is not an appeal, but merely a request that the full court re-hear the case en banc on its own initiative.
However, the petition filed was denied by the Ninth Circuit on November 12, 2014.
However, Chief Judge Thomas of the Ninth Circuit ordered on March 26, 2015 that the case be reheard en banc.
The en banc oral arguments were heard on June 16, 2015.
On June 9, 2016, the Ninth Circuit reversed its prior decision and ruled that "The right of a member of the general public to carry a concealed firearm in public is not, and never has been, protected by the Second Amendment."
The court's ruling did not address open carry in public, leaving that issue open to potential future litigation.
On June 26, 2017, the Supreme Court refused to grant certiorari to hear an appeal of the Ninth Circuit's en banc decision.
Justices Clarence Thomas and Neil Gorsuch dissented from the denial.

== Open carry ==
Open carry of firearms is governed in California by a set of laws that, at times, conflict with one another.
This has created significant confusion over the legality of open carry in the state.
Open carry of loaded or unloaded firearms in public is generally prohibited, although open carry may be allowed in unincorporated rural areas where permitted by local ordinance, and elsewhere under certain circumstances.

The Mulford Act prohibited personal possession (i.e., carry) of a loaded firearm in incorporated areas (such as inside city limits) or prohibited areas of unincorporated territory without a license to carry or other exemption provided for by law.
A license to carry "loaded and exposed" firearms may be issued by a Police Chief or County Sheriff in a county with population of less than 200,000 persons at the last census.
No license or permit is required to openly carry a loaded firearm in unincorporated areas where discharge is not prohibited by local ordinance.
Additionally, state law allows open carry in situations where one "reasonably believes that any person or the property of any person is in immediate, grave danger and that the carrying of the weapon is necessary for the preservation of that person or property."
However, one using this rationale as the basis for openly carrying a firearm can expect to be detained and questioned by law enforcement (and possibly arrested and charged with unlawful carrying of a firearm if the officer does not believe that open carry is sufficiently justified; subjecting one carrying under this rationale to substantial legal expense, even in the event of such charges being dropped or the individual being acquitted at trial), especially in more densely populated areas.

California Penal Code §
25850 (formerly 12031) defines what constitutes a loaded weapon).
For Penal Code to have validity, all following must apply to the case.

1.1.

"Loaded"
A firearm is "loaded" when there is:
an unexpended cartridge or shell,
consisting of a case that holds a charge of powder and a bullet or shot,
in, or attached in any manner to,
the firearm...including, but not limited to, in the firing chamber, magazine, or clip thereof attached to the firearm..
Therefore, carrying a loaded magazine separate from the handgun is NOT Prohibited under the CA Penal Code.
As long as the loaded magazine is not inserted into the gun, one is carrying/transporting an unloaded weapon.

e.g. Ammunition and handgun are in the same box
but the handgun does not have a loaded magazine inserted, nor a round in the chamber.

In the case of People v. Clark (1996) a shotgun shell attached to the shotgun (e.g. "side-saddle"), although not chambered or placed in a position where it was able to be fired, was declared to be legal under California law and the charge of having a loaded firearm against Clark was dismissed.

Prior to January 1, 2012, it was legal to openly carry an unloaded handgun in public.
In October 2011, Governor Jerry Brown signed a bill that modifies the law on openly carrying an unloaded firearm to match the restrictions for openly carrying a loaded weapon.
Legislation was later signed by Governor Brown to expand these restrictions to long guns and shotguns, except while hunting.

==
Transportation ==
PC§ 25610
[7].When being transported, handguns must be unloaded and in a locked fully enclosed container other than the glove box or any console attached to the vehicle.
The trunk of a car is considered to be a locked container but a glove box or "utility box" is specifically forbidden.
If one believes he or she is within a "gun-free school zone" (area surrounding 1,000 feet from the edge of school grounds which teaches any grade from kindergarten to 12th grade)
then the handgun must be locked in a fully enclosed container.
Failure to lock up a handgun while in a school zone is a violation of federal (only if one does not possess a concealed weapons permit issued by California) and state law.

Long guns (rifles, shotguns) must be unloaded when transported in a vehicle.
There is no requirement for a locked container with the exception of long guns considered to be "assault weapons".
Federal law requires locking containers when inside of a "gun-free school zone.
"
In U.S. v. Lopez the Supreme Court ruled the federal Gun-Free School Zone Act was an unconstitutional exercise of Congress's power under the commerce clause.
However, in 1996 Congress passed an amendment to the law requiring the gun to have traveled in interstate commerce, thereby voiding the effect of the ruling.

Assault weapons, as defined by California law, must always be transported in locked containers and may only be transported under certain circumstances


===
Traveling into California for purposes of competition ===
PC§ 30665.
Possession and Importation of Assault Weapon or .50 BMG Rifle
Into State by Nonresident; Conditions Permitting
Sections 30600, 30605, and
30610 shall not apply to the possession and
importation of an assault weapon or a .50 BMG rifle into this state by a
nonresident if all of the following conditions are met:
(a)
The person is attending or going directly to or coming directly from an
organized competitive match or league competition that involves the use of
an assault weapon or a .50 BMG rifle.

(b)
The competition or match is conducted on the premises of one of the
following:
(1) A target range that holds a regulatory or business license for the
purpose of practicing shooting at that target range.

(2)
A target range of a public or private club or organization that is
organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets.

(c)
The match or competition is sponsored by, conducted under the auspices
of, or approved by, a law enforcement agency or a nationally or state
recognized entity that fosters proficiency in, or promotes education about,
firearms.

(d)
The assault weapon or .50 BMG rifle is transported in accordance with
Section 25610 or Article 3 (commencing with Section 25505) of Chapter 2 of
Division 5.

(e)
The person is 18 years of age or over and is not in a class of persons
prohibited from possessing firearms by virtue of Chapter 2 (commencing with
Section 29800) or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 29900) of Division 9 of
this code or Section 8100 or 8103 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

(Added by Stats.
2010, SB 1080, Ch.
711, Sec.
6.
Operative January 1, 2012.)
==
Child safety ==
Firearms must be kept locked up when children may be present.
The 2008 California Dangerous Weapons Control Law modified California Penal Code §12035 defining criminal storage of a firearm as keeping "any loaded firearm within any premises that are under his or her custody or control and he or she knows or reasonably should know that a child is likely to gain access to the firearm.
"
A person may be charged with a crime, if he or she keeps a loaded firearm, and the child or a prohibited person takes the firearm to a public place or causes injury.
The law was further expanded in 2019 to include unloaded firearms.

==
NFA firearms ==
It is illegal to possess an automatic firearm or a short-barreled shotgun or rifle without permission from the DOJ; such permission is generally not granted.
Enforcement of the ban varies throughout the state.
Authorities in most urban areas will prosecute someone for merely possessing a prohibited firearm regardless of intent, whereas county sheriffs and local police in some rural counties have either refused to enforce the ban or to only prosecute those in possession of banned weapons who demonstrate malicious intent.

== Assault weapons ==
Since 1989, it is illegal to sell a firearm that the state has defined as an assault weapon and that has been listed in the California Department of Justice (DOJ) roster of prohibited firearms, unless one holds a Dangerous Weapons Permit issued by the state Department of Justice.
This includes many military look-alike semi-automatic rifles and .50 caliber BMG rifles.
DOJ roster firearms may be legally possessed if registered with the state prior to January 2005.
Military look-alike firearms that are not listed on the DOJ roster of prohibited firearms, known as "off-list lowers," are legal* to own and possess as long as state laws concerning configuration are followed.
*
Technically these "off-list" lowers are Category 2 assault weapons under current California law.
However, in the 2001 case Harrott v. County of Kings (25 P.3d 649
(Cal.
2001), the Category 2 assault weapon law was ruled unenforceable.
With the passage of Senate Bill 880 and Assembly Bill 1135 in June 2016, the state's assault weapon ban has been expanded to include all semi-automatic center-fire rifles and shotguns with military-style features that lack a fixed magazine.
This expanded the class of firearms deemed to be assault weapons to include rifles that were previously not considered assault weapons because they had a "bullet button" magazine release instead of a standard push-button magazine release.
The sale or transfer of such weapons is prohibited, effective January 1, 2017.
Those purchased prior to January 1, 2017 must be registered with the DOJ by June 30, 2018.
It is illegal to import, sell, give, trade, or lend a magazine that holds more than 10 rounds of ammunition, except for fixed tubular magazines for lever-action rifles and .22 caliber rifles; however, the possession of such magazines was legal until the passage of Proposition 63 in November 2016, effective July 1, 2017.
The ban on possession was prevented from going into effect by a federal district court on June 29, 2017.
Subsequently, on March 29, 2019, the entire large-capacity law was ruled unconstitutional but that ruling was put on hold while the case is under appeal.
The ban on possession of large-capacity magazines remains enjoined.

=== Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989 ===
The Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989 (AWCA)
, its augmentation in 1999, and the .50 Caliber BMG Regulation Act of 2004 have led to many restrictions on semi-automatic firearms.
In addition to a list of specific firearms that are banned by name, the following firearms are banned by characteristic (from Penal Code §30515(a), formerly §12276.1):

(1) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any one of the following:
(A)
A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon.

(B)
A thumbhole stock.

(C)
A folding or telescoping stock.

(D)
A grenade launcher or flare launcher.

(E)
A flash suppressor.

(F)
A forward pistol grip.

(2) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has a fixed magazine with the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.

(3) A semiautomatic, centerfire rifle that has an overall length of less than 30 inches [762 mm].

(4)
A semiautomatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a detachable magazine and any one of the following:
(A)
A threaded barrel, capable of accepting a flash suppressor, forward handgrip.

(B) A second handgrip.

(C)
A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely encircles, the barrel that allows the bearer to fire the weapon without burning his or her hand, except a slide that encloses the barrel.

(D)
The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location outside of the pistol grip.

(5) A semiautomatic pistol with a fixed magazine that has the capacity to accept more than 10 rounds.

(6)
A semiautomatic shotgun that has both of the following:
(A) A folding or telescoping stock.

(B)
A pistol grip that protrudes conspicuously beneath the action of the weapon, thumbhole stock, or vertical handgrip.

(7)
A semiautomatic shotgun that has the ability to accept a detachable magazine.

(8) Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder.
In addition, (Penal Code §12001.5) bans, by definition, short-barreled shotguns and short-barreled rifles.

Defined in Penal Code §12020; a short-barreled shotgun is defined as a firearm (designed, redesigned, or altered) to fire a fixed shotgun shell and has a barrel or barrels of less than 18 inches or an overall length of less than 26 inches.

A short-barreled rifle is defined as a semiautomatic, center fire rifle with a barrel length of less than 16 inches or an overall length of less than 26 inches.

While a Rossi Circuit Judge (18" barrel) is considered a shotgun with a revolving cylinder (violation of #8 above), the CA DOJ claims it is legal because it has a rifled barrel.
However, the Taurus Judge handgun is considered a "short-barreled shotgun" and therefore illegal in CA, even though it fires the same shot shell as the Circuit Judge, as well as has a rifled barrel.
Conversely, there are many revolvers that fire shot shells made in different calibers (e.g. 22, 9mm, 38, etc.)
mostly used to shoot birds or snakes.
Even though these handguns, with less that 18" barrels, fire shot shells, like the Judge, they are legal in California.

===
Kasler v. Lockyer Assault Weapon List ===
Following the Kasler v. Lockyer ruling, California passed a list of 84 firearms by name that are deemed as Assault Weapons and are subsequently deemed illegal to own in the State of California.
These firearms include the Bushmaster XM-15, Colt AR-15, Armalite AR-15, DPMS Panther, and Rock River Arms, Inc, as well as the Kalashnikov USA Hunting Rifle and various other AK-style and AR-style firearms.

===
Bullet button and refined definition of a "fixed magazine" ===
Methods of obtaining particular styles of firearms similar to assault weapons have been achieved by design changes by gun parts manufacturers.
One of the most common modifications prior to 2017 was a "bullet button", which modified a rifle so that the magazine is not removable without the use of a tool (which could include a bullet used as a tool per state law), which presses a button that a finger alone cannot press.
Weapons with this feature were deemed to no longer have a "detachable magazine" within the assault weapons definition, and therefore could be exempt from the law as it then stood, depending on the other requirements.
As certain portions of firearms (the lower receiver, or "lower" for short, which is legally considered to be the firearm) are banned by model name under California state law, multiple modifications could be made to allow a rifle to comply under state law.

It is under these exceptions that the weapons used in the 2015 San Bernardino terrorist attack  were legal when initially purchased, and subsequently illegally sold to the perpetrators.
The perpetrators subsequently illegally altered these exempt weapons in ways that violated other provisions of the California law, by enabling the DPMS Panther Arms AR-15 rifle to use a high-capacity magazine and illegally modifying the Smith & Wesson M&P15 rifle.
In order to close what was perceived by proponents to be a loophole in the law enabling such modifications, the legislature passed Assembly Bill 1135 and Senate Bill 880 in 2016 which, amongst other things, narrowed the definition of a "fixed magazine" as required under the law "to mean an ammunition feeding device contained in, or permanently attached to, a firearm in such a manner that the device cannot be removed without disassembly of the firearm action.
"\

Shortly after being signed into law, Darin Prince, the creator of the bullet button, revealed the bullet button reloaded in order to comply with the new law.
Following the San Bernardino Shooting, which left 16 people (including the two shooters) dead and the shooters using two illegally acquired and modified AR-style firearms that used the Bullet Button,  California further specified fixed magazines, where they deemed that the Bullet Button was not a sufficient way to fix the magazine, deeming it illegal and closing the "bullet button loophole".
As of SB 880's implementation, the use of the Bullet Button alone constitutes the firearm as an assault weapon, deeming it illegal in California.

===
Exceptions ===
California's assault weapons law is not an outright ban on statutorily-defined assault weapons per se, as it contains a provision for an individual to apply for a Dangerous Weapon Permit from the state DOJ to acquire, transport and possess a firearm that meets the state's assault weapon criteria, although such approval is generally not granted unless the applicant qualifies under a limited set of exceptions:
California's assault weapon definition currently does not apply to smoothbore (e.g., is neither a rifle nor a shotgun) long guns; rimfire, or manual-action (e.g., bolt, lever, pump, break actions, revolvers, etc.)
weapons that would otherwise have defined assault weapon features.

Individuals who owned listed assault weapons before the 1989 assault weapons ban went into effect are allowed to keep such firearms; owners were required to register such weapons with the California DOJ by a deadline established in the assault weapons ban legislation.
Transfer of registered assault weapons to private individuals is generally not permitted, including in cases where the owner is deceased.
Upon their death, the assault weapon must either be rendered permanently inoperable; surrendered to the DOJ, a police department, or licensed firearms dealer; or removed from the state.

Non-resident, active duty military members who bring their firearms into California when permanently assigned to a military installation within the state.
Prior to arrival, the military member must submit an application for a Military Assault Weapon Permit and a copy of his or her assignment orders and an authorization letter from the installation commander to the DOJ, and the firearm(s) in question are legal to obtain and possess in his or her home state.
If a non-resident military member decides to establish residency in California, he or she must either surrender listed assault weapons to the DOJ, police department, or licensed firearms dealer; or otherwise remove the weapons from the state prior to becoming a resident and/or separating from the Armed Services.
Military Assault Weapon Permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance, and can be renewed annually as long as the military member remains permanently stationed within the state.

Resident police officers in California may own listed assault weapons with permission of their police chief and the DOJ.
As of 2011, police officers may keep their assault weapons and large-capacity magazines after retirement or separation from the force.
No permission is needed for police to purchase and possess magazines that hold more than ten rounds of ammunition, but they must present proof of their active law enforcement affiliation.

Firearms that would have been classified as assault weapons but are used for Olympic and International competitions are exempt.
There is a list of the exempt firearms, and new firearms can be added to the list if needed by USA Shooting, the governing body for Olympic and International Shooting Sport competition.

Assault weapons being imported into California for sale and delivery to a federal, state or local governmental agency for use by employees of such agencies to perform official duties.

Private security firms may seek approval from the DOJ to arm its employees with weapons that meet California's assault weapon definition while on duty.
The DOJ in its discretion may issue a Dangerous Weapons Permit to security firms on a need-based determination (e.g., significance of persons, items, or sites being protected by the applying firm, threat level against such persons, items, or sites, etc.).
Employees of such firms are subject to extensive training and vetting requirements prior to obtaining DOJ approval to carry assault weapons on duty.

Assault weapons intended for use in the film industry are allowed, with approval from the DOJ.

Assault weapons possessed by federal, state, and local historical societies, museums, and institutional collections which are open to the public, provided they are properly housed, secured from unauthorized handling, and unloaded.

Individuals who demonstrate exceptional good cause for the issuance of a Dangerous Weapons Permit (meeting this criteria is extremely rare—usually limited to individuals with political connections), and further demonstrate their acquisition and possession of defined assault weapons will not threaten the public.

Assault weapons that have been rendered permanently non-functional, and cannot be restored to a functioning state, are legal to possess


===
Nonresidents transporting assault weapons through California ===
There are protections under the federal Firearm Owners Protection Act for nonresidents traveling through California with firearms that meet the state's assault weapon criteria.
First, the weapon must be legal for the traveler to own under federal law and under the laws of his or her home state and the state of destination.
Additionally, the weapon in question must be unloaded with the firearm and ammunition locked in separate cases and placed in an area of the vehicle that is not easily accessible, such as the trunk of a car or bed of a truck.
Finally, the traveler should traverse the state by the shortest route and make the minimum number of stops practicable.

==
Other laws ==
There are also numerous other laws, such as prohibition on possession of tracer ammunition and handgun armor-piercing ammunition.
All rifles are normally exempt for the original owner if properly registered at the time of the acts which prohibited them.

In addition, the law states that any weapon that is part of the AR-15 series or AK series is also an assault weapon, regardless of manufacturer; this dates back to 1989 ban, and was confirmed in the Kasler v. Lockyer decision, filed 6/29/2000.
However, the California Supreme Court declared the identification of assault weapon by series membership to be too dubious and difficult for the average citizen or even trial court to make without specific and clear model identification guidelines.
The court thus set some specific requirements for the "series" identification portion of the law in their ruling of Harrott v. County of Kings, filed 6/28/2001.
This decision required banned firearms to be specifically listed by make and model in California Code of Regulations (the "Kasler list"); it did not address assault weapons defined by features.
Thus, only firearms specifically listed by exact combination of manufacturer and model name, or conforming to explicit exterior characteristics (such as a pistol grip or folding stock in combination with a detachable magazine) can be banned under current legislation.

Once it was realized the California Department of Justice (CA DOJ) had not updated the "Kasler list" in the five years after the Harrott decision, many Californians found they could legally purchase and possess AR and AK rifles not yet officially identified as "series" members.
As of February 2006, over 10,000 "off-list" receivers (frames) for such rifles have been legally imported to, and purchased within, California.
The only requirement for these receivers are that the combination of make and model is not explicitly listed as banned, and as long as the owner does not add certain "characteristic features" turning the firearm into an assault weapon (i.e. pistol grip, flash suppressor, etc.).
These characteristic features can be used, however, if a nondetachable 10-round (or less) magazine, conforming in the converse to the California Code of Regulations §5469, formerly §978.20, definition of detachable magazine, is affixed to such "off-list" rifles.
These off-list rifles can also be used without a pistol grip, folding stock, or flash hider, in which case it is legal to own and use them with detachable magazines, including large-capacity magazines.

(California Code of Regulations §
978.20 was changed without regulatory effect renumbering §978.20 to §5469 filed 6-28-2006)
The CA DOJ produced a report from the Ferranto Commission in response, intimating that this list will be updated in early 2006; as of December 2006, it had not done so.
On February 1, 2006, the CA DOJ also issued a controversial memorandum about this subject; critics say the described actions are not founded or supported within statutory law in Penal Code §§12275–12290.
This memo stated that once off-list "series" firearms are declared and registered as assault weapons, they will not be able to have characteristic features added or fixed magazines removed.
This is being challenged by pro-gun groups, since there is no criminal violation in the California Penal Code for adding or changing features to a legally acquired, registered assault weapon.

On November 8, 2005, San Francisco voters enacted Proposition H, a total ban on the manufacture, sale, transfer or distribution of firearms or ammunition in San Francisco, as well as a ban on the possession of handguns within the city by San Francisco residents (excepting police officers, security guards and the like).
The ban did not prohibit possession of weapons other than handguns, nor did it prohibit residents of other cities from possessing handguns in San Francisco.

While this measure made San Francisco the third major U.S. city, following Washington, D.C. and Chicago, to enact a ban on handguns, San Francisco's ban extended further, not implementing a grandfather clause found in Chicago's and Washington D.C.'s laws that protected existing gun owners.
Proposition H stated that handgun owners in San Francisco must turn over their handguns to the police by the end of March 2006, have them confiscated, or move outside the city limits.
In June 2006, Judge James Warren of the San Francisco County Superior Court struck down Proposition H, asserting that under California law local officials do not have the authority to ban handgun ownership by law-abiding citizens.
On January 9, 2008, a California appellate court upheld Judge Warren's decision.
The National Rifle Association (NRA) opposed the ban from its inception.

In May 2013, the Los Angeles City Council voted to draft a law prohibiting the possession of large-capacity ammunition magazines, sparking lawsuit threats from two gun rights organizations.
In November of the same year, the city of Sunnyvale passed a similar ordinance along with three other firearm related restrictions.
The new ordinance requires city residents to "dispose, donate, or sell" any magazine capable of holding more than ten rounds within a proscribed period of time once the measure took effect.
Measure C also requires:

city residents to report firearm theft to the police within 48 hours,
residents to lock up their guns at home, and
gun dealers to keep logs of ammunition sales.
The city of San Francisco then passed similar ordinances a short time later.
SB199, passed in August 2014, requires some fake guns to have bright colors for safety reasons.
Bill 1014 that has passed the State Senate in September 2014 would allow the police to confiscate guns from high-risk individuals for a period of 21 days without a warrant or court order.
On 30 September 2014, Governor Brown signed the law which is phased in through 1 January 2016.
This makes California the fourth state (behind Connecticut, Indiana, and New York) to have a weapons seizure law.

SB 869, newly signed by Governor Brown, makes it a crime (infraction with a fine up to $1,000) to leave a firearm in an unattended vehicle unless it has been either 1.
locked in the trunk, 2.
stored in a locked container that is placed out of plain view or 3.
stored in a locked container that is permanently affixed to the interior of the vehicle and not in plain view.
The specific language of the new law can be found in Penal Code Section 25140.
Active peace officers are specifically called out as not being exempt, unless in the event that immediate aid is required that is within the course of their employment.
Likely, this law will be enforced upon the report that a firearm was stolen out of a vehicle, in which case the owner will be held responsible.

In California, the police or a person's family member can ask a judge to confiscate the firearms of a person who appears to pose a threat to themselves or others.
The weapons may be held for up to a year.
Such orders from out-of-state are also recognized.
As of September 1, 2020, eligible petitioners will be expanded to include an employer, coworker, and school teacher or employee, and the maximum allowable duration will be extended to 5 years.
Ghost guns are illegal.
Anyone wanting to build a homemade firearm is required to obtain a serial number from the state (de facto registration) and pass a background check.
As of July 1, 2024, the sale of all "firearm precursor parts" is required to be done through a licensed dealer.
Some localities have adopted Second Amendment sanctuary resolutions.

== See also ==
.50
Caliber BMG Regulation Act of 2004
Concealed carry in the United States
Gun laws in the United States by state
Guy Montag Doe v. San Francisco Housing Authority
Law of California
Mulford Act
Peruta v. San Diego
Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989
San Francisco Proposition H (2005)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
CA Penal Codes,
Section 6 "Control of Deadly Weapons"
CalGuns.net
California DOJ Bureau of Firearms Page
California DOJ
California Firearms Laws Summary Booklet
Legal Community Against Violence –
California State Law Summary
The CalGuns Foundation
CalGuns Foundation Wiki
Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST)
(Bengali: মিলিটারি
ইনস্টিটিউট
অফ সায়েন্স অ্যান্ড
টেকনোলজি) is under National University, Bangladesh in Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
It is an institute under the Ministry of Defence (Bangladesh) which is run by Military of Bangladesh and is affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals.
Though a military institution, both military and civil students study in MIST.

==
History ==
MIST came into existence on 19 April 1998 and academic programs were launched in January 1999.
The initial batches included only selected military students.
However, feeling the necessity of spreading quality engineering education, the authority decided to admit civil students (both male and female) and from 2002, civilian students were admitted in different departments through passing a rigorous admission test.

The maiden department of the institute is the Civil Engineering department, which started functioning in 1999.
In 2000, Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) department was established.
Mechanical Engineering (ME) department and Electrical, Electronic & Communication Engineering (EECE) department were established in the year 2003.
MIST started its Masters program in different disciplines from 2012 and MPhil/PhD from year 2014.In
the beginning MIST was affiliated with the University of Dhaka (DU).

==
Campus ==
MIST is located at Mirpur Cantonment, on the northwest edge of Dhaka City.
Students' hall and teachers' quarters are at the last end of the campus.
The academic buildings of MIST are on 50 acres (200,000 m2) of land.
This area is confined, with officers' mess, four tower buildings (two of them are completed, known as Faculty Tower-1 and Faculty Tower-2; as of December 2019, the other two are in construction), cafeteria, library, two fields for the civil students, medical center, physical center and administrative buildings.
Halls for students and teachers are situated outside the campus.
Recently more land was issued for the campus for residential accommodation.

==
Aim of MIST ==
The aim of MIST is to conduct undergraduate, post graduate/Masters (M.Sc.
Engg./ M. Engg.)
and Ph.D. program on various disciplines of engineering.
==
Student's dress ==
Civil students are to wear dress with displayed identity card as per 'Dress Code' prescribed by MIST authority.
Military students put on uniform as per Dress Regulation of respective services.

==
Affiliation ==
MIST was previously affiliated with the University of Dhaka.
However, at present all academic programs of MIST are affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP).
All examinations are conducted as per the schedule approved by BUP.
It also approves the results and awards certificates to the qualified students.

==
Procedure of admission ==
The undergraduate admission process at MIST has several steps.
First, students are screened based on their grade point average (GPA) in HSC or equivalent examinations.
Every year, 10,000 candidates are short-listed from approximately 20,000-20,500 applicants to sit for the admission test.
Besides the admission test, SSC and HSC results are taken into consideration while evaluating candidates.
Students who have passed in minimum five subjects in GCE O-Level and three subjects (mathematics, physics and chemistry) in A-Level, obtaining minimum C-grades in all subjects are also eligible for the admission test.
Foreign students may be admitted against a reserved quota of 3% of overall vacancies available (6% of civil seats).
Vacancies will be offered to countries through Armed Forces Division (AFD), Prime Minister's Office, of the Government of Bangladesh.
Admission to Ph.D. and M.Phil
programs requires a master's degree from relevant branch from a recognized university.
Admission to a Master's program requires a bachelor's degree in engineering from a recognized institution.
Admission is based on written admission test & interview/viva voce on the relevant departments.
Admission is highly competitive in postgraduate programs as only few aspirants are selected every year from a large pool of applicants.

==
Academics ==


===
Faculties and departments ===
Academic activities are undertaken by 12 departments under four faculties.
Twelve departments offer undergraduate programs.

===
Postgraduate programs ===
Eight departments of MIST offer postgraduate courses(M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D) and other three departments of Science and Engineering Faculty offer M.Phil.

Civil Engineering [Structure/Transportation/Environment/Water Resource/Geotechnical Engineering] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Electrical, Electronics & Communication Engineering [Power/Electronics/Communication] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Computer Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Mechanical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Aeronautical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Nuclear Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Biomedical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.)
===
Diploma courses ===
Certificate Course on
GIS and Remote Sensing
Diploma courses in surveying & mapping
Diploma & Certificate courses in CSE.

Professional advance courses.

==
Regulatory bodies ==


===
Council of MIST ===


====
Chairman ====
Honorable Minister, Ministry of Education, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.
====
Vice chairman ====
Chief of Army Staff, Bangladesh Army
Chief of Naval Staff, Bangladesh Navy
Chief of Air Staff,
Bangladesh Air Force


====
Members ====
Principal Staff Officer, Armed Forces Division (AFD)
Secretary, MOD
Vice Chancellor(VC), BUP
Engineer in Chief(E in C), Army Headquarters(AHQ)
Commandant, MIST
Commandant, BMA
Commandant, BNA
Commandant, BAFA
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), Faculty of science, DU
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), BUET
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of the Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Science and Technology


====
Member secretary ====
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Governing Body of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Vice chairman ====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BMA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BNA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BAFA /
Commandant MIST
Director General, Training Directorate, AFD
Director, Military Training, Bangladesh Army
Director, Naval Training,  Bangladesh Navy
Director, Air Training,  Bangladesh Air Force
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Director Administration, MIST
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and Information Technology


===
Member secretary ===
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Academic Council  of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
Commandant, MIST


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BMA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BNA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BAFA
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Heads of all Department, MIST
Colonel Staff, MIST
Controller of Exam, MIST
Representative of Training Directorate, AFD
Representative of Military Training Directorate, AHQ
Representative of Naval Training Directorate, NHQ
Representative of Air Training Directorate, Air HQ
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education


====
Member secretary ====
General Staff Officer Grade-1 (Academic),
MIST


== Number of seats ==
The number of seats for 4-year bachelor's degree in Engineering Programmes (Unit-A) and
5-year bachelor's degree of Architecture Programme (Unit-B) is given below:


==
Teacher's quarters ==
MIST has two Teacher's Quarters for the permanent teachers with families.
They are:
Polash (পলাশ)
Shapla (শাপলা)


== Facilities and services ==


== Halls of residence ==
MIST has dorms for male and female students.
Hostel administration is performed by the provost who is selected from one of the senior teachers of the 11 departments.
The hall organizes many creative works and tournaments.

===
Osmany Hall ===
Osmany Hall is named after the Bangabir General M.A.G. Osmany, the Commander-in-chief of Bangladesh forces during Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Osmany Hall is an 8 stored building with female and male wings, having a capacity of 558 students (male 260 and female 298).
There are 20 staff for each wing.
Osmany Hall is known for the security of the students compared to the other hall in the country.
Students get various modern facilities such as 24-hour electricity, internet service, gym, games and sports facilities.

==
Students organizations ==
MIST
Robotics Club (MISTRC)
<http://mistroboticsclub.com//>
MIST
Literature and Cultural Club (MISTLCC)
MIST
IEEE MIST Student Branch
MIST
Debating Society (MISTDS)
MIST  Photographic Society (MISTPS)
MIST  Film and Drama Society (MISTFDS)
MIST
Sports Club
MIST
Aeronautics and Astronautics Club (MAAC)
MIST  Computer Club <https://computer-club.mist.ac.bd/
>
MIST  Nuclear Engineering Club


==
Laboratory facilities ==
Each department is equipped with modern lab facilities.
The various laboratories available under each dept are given below:


==
Central library ==
MIST library has a resourceful collection of 65,000 books (as of 2018), 1,680 CD-ROMs, and a good number of magazines, periodicals, journals and articles from home and abroad.
The library gives access to online journals through Library Consortium of Bangladesh (LiCoB)[previously
Bangladesh INASP-PERii Consortium (BIPC)].
The central library uses KOHA, Dspace.
VuFind and Drupal (open source software) as a part of the Integrated Library Management System.
It also subscribes a number of Bangla and English newspapers and periodicals.
In addition to that, each dept has its own library enriched with adequate text and reference books.
Start of each semester library issues reference books of that particular semester to students of every department.
There is also a Cyber Center for Internet browsing.

==
MIST journals and magazines ==
MIST has an annual technical journal titled "Galaxy" (ISSN 2073-6444) whose concern is to provide a firm ground for students and faculty members to share their research outcome and knowledge.

"
IMPULSE"-Annual publication from Dept.
of Electrical, Electronic and Communication Engineering.
So far, there are 6 editions of this illustrious magazine.

Osmany Hall Magazine "Prottasha(প্রত্যাশা)
"
"
AEROMIST"-A departmental magazine of Aeronautical Engineering department.
===
Osmany Memorial Gold Medal ===
Awarded to the best student amongst all the MIST Medal holders.

===
MIST Medal ===
Awarded to first position holder in each department with a minimum CGPA of 3.80 out of 4.00.
===
Research Medal ===
Awarded to the student of different departments for the best Research work in their Graduation.

===
Dean's List of Honour ===
All students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 at the end of each academic level for level 1, 2 and 3
All graduating students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 considering results of entire program (level 1 to 4)


===
Scholarships and stipends ===
Chancellor's(BUP) Scholarship
Vice Chancellors (BUP) Scholarship/
Stipend
MIST Scholarship
MIST Stipends
Osmany Memorial Trust Scholarship
Buro Bangladesh Stipend
Chief of Army Staff Scholarship
Chief of Army Staff Stipend
Chief of Naval Staff Scholarship
Chief of Air Staff Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Stipend


==
Achievements ==
Md Mijanur Rahman (AE-1)
Won Runner-Up Trophy in "International Public Speaking Competition-2010" held in England.

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "4th IUT ICT Fest-2012", placed 8th( 5th in institution ranking).

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest Dhaka Regional 2012", achieved 17th position ( 9th in institution ranking).

MIST Lunabotics Team participated in "3rd Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2012" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA.

Mobile Apps "Save Life" developed by the Students (Ishtiak Ahmed & Kazi Munshimun Nabi) of CSE Dept of MIST secured 2nd runner-up position in the Mobile Apps Development Contest by EATL Apps among 188 projects.

MIST Aero Thunder Team participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition(West)-2013" & placed 19th position in world ranking, held in California, USA from 12 to 14 April 2013.

Two Teams from CE Dept.(Team VIVE & Team STORM) participated in "ACI Mortar Workability Competition 2013" held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA on 14 April and
Team VIVE placed 4th among all the universities & 1st contestant from Bangladesh & whole Asia.

Team "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" from Aeronautical Engineering Dept.
participated in 2013 AIAA/
Cessna Aircraft Company/
Raytheon Missile Systems Design/Build/Fly Competition held in Tucson, Arizona, US, from 19 to 21 April 2013 & placed 40 out of 90 team from all over the world (placed 4th in whole ASIA region). "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" is the 1st team from Bangladesh
participate this competition.

MIST Team "BIJOY" became Runners up of the Inter University Design Contest-UAPT jointly organized by Engineering Students Association of Bangladesh(ESAB) & Bangladeshi Systems Change Advocacy Network (B-SCAN) among 82 teams from all over the country on 10 May 2013.

MIST Lunabotics Team "EKUSH" participated in the "4th Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2013" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA & placed 11th in mining Category all over world.
And won 1st position in 'Outreach Project',1st in 'Luna World Wide Award'  2nd in 'System Engineering Paper' & 3rd in 'Team Spirit Award'.

"
MIST Aero Thunder Team GREEN" participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition (WEST)-2014" & placed 17th position among 100 universities all over the world.
And also placed 4th position in payload section & 10th in flight score
"MIST Aero Thunder Team RED" participated in "SAE Aero Design
Competition(East)-2014" & placed 10th position in world ranking, held in USA from 11 to 13 April 2014.
They also placed 5th position in System Engineering Paper & 5th position in Presentation.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Mist computer club website
Mist robotics club
The arms industry, also known as the arms trade, is a global industry which manufactures and sells weapons and military technology, and is a major component of the military–industrial complex.
It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities.
Arms-producing companies, also referred to as arms dealers, or as the military industry, produce arms for the armed forces of states and for civilians.
Departments of government also operate in the arms industry, buying and selling weapons, munitions and other military items.
An arsenal is a place where arms and ammunition - whether privately or publicly owned - are made, maintained and repaired, stored, or issued, in any combination.
Products of the arms industry include guns, artillery, ammunition, missiles, military aircraft, military vehicles, ships, electronic systems, night-vision devices, holographic weapon sights, laser rangefinders, laser sights, hand grenades, landmines and more.
The arms industry also provides other logistical and operational support.

The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) estimated military expenditures as of 2018 at $1822 billion.
This represented a relative decline from 1990, when military expenditures made up 4% of world GDP.
Part of the money goes to the procurement of military hardware and services from the military industry.
The combined arms-sales of the top 100 largest arms-producing companies and military services companies (excluding China) totaled $420 billion in 2018, according to SIPRI.
This was
4.6 percent higher than sales in 2017 and marks the fourth consecutive year of growth in Top 100 arms sales.
In 2004 over $30 billion were spent in the international arms-trade (a figure that excludes domestic sales of arms).
According to the institute, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2014–18 was 7.8 percent higher than in 2009–13 and 23 percent higher than in 2004–2008.
The five largest exporters in 2014–18 were the United States, Russia, France, Germany and China whilst the five biggest importers were Saudi Arabia, India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria.
Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms-industry to supply their own military forces.
Some countries also have a substantial legal or illegal domestic trade in weapons for use by their own citizens, primarily for self-defense, hunting or sporting purposes.
Illegal trade in small arms occurs in many countries and regions affected by political instability.
The Small Arms Survey estimates that 875 million small arms circulate worldwide, produced by more than 1,000 companies from nearly 100 countries.
Governments award contracts to supply their country's military; such arms contracts can become of substantial political importance.
The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development of what U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower described in 1961 as a military-industrial complex, where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked, similarly to the European multilateral defense procurement.
Various corporations, some publicly held, others private, bid for these contracts, which are often worth many billions of dollars.
Sometimes, as with the contract for the international Joint Strike Fighter, a competitive tendering process takes place, with the decision made on the merits of the designs submitted by the companies involved.
Other times, no bidding or competition takes place.

==
History ==
During the early modern period, England, France, the Netherlands and some states in Germany became self-sufficient in arms production, with diffusion and migration of skilled workers to more peripheral countries such as Portugal and Russia.

The modern arms industry emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century as a product of the creation and expansion of the first large military-industrial companies.
As smaller countries (and even newly industrializing countries like Russia and Japan) could no longer produce cutting-edge military equipment with their indigenous resources and capacity, they increasingly began to contract the manufacture of military equipment, such as battleships, artillery pieces and rifles to foreign firms.

In 1854, the British government awarded a contract to the Elswick Ordnance Company for the supply of his latest breech loading rifled artillery pieces.
This galvanized the private sector into weapons production, with the surplus being increasingly exported to foreign countries.
Armstrong became one of the first international arms dealers, selling his weapon systems to governments across the world from Brazil to Japan.
In 1884, he opened a shipyard at Elswick to specialize in warship production—at the time, it was the only factory in the world that could build a battleship and arm it completely.
The factory produced warships for many navies, including the Imperial Japanese Navy.
Several Armstrong cruisers played an important role in defeating the Russian fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.

In the American Civil War in 1861 the North had a small but cognizable advantage over the south due to its ability to produce (in relatively small numbers) breech-loading rifles for use against the muzzle-loading rifled muskets
the were largely the sole variety of shoulder arm utilized by the south.
This began the transition to industrially produced mechanized weapons such as the Gatling gun.
This industrial innovation in the defense industry was adopted by Prussia in 1866 & 1870–71 in its defeat of Austria and France respectively.
By this time the machine gun had begun entering into the militaries.
The first example of its effectiveness was in 1899 during the Boer War and in 1905 during the Russo-Japanese War.
However, Germany were leaders in innovation of weapons and used this innovation nearly defeating the allies in World War I.
In 1885, France decided to capitalize on this increasingly lucrative form of trade and repealed its ban on weapon exports.
The regulatory framework for the period up to the First World War was characterized by a laissez-faire policy that placed little obstruction in the way of weapons exports.
Due to the carnage of World War I, arms traders began to be regarded with odium as "merchants of death" and were accused of having instigated and perpetuated the war in order to maximize their profits from arms sales.
An inquiry into these allegations in Britain failed to find evidence to support them.
However, the sea change in attitude about war more generally meant that governments began to control and regulate the trade themselves.

The volume of the arms trade greatly increased during the 20th century, and it began to be used as a political tool, especially during the Cold War where the United States and the USSR supplied weapons to their proxies across the world, particularly third world countries (see Nixon Doctrine).

==
Sectors ==
===
Land-based weapon ===
This category includes everything from light arms to heavy artillery, and the majority of producers are small.
Many are located in third world countries.
International trade in handguns, machine guns, tanks, armored personnel carriers, and other relatively inexpensive weapons is substantial.
There is relatively little regulation at the international level, and as a result, many weapons fall into the hands of organized crime, rebel forces, terrorists, or regimes under sanctions.

====
Small arms ====
The Control Arms Campaign, founded by Amnesty International, Oxfam, and the International Action Network on Small Arms, estimated in 2003 that there are over 639 million small arms in circulation, and that over 1,135 companies based in more than 98 different countries manufacture small arms as well as their various components and ammunition.

===
Aerospace systems ===
Encompassing military aircraft (both land-based and naval aviation), conventional missiles, and military satellites, this is the most technologically advanced sector of the market.
It is also the least competitive from an economic standpoint, with a handful of companies dominating the entire market.
The top clients and major producers are virtually all located in the western world and Russia, with the United States easily in the first place.
Prominent aerospace firms include Rolls Royce, HAL(Hindustan aeronautics limited) BAE Systems, Dassault Aviation, Sukhoi, Mikoyan, EADS, Leonardo, Thales Group, Lockheed Martin,  Northrop Grumman and Boeing.
There are also several multinational consortia mostly involved in the manufacturing of fighter jets, such as the Eurofighter.
The largest military contract in history, signed in October 2001, involved the development of the Joint Strike Fighter.

===
Naval systems ===
Some of the world's great powers maintain substantial naval forces to provide a global presence, with the largest nations possessing aircraft carriers, nuclear submarines and advanced anti-air defense systems.
The vast majority of military ships are conventionally powered, but some are nuclear-powered.
There is also a large global market in second-hand naval vessels, generally purchased by developing countries from Western governments.

==
Cybersecurity industry ==
The cybersecurity industry is becoming the most important defense industry as cyber attacks are being deemed as one of the greatest risks to defense in the next ten years as cited by the NATO review in 2013.
Therefore, high levels of investment has been placed in the cybersecurity industry to produce new software to protect the ever-growing transition to digitally run hardware.
For the military industry it is vital that protections are used for systems used for reconnaissance, surveillance and intelligence gathering.

Nevertheless, cyber attacks and cyber attackers have become more advanced in their field using techniques such as Dynamic Trojan Horse Network (DTHN) Internet Worm, Zero-Day Attack, and Stealth Bot.
As a result, the cybersecurity industry has had to improve the defense technologies to remove any vulnerability to cyber attacks using systems such as the Security of Information (SIM), Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) and DDoS techniques.

As the threat to computers grows, the demand for cyber protection will rise, resulting in the growth of the cybersecurity industry.
It is expected that the industry will be dominated by the defense and homeland security agencies that will make up 40% of the industry.

==
International arms transfers ==
According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–14 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009.
The five biggest exporters in 2010–2014 were the United States, Russia, China, Germany and France, and the five biggest importers were India, Saudi Arabia, China, the United Arab Emirates and Pakistan.
The flow of arms to the Middle East increased by 87 percent between 2009–13 and 2014–18, while there was a decrease in flows to all other regions: Africa, the Americas, Asia and Oceania, and Europe.
SIPRI has identified 67 countries as exporters of major weapons in 2014–18.
The top 5 exporters during the period were responsible for 75 percent of all arms exports.
The composition of the five largest exporters of arms changed between 2014–18 remained unchanged compared to 2009–13, although their combined total exports of major arms were 10 percent higher.
In 2014–18 there can be seen significant increases in arms exports from the US, France and Germany, while Chinese exports rose marginally and Russian exports decreased.
In 2014–18, 155 countries (about three-quarters of all countries) imported major weapons.
The top 5 recipients accounted for 33 percent of the total arms imports during the period.
The top five arms importers - Saudi Arabia, India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria - accounted for 35 percent of total arms imports in 2014–18.
Of these, Saudi Arabia and India were among the top five importers in both 2009–13 and 2014–18.

In 2014–18, the volume of major arms international transfers was 7.8 percent higher than in 2009-13 and 23 percent than that in 2004–08.
The largest arms importer was Saudi Arabia, importing arms majorly from the United States, United Kingdom and France.
Between 2009–13 and 2014–18, the flow of arms to the Middle East increased by 87 percent.
Also including India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria, the top five importers received 35 percent of the total arms imports, during 2014–18.
Besides, the largest exporters were the United States, Russia, France, Germany and China.

==
World's largest arms exporters ==
Figures are SIPRI Trend Indicator Values (TIVs) expressed in millions.
These numbers may not represent real financial flows as prices for the underlying arms can be as low as zero in the case of military aid.
The following are estimates from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.

Overall global arms exports rose of about 6 per-cent in the last 5 years compared to the period 2010-2014 and increased by 20 per-cent since 2005–2009.Note that rankings for exporters below a billion dollars are less meaningful, as they can be swayed by single contracts.
A much more accurate picture of export volume, free from yearly fluctuations, is presented by 5-year moving averages.

Next to SIPRI there are several other sources that provide data on international transfers of arms.
These include national reports by national governments about arms exports, the UN register on conventional arms and an annual publication by the U.S. Congressional Research Service that includes data on arms exports to developing countries as compiled by U.S. intelligence agencies.
Due to the different methodologies and definitions used different sources often provide significantly different data.

===
World’s largest postwar arms exporter ===
SIPRI uses the "trend-indicator values" (TIV).
These are based on the known unit production costs of weapons and represent the transfer of military resources rather than the financial value of the transfer.

==
World's largest arms importers ==
Units are in Trend Indicator Values expressed as millions of U.S. dollars at 1990s prices.
These numbers may not represent real financial flows as prices for the underlying arms can be as low as zero in the case of military aid.

Please note that arms import rankings fluctuate heavily as countries enter and exit wars.
Export data tend to be less volatile as exporters tend to be more technologically advanced and have stable production flows.
5-year moving averages present a much more accurate picture of import volume, free from yearly fluctuations.

==
List of major weapon manufacturers ==
This is a list of the world's largest arms manufacturers and other military service companies who profit the most from the War economy, their origin is shown as well.
The information is based on a list published by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute for 2020.
The list provided by the SIPRI
The numbers are in billions of US dollars.

==
Arms control ==
Arms control refers to international restrictions upon the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation and usage of small arms, conventional weapons, and weapons of mass destruction.
It is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy, which seeks to persuade governments to accept such limitations through agreements and treaties, although it may also be forced upon non-consenting governments.

===
Notable international arms control treaties ===
Geneva Protocol on chemical and biological weapons, 1925
Outer Space Treaty, signed and entered into force 1967
Biological Weapons Convention, signed 1972, entered into force 1975
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), 1987
Chemical Weapons Convention, signed 1993, entered into force 1997
Ottawa Treaty on anti-personnel land mines, signed 1997, entered into force 1999
New START Treaty, signed by Russia and the United States in April 2010, entered into force in February 2011
Arms Trade Treaty, concluded in 2013, entered into force on 24 December 2014.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Amnesty International:
Arms Trade
The British Library – Defence Industry Guide (sources of information)
FAS's Arms Sales Monitoring Project
The Guardian's arms trade report
List of participators of the Defense System and Equipment international conference in London, 2003
SIPRI arms industry reports and database
SIPRI list of Top 100 arms-producing companies
SPADE Defense Index (NYSE:
DXS) Defense sector market index
The True Cost of Global Arms Trade [infographic included]
UN Office for Disarmament Affairs
U.S. Arms Sales to the Third World from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
World Map and Chart of Arms exports per country by Lebanese-economy-forum, World Bank data
World Security Institute's Center for Defense Information
Z. Yihdego, Arms Trade and International Law, Hart:
OXford, 2007
Military technology is the application of technology for use in warfare.
It comprises the kinds of technology that are distinctly military in nature and not civilian in application, usually because they lack useful or legal civilian applications, or are dangerous to use without appropriate military training.

The line is porous; military inventions have been brought into civilian use throughout history, with sometimes minor modification if any, and civilian innovations have similarly been put to military use.

Military technology is often researched and developed by scientists and engineers specifically for use in battle by the armed forces.
Many new technologies came as a result of the military funding of science.

Armament engineering is the design, development, testing and lifecycle management of military weapons and systems.
It draws on the knowledge of several traditional engineering disciplines, including mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, mechatronics, electro-optics, aerospace engineering, materials engineering, and chemical engineering.

==
History ==
This section is divided into the broad cultural developments that affected military technology.

===
Ancient technology ===
The first use of stone tools may have begun during the Paleolithic Period.
The earliest stone tools are from the site of Lomekwi, Turkana, dating from 3.3 million years ago.
Stone tools diversified through the Pleistocene Period, which ended ~12,000 years ago.

The earliest evidence of warfare between two groups is recorded at the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, where human skeletons with major traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including an embedded obsidian bladelet on a skull, are evidence of inter-group conflict between groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers 10,000 years ago.
Humans entered the Bronze Age as they learned to smelt copper into an alloy with tin to make weapons.
In Asia where copper-tin ores are rare, this development was delayed until trading in bronze began in the third millennium BCE.
In the Middle East and Southern European regions, the Bronze Age follows the Neolithic period, but in other parts of the world, the Copper Age is a transition from Neolithic to the Bronze Age.
Although the Iron Age generally follows the Bronze Age, in some areas the Iron Age intrudes directly on the Neolithic from outside the region, with the exception of Sub-Saharan Africa where it was developed independently.
The first large-scale use of iron weapons began in Asia Minor around the 14th century BCE and in Central Europe around the 11th century BCE followed by the Middle East (about 1000 BCE) and India and China.
The Assyrians are credited with the introduction of horse cavalry in warfare and the extensive use of iron weapons by 1100 BCE.
Assyrians were also the first to use iron-tipped arrows.

=== Post-classical technology ===
The Wujing Zongyao (Essentials of the Military Arts), written by Zeng Gongliang, Ding Du, and others at the order of Emperor Renzong around 1043 during the Song dynasty illustrate the eras focus on advancing intellectual issues and military technology due to the significance of warfare between the Song and the Liao, Jin, and Yuan to their north.

The book covers topics of military strategy, training, and the production and employment of advanced weaponry.

Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbors to the north.
The flamethrower found its origins in Byzantine-era Greece, employing Greek fire (a chemically complex, highly flammable petrol fluid) in a device with a siphon hose by the 7th century.

The earliest reference to Greek Fire in China was made in 917, written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms.

In 919, the siphon projector-pump was used to spread the 'fierce fire oil' that could not be doused with water, as recorded by Lin Yu in his Wuyue Beishi, hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire
(see also Pen Huo Qi).
Lin Yu mentioned also that the 'fierce fire oil' derived ultimately from one of China's maritime contacts in the 'southern seas', Arabia Dashiguo.
In the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919, the naval fleet of the Wenmu King from Wuyue defeated a Huainan army from the Wu state; Wenmu's success was facilitated by the use of 'fire oil' ('huoyou') to burn their fleet, signifying the first Chinese use of gunpowder in a battle.
The Chinese applied the use of double-piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder (with an upstroke and downstroke), lit at the end by a slow-burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame.
This device was featured in description and illustration of  the Wujing Zongyao military manuscript of 1044.
In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976, early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975.
Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy, but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction.

Although the destructive effects of gunpowder were described in the earlier Tang dynasty by a Daoist alchemist, the earliest developments of the gun barrel and the projectile-fire cannon were found in late Song China.
The first art depiction of the Chinese 'fire lance' (a combination of a temporary-fire flamethrower and gun) was from a Buddhist mural painting of Dunhuang, dated circa 950.
These 'fire-lances' were widespread in use by the early 12th century, featuring hollowed bamboo poles as tubes to fire sand particles (to blind and choke), lead pellets, bits of sharp metal and pottery shards, and finally large gunpowder-propelled arrows and rocket weaponry.

Eventually, perishable bamboo was replaced with hollow tubes of cast iron, and so too did the terminology of this new weapon change, from 'fire-spear' huo qiang to 'fire-tube' huo tong.

This ancestor to the gun was complemented by the ancestor to the cannon, what the Chinese referred to since the 13th century as the 'multiple bullets magazine erupter' bai zu lian zhu pao, a tube of bronze or cast iron that was filled with about 100 lead balls.
The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, dating to 1128,
that portrays a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, firing flames and a cannonball.
However, the oldest existent archaeological discovery of a metal barrel handgun is from the Chinese Heilongjiang excavation, dated to 1288.
The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
Written later by Jiao Yu in his Huolongjing (mid-14th century), this manuscript recorded an earlier Song-era cast-iron cannon known as the 'flying-cloud thunderclap eruptor' (fei yun pi-li pao).
The manuscript stated that:
As noted before, the change in terminology for these new weapons during the Song period were gradual.
The early Song cannons were at first termed the same way as the Chinese trebuchet catapult.
A later Ming dynasty scholar known as Mao Yuanyi would explain this use of terminology and true origins of the cannon in his text of the Wubei Zhi, written in 1628:
The 14th-century Huolongjing was also one of the first Chinese texts to carefully describe to the use of explosive land mines, which had been used by the late Song Chinese against the Mongols in 1277, and employed by the Yuan dynasty afterwards.
The innovation of the detonated land mine was accredited to one Luo Qianxia in the campaign of defense against the Mongol invasion by Kublai Khan, Later Chinese texts revealed that the Chinese land mine employed either a rip cord or a motion booby trap of a pin releasing falling weights that rotated a steel flint wheel, which in turn created sparks that ignited the train of fuses for the land mines.

Furthermore, the Song employed the earliest known gunpowder-propelled rockets in warfare during the late 13th century, its earliest form being the archaic Fire Arrow.
When the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng fell to the Jurchens in 1126, it was written by Xia Shaozeng that 20,000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchens in their conquest.

An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ("Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques"), written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng Kongliang and Yang Weide, described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder packets near the head of the arrow.
Going back yet even farther, the Wu Li Xiao Shi (1630, second edition 1664) of Fang Yizhi stated that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song (r. 960–976) in 960.

===
Modern technology ===


====
Armies ====
The Islamic gunpowder empires introduced numerous developed firearms, cannon and small arms.
During the period of Proto-industrialization, newly invented weapons were seen to be used in Mughal India.

Rapid development in military technology had a dramatic impact on armies and navies in the industrialized world in 1740-1914.
For land warfare, cavalry faded in importance, while infantry became transformed by the use of highly accurate more rapidly loading rifles, and the use of smokeless powder.
Machine guns were developed in the 1860s in Europe.
Rocket artillery and the Mysorean rockets, both pioneered by Indian Muslim Tipu Sultan, became more powerful as new high explosives (based on nitroglycerin) arrived during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, and the French introduced much more accurate rapid-fire field artillery.
Logistics and communications support for land warfare dramatically improved with use of railways and telegraphs.
Industrialization provided a base of factories that could be converted to  produce munitions, as well as uniforms, tents, wagons and essential supplies.
Medical facilities were enlarged and reorganized based on improved hospitals and the creation of modern nursing,  typified by Florence Nightingale in Britain during the Crimean War of 1854-56.
====
Naval ====
Naval warfare was transformed by many innovations, most notably the coal-based steam engine, highly accurate long-range naval guns, heavy steel armour for battleships, mines, and the introduction of the torpedo, followed by the torpedo boat and the destroyer.
Coal after 1900 was eventually displaced by more efficient oil, but meanwhile navies with an international scope had to depend on a network of coaling stations to refuel.
The British Empire provided them in abundance, as did the French Empire to a lesser extent.

War colleges developed, as military theory became a specialty; cadets and senior commanders were taught the theories of Jomini, Clausewitz and Mahan, And engaged in tabletop war games.
Around 1900, entirely new innovations such as submarines and airplanes appeared, and were quickly adapted to warfare by 1914.
The British HMS Dreadnought (1906) incorporated so much of the latest technology in weapons, propulsion and armour that it at a stroke made all other battleships obsolescent.

====
Organization and finance ====
New financial tools were developed to fund the rapidly increasing costs of warfare, such as popular bond sales and income taxes, and the funding of permanent research centers.

Many 19th century innovations were largely invented and promoted by lone individuals with small teams of assistants, such as David Bushnell and the submarine, John Ericsson and the battleship, Hiram Maxim and the machine gun, and Alfred Nobel and high explosives.
By 1900 the military began to realize that they needed to rely much more heavily on large-scale research centers, which needed government funding.

They brought in leaders of organized innovation such as Thomas Edison in the U.S. and chemist Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Germany.

==
Postmodern technology ==
The postmodern stage of military technology emerged in the 1940s, and one with recognition thanks to the high priority given during the war to scientific and engineering research and development regarding nuclear weapons, radar, jet engines, proximity fuses, advanced submarines, aircraft carriers, and other weapons.
The high-priority continues into the 21st century.
It involves the military application of advanced scientific research regarding nuclear weapons, jet engines, ballistic and guided missiles, radar, biological warfare, and the use of electronics, computers and software.

===
Space ===
During the Cold War, the world's two great superpowers — the Soviet Union and the United States of America — spent large proportions of their GDP on developing military technologies.

The drive to place objects in orbit stimulated space research and started the Space Race.

In 1957, the USSR launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1.

By the end of the 1960s, both countries regularly deployed satellites.
Spy satellites were used by militaries to take accurate pictures of their rivals' military installations.

As time passed the resolution and accuracy of orbital reconnaissance alarmed both sides of the iron curtain.

Both the United States and the Soviet Union began to develop anti-satellite weapons to blind or destroy each other's satellites.

Laser weapons, kamikaze style satellites, as well as orbital nuclear explosion were researched with varying levels of success.

Spy satellites were, and continue to be, used to monitor the dismantling of military assets in accordance with arms control treaties signed between the two superpowers.
To use spy satellites in such a manner is often referred to in treaties as "national technical means of verification".

The superpowers developed ballistic missiles to enable them to use nuclear weaponry across great distances.
As rocket science developed, the range of missiles increased and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) were created, which could strike virtually any target on Earth in a timeframe measured in minutes rather than hours or days.

In order to cover large distances ballistic missiles are usually launched into sub-orbital spaceflight.

As soon as intercontinental missiles were developed, military planners began programmes and strategies to counter their effectiveness.

===
Mobilization ===
A significant portion of military technology is about transportation, allowing troops and weaponry to be moved from their origins to the front.
Land transport has historically been mainly by foot, land vehicles have usually been used as well, from chariots to tanks.

When conducting a battle over a body of water, ships are used.
There are historically two main categories of ships: those for transporting troops, and those for attacking other ships.

Soon after the invention of aeroplanes, military aviation became a significant component of warfare, though usually as a supplementary role.
The two main types of military aircraft are bombers, which attack land- or sea-based targets, and fighters, which attack other aircraft.

Military vehicles are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces.

List of military vehicles
List of armoured fighting vehicles
List of tanksMilitary aircraft includes any use of aircraft by a country's military, including such areas as transport, training, disaster relief, border patrol, search and rescue, surveillance, surveying, peacekeeping, and (very rarely) aerial warfare.

List of aircraft
List of aircraft weaponsWarships are watercraft for combat and transportation in and on seas and oceans.

Submarines
Complex masting and sail systems found on warships during the Age of Sail
List of historical ship and boat types
List of aircraft carriers
List of submarine classes


===
Defence ===
Fortifications are military constructions and buildings designed for defence in warfare.
They range in size and age from the Great Wall of China to a Sangar.

List of fortifications
List of forts


===
Sensors and communication ===
Sensors and communication systems are used to detect enemies, coordinate movements of armed forces and guide weaponry.
Early systems included flag signaling, telegraph and heliographs.

Laser guidance
Missile guidance
Norden Bombsight
Proximity fuse
Radar
Satellite guidance in guidance weapons


==
Future technology ==
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is an agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of new technologies for use by the military.

DARPA leads the development of military technology in the United States and today, has dozens of ongoing projects; everything from humanoid robots, to bullets that are able to change path before reaching their target.
China has a similar agency.

===
Emerging territory ===
Current militaries continue to invest in new technologies for the future.
Such technologies include cognitive radar , 5g cellular networks, microchips, semiconductors, and large scale analytic engines.
Additionally, many militaries seek to improve current laser technology.
For example, Israeli Defense Forces utilize laser technology to disable small enemy machinery, but seek to move to more large scale capabilities in the coming years.
Militaries across the world continue to perform research on autonomous technologies which allow for increased troop mobility or replacement of live soldiers.
Autonomous vehicles and robots are expected to play a role in future conflicts; this has the potential to decrease loss of life in future warfare.
Observers of transhumanism note high rates of technological terms in military literature, but low rates for explicitly transhuman-related terms.
Today's hybrid style of warfare also calls for investments in information technologies.
Increased reliance on computer systems has incentivized nations to push for increased efforts at managing large scale networks and having access to large scale data.
New strategies of cyber and hybrid warfare includes, network attacks, media analysis, and media/ grass-roots campaigns on medias such as blog posts


====
Cyberspace ====
In 2011, the US Defense Department declared cyberspace a new domain of warfare; since then DARPA has begun a research project known as "Project X" with the goal of creating new technologies that will enable the government to better understand and map the cyber territory.

Ultimately giving the Department of Defense the ability to plan and manage large-scale cyber missions across dynamic network environments.

== See also ==
List of military inventions
List of emerging military technologies
Bellifortis, late medieval treatise on military technology.

Materiel


== References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andrade, Tonio.
The Gunpowder Age: China, military innovation, and the rise of the West in world history (Princeton UP, 2016).

Black, Jeremy.
Tools of War  (2007) covers 50 major inventions.
excerpt
Boot, Max.
War made new: technology, warfare, and the course of history, 1500 to today (Penguin, 2006).

Dupuy, Trevor N.
The evolution of weapons and warfare (1984), 350pp, cover 2000 BC to late 20th century.

Ellis, John.
The Social History of the Machine Gun (1986).

Gabriel, Richard A., and Karen S. Metz.
From Sumer to Rome: The Military capabilities of ancient armies (ABC-CLIO, 1991).

Hacker, Barton (2005).
"
The Machines of War: Western Military Technology 1850–2000".
History & Technology.
21 (3)
: 255–300.
doi:10.1080/07341510500198669.
S2CID 144113139.

Levy, Jack S (1984).
"
The offensive/defensive balance of military technology: A theoretical and historical analysis".
International Studies Quarterly.
28 (2)
: 219–238.
doi:10.2307/2600696.
JSTOR 2600696.

McNeill, William H.
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 (1984).

Parker, Geoffrey.
The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West (1988).

Steele, Brett D. and Tamara Dorland.
Heirs of Archimedes: Science & the Art of War through the Age of Enlightenment (2005)
397 pp.
Politics is the process by which groups of people make decisions.
Although the term is generally applied to behavior within civil governments,
politics is observed in all human group interactions, including corporate, academic, and religious institutions.
Politics consists of "social relations involving authority or power.
The definition of "politics" from "The Free Dictionary" is the study of political behavior and examines the acquisition and application of power.
Politics study include political philosophy, which seeks a rationale for politics and an ethic of public behavior, and public administration, which examines the practices of governance.

== 0-9 ==
10 Agorot controversy -
1965
Yerevan demonstrations - 
1984 network liberty alliance -
2006
Franco–Italian–Spanish Middle East Peace Plan -
2006 Georgian-Russian espionage controversy -
2006
Norwegian Jostein Gaarder
controversy -
2006
United States immigration reform protests -
2007
Georgia helicopter attack incident -
2007 Georgia missile incident -
2007
Georgia plane downing incident -


==
A ==
A Man's A Man for A'
That -
A Quaker Action Group -
A Scientific Support for Darwinism -
Abalone Alliance -
Ableism -
Abortion -
Absentee ballot -
Absolute majority -
Absolute monarch -
Absolute
monarchy -
Absolutism -
Abstention -
Academia -
Acceptance -
Acclamation -
Active measures -
Activism -
Activism at
Ohio Wesleyan University -
Activism industry -
Administrative Centre -
Administrative resource -
Adolf
Hitler -
Advocacy -
Affair -
Affinity group -
Affirmative
action -
Affirmative action bake sale -
African Plate -
African socialism -
Agrarianism -
Agricultural policy -
Alan Placa -
Alexandre de Lameth -
Alice's Meadow -
Alliance for a New Humanity -
Alta controversy -
Alternative Views -
Amalgamation (history) -
Amalgamation (politics) -
American Political Science Association -
American Political Science Review -
Americas -
Americentric -
Amoral -
An Act of Conscience -
An equal amount of products for an equal amount of labor -
Anarchism -
Anarchism in China -
Anarchist communism -
Anarcho-capitalism -
Anarcho-primitivism -
Anarcho-syndicalism -
Anatopia -
Ancien Régime -
Ancien régime -
Ancient Greece -
Animal rights -
Animal testing -
Annexation -
Anthropology -
Anti-Capitalist Convergence -
Anti-Communism -
Anti-nuclear movement -
Anti-nuclear movement in Australia -
Anti-nuclear movement in Germany -
Anti-nuclear movement in the United States -
Anti-Poverty Committee -
Anti-Revisionist -
Anti-Stalinist left -
Anti-authoritarian -
Anti-capitalism -
Anti-clericalism -
Anti-communism -
Anti-cult movement -
Anti-environmentalism -
Anti-incumbency -
Anti-nationalism -
Anti-work -
Antidisestablishmentarianism -
Antimilitarism -
Antinaturalism (politics) -
Antoine Barnave -
Apolitical -
Aptitude -
Arab socialism -
Arbetarnas bildningsförbund -
Arbeter Ring (Workmen's Circle) -
Arctic Refuge
drilling controversy -
Arendt, Hannah -
Aristocracy -
Aristotelianism -
Aristotle -
Arizona State University -
Arm's length principle -
Arms Length Management Organisation -
Arrow Cross Party -
Arthashastra -
Artists United Against Apartheid -
Artivist -
Asian values -
Assembly of the Poor -
Asset-based egalitarianism -
Atrocity story -
Attack
poodle -
Audre Lorde
Project -
Augustine of
Hippo -
Augustus -
Ausserparlamentarische Opposition -
Australasia -
Australia -
Austria -
Autarchism -
Authoritarian -
Authoritarianism -
Authority -
Autism
Awareness Campaign UK -
Autism Society of America -
Autism Speaks -
Autonomous area -
Average worker's wage -
Averroes -
Aviation ministry -
Avicenna -
Awards -
Axis of Justice


==
B ==
BCE -
Babels -
Babeuf -
Balanced job complex -
Ballot -
Ballot access -
Ballot box -
Ballot stuffing -
Barbara Kay
controversy -
Bavaria -
Bavarian Soviet Republic -
Behavioralism -
Beirut-Damascus Declaration -
Belgian Labour Party -
Bellum omnium contra omnes -
Benito Mussolini -
Berne International -
Bible -
Bicameralism -
Biosecurity protocol -
Bipartisanship -
Black Front -
Black Panther Party -
Black populism -
Black supremacy -
Board of Control (municipal government) -
Bob Dornan -
Body politic -
Bolivarian
Revolution -
Bolshevik -
Bourgeoisie -
Brahmana -
Brandeis
University -
Brights
movement -
British politics -
Brown Berets (Watsonville) -
Buddhism -
Buddhist socialism -
Bureau-shaping model -
Bureaucracy -
Bureaucrat -
Bureaucratic drift - 
Burmese Way to
Socialism -
Butskelism -
By-election


==
C ==
Cabotage -
Cacerolazo -
Caging list -
Calculus of voting -
Californians
Aware -
Call For Action -
Camp Trans -
Camp for Climate Action -
Campaign for Innocent Victims in Conflict -
Canal
Contemporâneo -
Candidate -
Capital -
Capital
punishment -
Capitalism -
1920 Carinthian plebiscite -
Carneiro's circumscription theory -
Carnival Against Capital -
Carthaginian peace -
Cartographic aggression -
Catholic -
Celine's laws -
Censorship -
Center for American Politics and Citizenship -
Center for Biological Diversity -
Center for Freedom and Prosperity -
Center for Science in the Public Interest -
Center for the Evaluation of Risks to Human Reproduction -
Central Military Commission -
Centrist -
Chambers of parliament -
Champagne
socialist -
Chanakya -
Chandragupta Maurya -
Chappaquiddick incident -
Charismatic authority -
Cherokee freedmen
controversy -
Child advocacy -
China watcher -
Chinaman (politics) -
Chinese people -
Christian democracy -
Christian Institute -
Christian democracy -
Christian
existentialism -
Christian socialism -
Christianity -
Christians -
The Chronicle of Higher Education -
Chuch'e -
Church and
state -
Cicero -
Citizen and consumer movements in Japan -
Citizens' jury -
Citizenship -
City-state -
Civil authority -
Civil libertarianism -
Civil liberties -
Civil registry -
Civil service -
Civil society -
Civil society campaign -
Civilian control of the military -
Civilized -
Clandestine Insurgent Rebel Clown Army -
Clare Boothe Luce
Policy Institute -
Class conflict -
Class struggle -
Classical liberalism -
Classless society -
Clean Clothes Campaign -
Cleavage (politics) -
Clergy Letter
Project -
Clone (voting) -
Co-option -
Coalition for Comprehensive Immigration Reform -
Coercion -
Colby
College -
Cold War -
Collective action -
Collective responsibility -
Collectivism -
College of William & Mary -
Colonialism -
Command and Control (government) -
Commercial Club of Chicago -
Committee -
Committee of 100 (Delaware) -
Common Purpose
UK -
Common minimum programme -
Commonwealth of World Citizens -
Communalism -
Commune (socialism) -
Communism -
Communist -
Communitarianism -
Communities Organized for Public Service -
Community Front in Defense of Land -
Community organizing -
Communization -
Compact theory -
Comparative government -
Comparative politics -
Competitiveness Policy Council -
Compulsory purchase order -
Compulsory voting -
Concession (politics) -
Concord Principles -
Concurrent majority -
Condominium (international law) -
Conference of Socialist Economists -
Confidence and supply -
Confucius -
Congress -
Congress of Vienna -
Congressional Order of Merit -
Conscription -
Consent of the governed -
Conservatism -
Conservatism in Colombia -
Conservatism in the United States -
Consistent life ethic -
Conspiracy (political) -
Constituency -
Constituent
country -
Constituent state -
Constitutional convention (political meeting) -
Constitutional crisis -
Constitutional dictatorship -
Constitutional patriotism -
Constitutionalism -
Consul general -
Consumer organization -
Consumers' Association -
Consumers' Research -
Contact Group (Balkans) -
Contempt of Parliament -
Contentious politics -
Continental Europe -
Controversies related to Islam and Muslims -
Coordination failure -
Cordón
Industrial -
Cornelius Castoriadis -
Cornell College -
Cornell University -
Corporate Europe Observatory -
Corporate nationalism -
Corporate oligarchy -
Corporate welfare -
Corporation -
Corrective Revolution -
Cosmopolitanism -
Council on American–
Islamic Relations -
Counter-recruitment -
Counter-
terrorism -
CountyWatch -
County executive -
Courtesy resolution -
Craftivism -
Crisis
management -
Critical international relations theory -
Criticisms of electoralism -
Criticisms of socialism
-
Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory -
Critique of capitalism -
Cross-cultural studies -
Cult of personality -
Cultural hegemony -
Culture -
Culture jamming -
Curvilinear
disparity -
Custom online panel -
Cyberpolitics -


== D ==
DIY culture -
Daniel Mark
Siegel -
Daniel
Patrick Moynihan -
Dartmouth
College -
De
Maistre -
Deanie Frazier -
Debate -
Debeaking -
Declarationism -
Declassification -
Deduction -
Defective by Design -
Definitional concerns in anarchist theory -
Delegate model of representation -
Delegated
voting -
Delegation -
Deliberative democracy -
Demand management -
Demarchy -
Democracy -
Democracy Day (United States) - 
Democracy
building -
Democracy in Marxism -
Democracy in the Middle East -
Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee
-
Democratic Socialists of America -
Democratic World Federalists -
Democratic empire -
Democratic peace theory -
Democratic socialism -
Democratic structuring -
Democratic transhumanism -
Demonstration (people) -
Demos (U.S. think tank) -
Demzilla -
Denialism -
Dependent territory -
Deposition (politics) -
Designated Suppliers Program -
Detournement -
Dialectic -
Diaspora politics -
Dichotomy -
Digital era governance -
Digital object identifier -
Diplomacy -
Direct Action and Democracy
Today -
Direct action -
Direct democracy -
Direct rule over Northern Ireland -
Disability Determination Services -
Disarm bush -
Disarmament -
Dissent!
(
network) -
Distributism -
Divided regions -
Divine Right of Kings -
Dominant-party system -
Donald Trump -
Downhill Battle -
Downsize DC
Foundation -
Drug policy -
Drug policy reform -
Dual loyalty -
Dual mandate -
Dual power -
Duumviracy -
Dyke March -
Dykes on Bikes -


==
E ==
E. J.
Josey -
Early voting -
Earthlings (documentary) -
East Gosforth -
Eco-Communalism -
Eco-socialism -
Ecodefense -
Economic activism -
Economic calculation problem -
Economic interventionism -
Economic liberalism -
Economics -
Economy -
Ecotage -
E-Democracy -
Edmund
Burke -
Education -
Education Action Group -
Education Otherwise -
Education policy -
Education reform -
Egalitarianism -
Egalitarianism as a Revolt Against Nature and Other Essays -
Egyptian Socialist Youth Organization -
Election -
Election (1999 film) -
Election Day (United Kingdom) -
Election Day
Registration -
Election judge -
Election law -
Election management body -
Election monitoring -
Election
surprise -
Elections -
Elector -
Electoral Reform Society -
Electoral calendar 2009
-
Electoral college -
Electoral fusion -
Electoral geography -
Electoral power -
Electoral reform -
Electoralism -
Electorate -
Electronic civil disobedience -
Electronic politics -
Elitism -
Elitist -
Emergent democracy -
Empirical -
Empiricism -
Employment -
Enabling
act -
Enclave and exclave -
Energy security -
England -
Environmentalism -
Epistemology -
Equality before the law -
Equality of opportunity -
Equality of outcome -
Eric Hoffer -
Eskalera
Karakola -
Ethical challenges to autism
treatment -
Ethics -
Ethnic nationalism -
Ethnopluralism -
Etoy -
Euripides -
Europe -
Europeans of the Year -
Exclusive mandate -
Executive (government) -
Executive branch -
Executive order (United States) -
Executive power -
Exit poll -
Expansionism -
Expansionist Nationalism -


== F ==
Factual association -
Fahrenheit 9/11
controversy -
Family -
Fanorama -
Fantasy Congress -
Farband -
Farley File -
Fasci Siciliani -
Fascio -
Fascism -
Fascism as an international phenomenon -
Fascist -
Father of the House -
Favourite -
Federal Returning Officer -
Federalism -
Feminism -
Ferdowsi -
Fernand
Brouez -
Feuillant -
Fifth power -
Fiscal conservatism -
Five-point electoral law -
Fixed-term
election -
Foco -
Folkhemmet -
Food politics -
For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto -
Foreign policy -
Foreign policy analysis -
France -
Franchise
activism -
Free Software Foundation -
Free market -
Free migration -
Free
the Old Head of Kinsale -
Freedom (political) -
Freedom Center Western Massachusetts -
Freedom of speech -
Freedom of the press -
French Constitution of 1793 -
French Constitution of 1795 -
French Directory -
French
Fifth Republic -
French
Revolution -
French
Senate -
Front-runner -
Fu Xiancai -
Fudgie Frottage -
Full slate -
Functionalism in international relations -
Funky
Dragon -


==
G ==
G. William Domhoff -
Galicianism (Galicia) -
Game theory -
Gandhian
economics -
Gastald -
Gaullism -
Gay
marriage -
Gay rights -
General election -
Generalissimo -
Generation Engage or GenerationEngage -
Geopolitics -
George Allen (U.S. politician) -
George
Lakoff -
Georgetown
University -
Gerard Toal -
German student movement -
Germanophile -
Get Up
, Stand Up:
The Story of Pop and
Protest -
Girondins -
Girondist -
Glenn W. Smith -
Global Environment and Trade Study -
Global Justice (organization) -
Global Justice Movement -
Global citizens
movement -
Global politics -
Global power barometer -
Globalism -
Globalization -
Glossary of the French Revolution -
Godless Americans
March on Washington -
Golden Liberty -
Goodhart's law -
Goulash Communism -
Governance -
Government -
Government-organized demonstration -
Government Gazette of South Africa -
Government in exile -
Government procurement -
Government simulation game -
Grapus -
Grassroots Radio Coalition -
Great American
Boycott -
Great
Britain -
Great
power -
Green anarchism -
Green lending -
Green liberalism -
Green politics -
Green syndicalism -
Greenpeace -
Guardian of Zion
Award -
Guevarism -
Guided
Democracy -
Gun control -
Gun rights -


== H ==
Hacktivism -
Hacktivismo -
Hacktivist News Service -
Haldane principle -
Handover -
Hannah Arendt -
Haringey Solidarity Group -
Harvard
University -
Hasbara -
Haymarket Books -
He who does not work, neither shall he eat -
Head of state succession -
Heads of
state -
Health politics - 
Health care
politics -
Health care
reform -
Health department -
Hegemonic stability theory -
Hendrix
College -
Herbert
Baxter Adams -
Hereditary Education
Policy -
Herzl
Award -
Hesiod -
Hierarchical organization -
High politics -
Hillary Rodham cattle futures controversy -
Hindi-Urdu
controversy -
Hindmarsh Island bridge controversy -
Hindu nationalism -
Hindutva -
Historical institutionalism -
History -
History of India -
History of democracy -
History of fundamentalist Islam in Iran -
History of political science -
History of socialism -
History of terrorism
-
Hobbes -
Home Nations -
Homer -
Householder
Franchise -
Hudson Guild -
Human chain -
Human geography -
Human settlement -
Human shield -
Human shield action to
Iraq -
Hung parliament -
Hunt Saboteurs Association -
Husting -
Hypatus -


==
I ==
Icarus Project -
Idealism in international relations -
Ideologies of parties -
Ideology -
Identity politics -
Ilısu Dam
Campaign -
Imanol Ordorika Sacristán -
Immigration policy -
Immigration reduction -
Immigration reform -
In His Steps -
Inclusive Democracy -
Income redistribution -
Independence -
Independence referendum -
Independent Australian Jewish Voices -
Independent Media Center -
India -
Indirect election -
Individualist anarchism -
Indophile -
Industrialisation -
Indybay -
Infighting -
Information science -
Inge Scholl -
Initiative -
Innovation -
Institute for Global Communications -
Institute for Humane Studies -
Institutional analysis -
Integral Nationalism -
Integral humanism -
Inter-Parliamentary Union -
Interest aggregation -
Interest
articulation -
Intergovernmental -
Internal security -
International Action -
International Action Center -
International Falcon Movement -
International Foundation for Electoral Systems
International Socialist Organization -
International Solidarity Movement -
International Working Union of Socialist Parties -
International law -
International relations -
International relations theory -
International trade -
Internationalism (politics) -
Internet censorship -
Internet taxation -
Intersectionality -
Invisible Party -
Ion Sancho (politician) -
Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America -
Irish Socialist Network -
Islamic -
Islamic Thinkers
Society -
Islamic state -
Islamism -
Island country -
Isolationism -
Israeli–
Palestinian conflict -
Italy -


==
J ==
Jamahiriya -
James E. Hansen -
Jamil Hussein
controversy -
Jan Wong
controversy -
Japanese Imperial succession controversy -
Jean-Jacques Rousseau -
Jean Schmidt -
Jeffersonian political philosophy -
Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs -
Jesus Ledesma Aguilar -
Jewish Socialists' Group -
John Carver (board policy) -
John Locke -
John Mordaunt Trust -
John Rawls -
John
Stuart Mill -
Johns Hopkins
University -
Joint electorate -
Joint session -
Joseph
Stalin -
Juche -
Judicial -
Judicial activism -
Judicial branch -
Judicial power -
Judicial tyranny -
Judiciary -
Julius Caesar -
Junge Wilde -
Junta (Habsburg) -
Junta (Peninsular War) -
Jura federation -
Jurisdiction -
Justice at Stake
Campaign -


==
K ==
Karl Marx -
Karl Popper -
Keep Ireland Open -
Keynesian economics -
Kingdom of Sardinia -
Kingmaker -
Klemens
von Metternich -
Korean Immigrant Workers Advocates -
Kremlinology -


==
L ==
La Reunion (Dallas) -
Labor Zionism -
Labour Party (UK) -
Labour
law -
Labour movement -
Labour voucher -
Laissez-faire -
Laissez-faire
capitalism -
Laissez
faire -
Lake Ontario Waterkeeper -
Land and liberty (slogan) -
Land reform -
Landmine Survivors
Network -
Landslide victory -
Lange Model -
Language policy -
Law -
Law and order
(politics) -
Law collective -
Law making -
Lawrence O'Brien
Award -
Leaderless resistance -
League (politics) -
League of Coloured Peoples -
Left
-Right politics -
Left-Wing Communism:
An Infantile Disorder -
Left-right politics -
Left-wing -
Left-wing fascism -
Left-wing politics
-
Left wing -
Legal
domination -
Legal research -
Legal system -
Legislative -
Legislative Assembly (France) -
Legislative branch -
Legislative power -
Legislative veto -
Legislative violence -
Legislature -
Legitimating ideology -
Lenin -
Les Dégonflés -
Leviathan -
Leviathan (book) -
Liberal -
Liberal
democracy -
Liberalism -
Liberalism in Colombia
-
Liberalism in the United States -
Liberals -
Liberation theology -
Libertarian Marxism -
Libertarian Party of
Michigan -
Libertarian Socialism -
Libertarian socialism -
Libertarianism -
Libertarians -
Liberty -
Liberty Tree Foundation for the Democratic Revolution -
Line-item veto -
Linestanding -
Linguistics -
Liquid democracy -
Lishenets -
List of political scientists -
Liverpool Social Forum -
Livy -
Local Works -
Local government -
Local self-government -
Localism -
Localism (politics) -
London School of Economics -
Louis XVIII of
France -
Luck egalitarianism -
Luxemburgism -


== M ==
MVDDS dispute -
Machiavellianism -
Macmillan Publishers -
Maimonides -
Maine Video Activists
Network -
Majoritarianism -
Majority -
Malicious compliance -
Management -
Mandate (politics) -
Mao Zedong -
Maoism -
Margaret Thatcher -
Marginal seat -
Marijuana Policy Project -
Market populism -
Market socialism -
Marriage gap -
Marxism -
Marxism-Leninism -
Marxist international relations theory -
Marxist philosophy -
Marxist revisionism -
Mass
mobilization -
Mass politics -
Massachusetts Institute of Technology -
Maternity Coalition -
Matriarchy -
Maurya
Empire -
Max Weber -
Maximilien
Robespierre -
May Conspiracy -
May Day -
Mayday Mutual Aid Medical Station -
Means of production -
Media activism -
Mediastrike -
Medical marijuana -
Melanesia -
Melanesian socialism -
Mercantilism -
Merchants Club -
Metapolitics -
Metropolitan municipality -
Miami model -
Micronesia -
Mid-City Community Advocacy Network (Mid-City CAN) -
Middle Ages -
Mierscheid Law -
Mike Lesser -
Militant -
Militarism -
Military geography -
Minarchism -
Minimal effects hypothesis -
Minimum wage -
Ministry (collective executive) -
Ministry (government department) -
Minoritarianism -
Minorities -
Miscegenation -
Mission-based organization -
Mobutism -
Mock election -
Modern American liberalism -
Monarchism -
Monarchy -
Monash
University -
Money
bill -
Monkeywrenching -ة
Montebello High School flag flipping incident, 2006
-
Moral Politics -
Moral
high ground -
Moral philosophy -
Morality -
Motion of no confidence -
Motyl's Theory of the
Empire -
Mount Holyoke College -
MoveOn.org
ad controversy -
Movement for a New Society -
Multi-party
system -
Multiculturalism -
Municipal corporation -
Municipal services -
Music and politics -
Muslim Association of Britain -
Muslim Public Affairs Committee
UK -
Muslim Public Affairs Council -
Māori protest
movement -


==
N ==
NATO expansion -
NLRB election procedures -
NY Salon -
Name
recognition -
Nancy Program -
Napoleon
Bonaparte -
Nasserism -
Nation -
Nation-state -
National Action Party (Mexico) -
National Alliance on Mental Illness -
National American Woman Suffrage Association -
National Assembly -
National Assembly of France -
National Association of Old IRA -
National Association of Railroad Passengers -
National Association of Secretaries of State -
National Bolshevism -
National Breast Cancer
Awareness Month -
National Civic League -
National Convention -
National Italian American Foundation -
National Korean American Service & Education Consortium -
National League of Cities -
National Maternity Action Plan -
National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws -
National Priority Projects -
National Security Whistleblowers Coalition -
National Socialist
Program -
National Vaccine Information Center -
National Youth Rights Association -
National heritage area -
National language -
National
socialism -
Nationalism -
Nationalist activism -
Natural rights -
Nature versus nurture -
Nazi -
Nazism -
Neo-Gramscianism -
Neo-Zionism -
Neo-medievalism -
Neo-populism -
Neoconservatism -
Neoliberalism -
Neoliberalism (international relations) -
Neomercantilism -
Neosocialism -
Netherlands -
Netroots -
Nevada Desert Experience -
New Democracy -
New Jersey Redistricting Commission -
New Left -
New Politics (magazine) -
New Revolutionary
Alternative -
New York University -
Newt
Gingrich -
Niccolò
Machiavelli -
No-cost campaign -
No Border network -
Noam
Chomsky -
Nolan Chart -
Nolan chart -
Nominating committee -
Nomination rules -
Non-governmental organizations -
Non-human electoral candidates -
Non-intervention -
Non-partisan democracy -
Nonproliferation -
Nonviolence -
Nonviolence International -
Norberto Bobbio -
Norm Peterson (politician) -
Normative -
North America -
Northeast Action -
Northern Arizona University -
Nothing About Us
Without
Us -
Nothing
But Nets -
Nuclear-Free Future Award -
Nuclear testing -


== O ==
Objectivism and libertarianism -
Occidental College -
Occupation (protest) -
Ochlocracy -
Office politics -
Official language -
Old
right -
Oligarchy -
Omaha Platform -
On Liberty -
One People's Project -
Open campaign -
Open government -
Open politics -
Opposition (politics) -
Opposition to immigration -
Orange Revolution
Originalism -
Osman Ahmed Osman -
Ostracism -
Outer Continental Shelf -
Outing -
Outlying territory -


==
P ==
PDF -
PIANZEA -
Pacific
Environment -
Pacifism -
Pale -
Paleoconservatism -
Paleolibertarianism -
Palestine
Media Watch -
Pali Canon -
Parachute candidate -
Paradox of voting -
Parent-teacher association -
Parents and citizens -
Parity of esteem -
Parliamentary informatics -
Parliamentary session -
Parochialism -
Participatory economics -
Participatory politics -
Partition (politics) -
Partners in Population and Development -
Partnership for a Drug-Free America -
Party-line vote -
Party platform -
Party political broadcast -
Party system -
Passive obedience -
Patriarchy -
Patriotism -
Peace and conflict studies -
Peace studies -
Peace walk -
Peacefire -
People's Justice Party (UK) -
People &
Planet -
Peronism -
Pete
Stark -
Peter F. Paul -
Peterloo
Massacre -
Petticoat affair -
Pharaonism
-
Pharisees -
PharmFree
-
Philosopher -
Philosophical anarchism -
Philosophy -
Philosophy, Politics, and
Economics -
Pi Sigma
Alpha -
Pieing -
Plato -
Plumi -
Plutarch -
Pochvennichestvo -
Policy -
Policy analysis -
Policy by press release -
Policy studies -
Polish American Congress -
Polish American Congress of Eastern Massachusetts -
Political Campaigning -
Political Film Society -
Political Management -
Political activism -
Political agenda -
Political authorities -
Political behavior -
Political campaign -
Political campaign staff -
Political capital -
Political communications -
Political compass -
Political corruption -
Political crime -
Political criticism -
Political culture -
Political decoy -
Political dissent -
Political economy -
Political entrepreneur -
Political faction -
Political game -
Political geography -
Political history -
Political institution -
Political labels -
Political libel -
Political literacy -
Political media -
Political movement -
Political participation -
Political parties -
Political parties of the world -
Political party -
Political philosophy -
Political power -
Political psychology -
Political rights -
Political science -
Political science of
religion -
Political scientist -
Political simulation -
Political socialization -
Political sociology -
Political spectacle -
Political spectrum -
Political statement -
Political symbolism -
Political system -
Political systems -
Political
t-shirt -
Political theatre -
Political theology -
Political theory -
Political unitarism -
Politically exposed person -
Politician -
Politicization of science -
Politico -
Politico-media complex -
Politics -
Politics (Aristotle) -
Politics (disambiguation)
-
Politics by country -
Politics by subdivision -
Politics in fiction -
Polity -
Polling station -
Pollster -
Polybius -
Polynesia -
Popular socialism -
Popularism -
Populism -
Porkbusters -
Positive (social sciences) -
Positive political theory -
Post-democracy -
Post-modern -
Post-structuralist -
Post-war consensus -
Postal voting -
Postmodern -
power broker -
Power in international relations -
Power transition theory -
Power
vacuum -
Prague Party Conference -
Pre-Marx socialists -
Prebendalism -
President's Council on Service and Civic
Participation -
President-elect -
Presidential succession -
Prime Minister -
Princeton Project
55 -
Princeton
University -
Principate -
Private defense agency -
Private property -
Privatization -
Pro-life -
Pro-war -
Pro
forma -
Probing amendment -
Productive forces -
Progg -
Progress For America -
Progressive Era -
Progressivism -
Project
Camelot -
Project
Cybersyn -
Proletarian internationalism -
Proletarian
revolution -
Proletariat -
Prometheus Radio Project -
Promoting adversaries -
Pronunciamiento -
Property rights -
Protest -
Protest
vote -
Provisional ballot -
Proxy voting -
Prussia -
Psephology -
Pseudo-secularism -
Psychogeography -
Psychology -
Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness Response
Act -
Public administration -
Public benefit corporation -
Public law -
Public management -
Public opinion -
Public participation -
Public policy -
Public property -
Public sector -
Public trust -
Public value -
Publics -
Publixtheatre Caravan -
Punk ideologies -
Pure race -
Purple Rain Protest -


==
Q ==
Queeruption -
Quick count -
Quota Borda system -


== R ==
R. Doug Lewis -
RISE
International -
Race relations -
Racial segregation -
Racist -
Radical Youth (Aotearoa New Zealand) -
Radical cheerleading -
Radical democracy -
Radicalism (historical) -
Radicalization -
Radium
Girls -
Rainbow/
PUSH -
Reactionary -
Realigning election -
Realism in international relations
-
Recall election -
Red-baiting -
Red
Falcons -
Red Guard Party (United States) -
Red flag (politics) -
Red inverted triangle -
Redbud Woods controversy -
Redistribution of wealth -
Referendum -
Reflections on the Revolution in France -
Reformism -
Refusal to serve in the Israeli military -
Refuse and Resist -
Refused ballot -
Regenesis Movement -
Regime -
Regional autonomy -
Regional hegemony -
Regional state -
Regionalism -
Religion -
Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice -
Religious socialism -
Renaissance -
Rent strike -
Representative democracy -
Republic of
China -
Republican
In Name Only -
Republican Party (United States) -
Republicanism -
Reserved political positions -
Returning Officer -
Reverb (non-profit) -
Reverse discrimination -
Revisionist Zionism -
Revolution -
Revolution from above -
Revolutionary Knitting Circle -
Revolutionary movement -
Revolutionary socialism -
Revolutions of 1848 -
Rhythms of resistance -
Richard Carmona -
Richard L. Hasen -
Rig-Veda -
Right-wing -
Right-wing politics -
Right of
conquest -
Right of foreigners to vote -
Right socialism -
Right wing -
Rights -
Rights and responsibilities of marriages in the United States -
Rise of nationalism in Europe -
Rita Borsellino -
Robert Dahl -
Robert F. Thompson -
Robert Filmer -
Robert Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh -
Roemer Model of Political Competition -
Roman Empire -
Roman Republic -
Ronald
Reagan -
Roosevelt Institution -
Root Force -
Roots of Resistance -
Rosenberg Fund for
Children -
Rotvoll controversy -
Royal Commission -
Royal Commissions Act 1902 -
Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam -
Rudy Giuliani promotions of Bernard Kerik -
Ruling clique -
Rump organization -
Russian Procurement -
Russian Revolution of 1917 -
==
S ==
Sabotage -
Sadducees -
Safe seat -
Safer Alternative for Enjoyable Recreation -
Samhita
-
Samuel Gompers -
Sangonet -
Santorum controversy -
Satiric misspelling -
School of the Americas Watch -
Science, Technology, & International Affairs -
Science for the People -
Science
policy -
Scientific Socialism -
Scottish Politician of the Year -
Seat of government -
Seaweed rebellion -
Secret ballot -
Section 28 -
Sectionalism -
Secularism -
Security and Peace -
Self-determination -
Senate
Document -
Separate electorate -
Separation of church and state -
Separation of powers -
Separatism -
Settler colonialism -
Sexual Freedom League -
Shadow Cabinet -
Shadow Minister -
Signoria of Florence -
Simple majority -
Single-issue politics -
One-party
state -
Sinistrisme -
Sister Boom-Boom -
Sister
Roma -
Sitdown strike -
Situational ethics -
Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice -
Slacktivism -
Slavophile -
Small-l libertarianism -
Smith
College -
Social-imperialism -
Social Credit -
Social Solidarity -
Social class -
Social contract -
Social democracy -
Social democratic -
Social democrats -
Social fascism -
Social liberalism -
Social philosophy -
Social
policy -
Social psychology -
Social
science -
Social sciences -
Social sector -
Social welfare provision -
Socialism -
Socialism (book) -
Socialism and LGBT rights -
Socialism and social democracy in Canada -
Socialism of the 21st century -
Socialist Action (disambiguation) -
Socialist
Legality -
Socialist Register -
Socialist Resistance -
Socialist Review (US) -
Socialist Studies (1981) -
Socialist Worker (Aotearoa) -
Socialist competition -
Socialist economics -
Socialist feminism -
Socialist law -
Socialist realism -
Socialist state -
Society -
Sociology -
Soft despotism -
Soft paternalism -
Sokwanele -
Somaly Mam
Foundation -
Songun -
Sortition -
Sound truck -
South America -
South End Press -
Southeast Asian Leaders -
Southern Agrarians -
Southwest Asia -
Sovereign -
Sovereign state -
Sovereignty -
Soviet (council) -
Soviet Union -
Soviet democracy -
Soviet republic (system of government) -
Space policy -
Spanish Constitution of 1812 -
Speaker of the Senate -
Spokescouncil -
St. Petersburg Democratic Club (United States) -
Stalinism -
Stand Up
Speak
Up -
Starve the beast -
State (polity) -
State Electoral Office -
State of emergency -
State of nature -
State socialism -
Stateless nation -
Statistics -
Statoid -
Stem cell -
Stem cell controversy -
Stephanie Cutter -
Steven
Lukes -
Strategic Urban Planning -
Strategic geography -
Strategic planning -
Street-level bureaucracy -
Street protester -
Strength through Peace -
Student Activity Fee -
Student Global AIDS
Campaign -
Student activism -
Student voice -
Students
Partnership Worldwide -
Students for Justice in Palestine -
Stump speech (politics) -
Substantive representation -
Suffrage -
Sultanism -
Summer capital -
Supermajority -
Superpower -
Supranational -
Supranational aspects of international organizations -
Supremacism -
Surveillance
state -
Susan Bernecker -
Sustainable procurement -
Swing vote -
Swingometer -
Syncretic politics -
Synonyms -
Systematic ideology -
Systems theory in political science -


==
T ==
TV turnoff -
Tactical media -
Tactical
politics -
Taistoism -
Taiwan -
Take Pride in America -
Takshashila
University -
Talk About Curing Autism -
Tax Justice Network -
Tax increment financing -
Tax reform -
Technology and society -
Temporary capital -
Tenant-in-chief -
Territory (country subdivision) -
Terrorism -
Tetracameralism -
The Age of Enlightenment -
The Analects of Confucius -
The Communist Manifesto -
The Denver Principles -
The Internationale -
The Lawless State -
The Legislative Assembly and the fall of the French monarchy -
The Lysistrata Project (protest) -
The Masque of Anarchy -
The Mischief Makers -
The Mountain -
The People Speak -
The Prince -
The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists -
The Republic -
The Social Contract -
The Soul of Man under Socialism -
The Triple Revolution -
The Two Souls of
Socialism -
Theocracy -
Theology -
Theories of Political Behavior -
Theories of political behavior -
Theories of
state -
Thermidorian Reaction -
Thessaloniki bombings of 1903
-
Think tank -
Third-worldism
-
Thomas Boddington -
Thomas Hobbes -
Thomas Sowell -
Three-cornered-contest -
ThreeBallot -
Three Principles of the People -
Three powers of the State -
Thucydides -
Ticket (election) -
Ticket splitters -
Timarchy -
Timeline of women's rights (other than voting) -
Timeline of women's
suffrage -
To
the Finland Station -
Tory Socialism -
Totalitarian -
Totalitarianism -
Townsite -
Trade facilitation -
Traditional domination -
Traffic light coalition -
Transitology -
Transparency (humanities) -
Transparency International -
Transpartisan -
Treatment Advocacy Center -
Tree pinning -
Tree sitting -
Tree spiking -
Trent Lott -
Trial (law) -
Tricameralism -
Tripartite classification of authority -
Triple oppression -
Triumphalism -
Tully Satre -
Turkey -
Turkey Youth Union -
Turn Your Back on
Bush -
Turner
Controversy -
Twilight Club -
Two-party system -
Two Treatises of Government -
Types of socialism -
Tyranny -
Tyrant -


==
U ==
U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea -
UK Social Centre Network -
Ukraine without Kuchma -
Unaffiliated voter -
Underground Literary Alliance -
Unicameralism -
Unilateral
disarmament -
Union Calendar -
Unitary
state -
United Kingdom -
United States -
United States-Russia
mutual detargeting -
United States Republican Party presidential nomination, 2008 -
United States
Supreme Court -
United
We Stand
America -
Universal health care -
Universal manhood
suffrage -
Universal suffrage -
University of California,
Santa Cruz -
University of Essex -
University of Idaho -
University of Puget Sound -
University of Sydney -
University of Texas at Austin -
University of Ulster -
University reform in Argentina -
Up with People -
Uranium mining controversy in Kakadu National Park -
Urban75 -
Uribism -
Urmia Manifesto of the United Free Assyria -
Ursinus College -
Use of Sciences Po -
Utah League of Cities and Towns
-
Utopia -
Utopian
socialism -


==
V ==
VDARE -
Vanguard party -
Vanguardism -
Vanishing mediator -
Varieties of democracy -
Veterans of Future Wars -
Veto -
Vice Consul -
Victoria University of
Wellington -
Villagization -
Virgil Goode -
Virginians Against Drug Violence -
Virtue -
Vladimir Lenin -
Vote allocation -
Vote counting system -
Vote
pairing -
Votebank -
Voter database -
Voter fatigue -
Voter registration -
Voter turnout -
Voting -
Voting bloc -
Voting
machine -
Voting system -
Voting systems -


==
W ==
WOMBLES -
Wage labour -
Wage slavery -
Wages -
War -
War on Terrorism -
Ward Churchill 9/11 essay controversy -
Washington and Lee University -
Water fluoridation controversy -
Week of Silence -
Welfare reform -
West
Gosforth -
West Side Nut Club -
Western Journalism Center -
Which? -
Whip (politics) -
Whirl-Mart -
White-collar worker -
White Poppy -
White nationalism -
White separatism -
White supremacy -
Whitewash (censorship) -
Willard Saulsbury, Sr. -
Winston Churchill -
Wipeout (elections) -
Women's suffrage -
Women's suffrage in South Carolina -
Women in politics -
Women of Color Resource Center -
Worker center -
Workers' Awaaz -
Workers' control -
Workers' council -
Workers' self-management -
Working class -
World's Smallest Political Quiz -
World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry -
World War II -
World cultures -
World government -
World government in science fiction -
World revolution -
Writ of election -
Write-in candidate -


==
X ==
Xenophon -


==
Y ==
YearlyKos -
Young Lords -
Young Socialist Alliance -
Youth pride -
Youth
activism -
Youth council -
Youth politics -
Youth vote -


==
Z ==
Zikism -
Zionist Freedom Alliance -
Zombie Lurch -
Zvakwana -
Ürün


== Footnotes ==
The Korean People's Army (KPA; Korean: 조선인민군; Hanja: 朝鮮人民軍; Chosŏn-inmin'gun; lit.
'"Korean People's Military"') are the military forces of North Korea and the armed wing of the Workers' Party of Korea.
Under the Songun policy, it is the central institution of North Korean society.
Kim Jong-un serves as Supreme Commander and the chairman of the Central Military Commission.
The KPA consists of five branches: the Ground Force, the Naval Force, the Air and Anti-Air Force, the Strategic Rocket Forces, and the Special Operation Force.

The KPA considers its primary adversaries to be the Republic of Korea Armed Forces and United States Forces Korea, across the Korean Demilitarized Zone, as it has since the Armistice Agreement of July 1953.
As of 2016, with 5,889,000 paramilitary personnel, it is the largest military organisation in the world.
This numbers 25% of the North Korean population.

==
History ==


===
Korean People's Revolutionary Army 1932–1948 ===
Kim Il-sung's anti-Japanese guerrilla army, the Korean People's Revolutionary Army, was established on 25 April 1932.
This revolutionary army was transformed into the regular army on 8 February 1948.
Both these are celebrated as army days, with decennial anniversaries treated as major celebrations, except from 1978 to 2014 when only the 1932 anniversary was celebrated.

===
Korean Volunteer Army 1939–1948 ===
In 1939, the Korean Volunteer Army (KVA), was formed in Yan'an, China.
The two individuals responsible for the army were Kim Tu-bong and Mu Chong.
At the same time, a school was established near Yan'an for training military and political leaders for a future independent Korea.
By 1945, the KVA had grown to approximately 1,000 men, mostly Korean deserters from the Imperial Japanese Army.
During this period, the KVA fought alongside the Chinese communist forces from which it drew its arms and ammunition.
After the defeat of the Japanese, the KVA accompanied the Chinese communist forces into eastern Jilin, intending to gain recruits from ethnic Koreans in China, particularly from Yanbian, and then enter Korea.

===
Soviet Korean Units ===
Just after World War II and during the Soviet Union's occupation of the part of Korea north of the 38th Parallel, the Soviet 25th Army headquarters in Pyongyang issued a statement ordering all armed resistance groups in the northern part of the peninsula to disband on 12 October 1945.
Two thousand Koreans with previous experience in the Soviet army were sent to various locations around the country to organise constabulary forces with permission from Soviet military headquarters, and the force was created on 21 October 1945.

===
Formation of National Army ===
The headquarters felt a need for a separate unit for security around railways, and the formation of the unit was announced on 11 January 1946.
That unit was activated on 15 August of the same year to supervise existing security forces and creation of the national armed forces.
Military institutes such as the Pyongyang Academy (became No.
2 KPA Officers School in Jan. 1949) and the Central Constabulary Academy (became KPA Military Academy in Dec. 1948) soon followed for the education of political and military officers for the new armed forces.

After the military was organised and facilities to educate its new recruits were constructed, the Constabulary Discipline Corps was reorganised into the Korean People's Army General Headquarters.
The previously semi-official units became military regulars with the distribution of Soviet uniforms, badges, and weapons that followed the inception of the headquarters.
The State Security Department, a forerunner to the Ministry of People's Defense, was created as part of the Interim People's Committee on 4 February 1948.
The formal creation of the Korean People's Army was announced four days later on 8 February, the day after the Fourth Plenary Session of the People's Assembly approved the plan to separate the roles of the military and those of the police, seven months before the government of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was proclaimed on 9 September 1948.
In addition, the Ministry of State for the People's Armed Forces was established, which controlled a central guard battalion, two divisions, and an independent mixed and combined arms brigade.

===
Conflicts and events ===
Before the outbreak of the Korean War, Joseph Stalin equipped the KPA with modern tanks, trucks, artillery, and small arms (at the time, the South Korean Army had nothing remotely comparable either in numbers of troops or equipment).
During the opening phases of the Korean War in 1950, the KPA quickly drove South Korean forces south and captured Seoul, only to lose 70,000 of their 100,000-strong army in the autumn after U.S. amphibious landings at the Battle of Incheon and a subsequent drive to the Yalu River.
On 4 November, China openly staged a military intervention.
On 7 December, Kim Il-sung was deprived of the right of command of KPA by China.
The KPA subsequently played a secondary minor role to Chinese forces in the remainder of the conflict.
By the time of the Armistice in 1953, the KPA had sustained 290,000 casualties and lost 90,000 men as POWs.

In 1953, the Military Armistice Commission (MAC) was able to oversee and enforce the terms of the armistice.
The Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC), made up of delegations from Czechoslovakia, Poland, Sweden and Switzerland, carried out inspections to ensure implementation of the terms of the Armistice that prevented reinforcements or new weapons being brought into Korea.

Soviet thinking on the strategic scale was replaced since December 1962 with a people's war concept.
The Soviet idea of direct warfare was replaced with a Maoist war of attrition strategy.
Along with the mechanisation of some infantry units, more emphasis was put on light weapons, high-angle indirect fire, night fighting, and sea denial.

== Date of establishment history ==
Until 1977, original Korean People's Army's official date of establishment was 8 February 1948.
But in 1978, changed to 25 April 1932, Kim Il-sung's anti-Japanese guerrilla army – Korean People's Revolutionary Army, considered the predecessor of the Korean People's Army, was formed on 25 April 1932.
The date of establishment was officially changed back to 8 February 1948 by 2019, however.
==
Organization ==


===
Commission and leadership ===
The primary path for command and control of the KPA extends through the National Defence Commission which was led by its chairman Kim Jong-il until 2011, to the Ministry of Defence and its General Staff Department.
From there on, command and control flows to the various bureaus and operational units.
A secondary path, to ensure political control of the military establishment, extends through the Workers' Party of Korea's Central Military Commission of the Workers' Party of Korea.

Since 1990, numerous and dramatic transformations within the DPRK have led to the current command and control structure.
The details of the majority of these changes are simply unknown to the world.
What little is known indicates that many changes were the natural result of the deaths of the aging leadership including Kim Il-sung (July 1994), Minister of People's Armed Forces O Chin-u (February 1995) and Minister of Defence Choi Kwang (February 1997).

The vast majority of changes were undertaken to secure the power and position of Kim Jong-il.
Formerly the State Affairs Commission, from its founding in 1972 (originally the National Defence Commission), was part of the Central People's Committee (CPC) while the Ministry of Defence, from 1982 onward, was under direct presidential control.
At the Eighteenth session of the sixth Central People's Committee, held on 23 May 1990, the SAC became established as its own independent commission, rising to the same status as the CPC (now the Cabinet of North Korea) and not subordinated to it, as was the case before.
Concurrent with this, Kim Jong-il was appointed first vice-chairman of the State Affairs Commission.
The following year, on 24 December 1991, Kim Jong-il was appointed Supreme Commander of the Korean People's Army.
Four months later, on 20 April 1992, Kim Jong-il was awarded the rank of Marshal and his father, in virtue of being the KPA's founding commander in chief, became Grand Marshal as a result and one year later he became the Chairman of the State Affairs Commission, by now under Supreme People's Assembly control under the then 1992 constitution as amended.

Almost all officers of the KPA began their military careers as privates; only very few people are admitted to a military academy without prior service.
The results is an egalitarian military system where officers are familiar with the life of a military private and "military nobility" is all but nonexistent.
Within the KPA, between December 1991 and December 1995, nearly 800 high officers (out of approximately 1,200) received promotions and preferential assignments.
Three days after Kim Jong-il became Marshal, eight generals were appointed to the rank of Vice-Marshal.
In April 1997, on the 85th anniversary of Kim Il-sung's birthday, Kim Jong-il promoted 127 general and admiral grade officers.
The following April he ordered the promotions of another 22 generals and flag officers.
Along with these changes, many KPA officers were appointed to influential positions within the Korean Workers' Party.
These promotions continue today, simultaneous with the celebration of Kim Il-sung's birthday and the KPA anniversary celebrations every April and since recently in July to honour the end of the Korean War.
Under Kim Jong-il's leadership, political officers dispatched from the party monitored every move of a general's daily life, according to analysts similar to the work of Soviet political commissars during the early and middle years of the military establishment.

Today the KPA exercises full control of both the Politburo and the Central Military Commission of the WPK, the KPA General Political and General Staff Departments and the Ministry of Defence, all having KPA representatives with a minimum general officer rank.
Following changes made during the 4th session of the 13th Supreme People's Assembly on 29 June 2016, the State Affairs Commission has overseen the Ministry of Defence as part of its systemic responsibilities.
All members of the State Affairs Commission have membership status (regular or alternate) on the WPK Political Bureau.

===
Ground force formations ==
=
I Corps (Hoeyang County, Kangwon Province)
II Corps (Pyongsan County, North Hwanghae Province)
III Corps (Nampo, South Pyongan)
IV Corps (Haeju, South Hwanghae Province)
V Corps (Sepo County, Kangwon Province)
VII Corps (Hamhung, South Hamgyong Province)
Pyongyang Defense Command
XII Corps
IX
(Chongjin, North Hamgyong Province)
X Corps (Hyesan, Ryanggang Province)
XI Corps (Tokchon, South Pyongan Province)
Mechanised infantry divisions:
108th
Division
425th
Division
806th
Division
815th
Division
820th Tank Corps


===
Conscription and terms of service ===
North Korea has universal conscription for males and selective conscription for females with many pre-
and post-service requirements.
Article 86 of the North Korean Constitution states: "
National defence is the supreme duty and honour of citizens.

Citizens shall defend the country and serve in the armed forces as
required by law.
"KPA
soldiers serve three years of military service in the KPA, which also runs its own factories, farms and trading arms.

====
Paramilitary organisations ====
The Young Red Guards are the youth cadet corps of the KPA for secondary level and university level students.
Every Saturday, they hold mandatory 4-hour military training drills, and have training activities on and off campus to prepare them for military service when they turn 18 or after graduation, as well as for contingency measures in peacetime.

Under the Ministry of Social Security and the wartime control of the Ministry of Defence, and formerly the Korean People's Security Forces, the Korean People's Internal Security Forces forms the national gendarmerie and civil defence force of the KPA.
The KPISF has its units in various fields like civil defence, traffic management, civil disturbance control, and local security.
It has its own special forces units.
The service shares the ranks of the KPA (with the exception of Marshals) but wears different uniforms.
===
Budget and commercial interests ===
The KPA's annual budget is approximately US$6 billion.
In 2009, the U.S. Institute for Science and International Security reported that North Korea may possess fissile material for around two to nine nuclear warheads.
The North Korean Songun ("Military First") policy elevates the KPA to the primary position in the government and society.

According to North Korea's state news agency, military expenditures for 2010 made up 15.8 percent of the state budget.
Most analyses of North Korea's defence sector, however, estimate that defence spending constitutes between one-quarter and one-third of all government spending.
As of 2003, according to the International Institute of Strategic Studies, North Korea's defence budget consumed some 25 percent of central government spending.
In the mid-1970s and early 1980s, according to figures released by the Polish Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, between 32 and 38 percent of central government expenditures went towards defence.

North Korea sells missiles and military equipment to many countries worldwide.
In April 2009, the United Nations named the Korea Mining and Development Trading Corporation (KOMID) as North Korea's primary arms dealer and main exporter of equipment related to ballistic missiles and conventional weapons.
It also named Korea Ryonbong as a supporter of North Korea's military related sales.
Historically, North Korea has assisted a vast number of revolutionary, insurgent and terrorist groups in more than 62 countries.
A cumulative total of more than 5,000 foreign personnel have been trained in North Korea, and over 7,000 military advisers, primarily from the Reconnaissance General Bureau, have been dispatched to some forty-seven countries.
Some of the organisations which received North Korean aid include the Polisario Front, Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, the Communist Party of Thailand, the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.
The Zimbabwean Fifth Brigade received its initial training from KPA instructors.
North Korean troops allegedly saw combat during the Libyan–Egyptian War and the Angolan Civil War.
Up to 200 KPAF pilots took part in the Vietnam War, scoring several kills against US aircraft.
Two KPA anti-aircraft artillery regiments were sent to North Vietnam as well.
North Korean instructors trained Hezbollah fighters in guerrilla warfare tactics around 2004, prior to the Second Lebanon War.
During the Syrian Civil War, Arabic-speaking KPA officers may have assisted the Syrian Arab Army in military operations planning and have supervised artillery bombardments in the Aleppo area.

==
Service branches ==


===
Ground Force ===
The Korean People's Army Ground Force (KPAGF) is the main branch of the Korean People's Army responsible for land-based military operations.
It is the de facto army of North Korea.

===
Naval Force ===
The Korean People's Army Naval Force (KPANF) is organized into two fleets which are not able to support each other.
The East Fleet is headquartered at T'oejo-dong and the West Fleet at Nampho.
A number of training, shipbuilding and maintenance units and a naval air wing report directly to Naval Command Headquarters at Pyongyang.
The majority of the Navy's ships are assigned to the East Fleet.
Due to the short range of most ships, the two fleets are not known to have ever conducted joint operations or shared vessels.

===
Air and Anti-Air Force ===
The Korean People's Army Air and Anti-Air Force (KPAAF) is also responsible for North Korea's air defence forces through the use of anti-aircraft artillery and surface-to-air missiles (SAM).
While much of the equipment is outdated, the high saturation of multilayered, overlapping, mutually supporting air defence sites provides a formidable challenge to enemy air attacks.

===
Strategic Rocket Force ===
The Korean People's Army Strategic Rocket Force (KPASRF) is a major division of the KPA that controls the DPRK's nuclear and conventional strategic missiles.
It is mainly equipped with surface-to-surface missiles of Soviet and Chinese design, as well as locally developed long-range missiles.

===
Special Operation Force ===
The Korean People's Army Special Operation Force (KPASOF) is an asymmetric force with a total troop size of 200,000.
Since the Korean War (North Korea: the Korean War of Liberation), it has continued to play a role of concentrating infiltration of troops into the territory of the Republic of South Korea and conducting sabotage.

==
Capabilities ==
After the Korean War, North Korea maintained a powerful, but smaller military force than that of South Korea.
In 1967 the KPA forces of about 345,000 were much smaller than the South Korean ground forces of about 585,000.
North Korea's relative isolation and economic plight starting from the 1980s has now tipped the balance of military power into the hands of the better-equipped South Korean military.
In response to this predicament, North Korea relies on asymmetric warfare techniques and unconventional weaponry to achieve parity against high-tech enemy forces.
North Korea is reported to have developed a wide range of technologies towards this end, such as stealth paint to conceal ground targets, midget submarines and human torpedoes, blinding laser weapons, and probably has a chemical weapons program and is likely to possess a stockpile of chemical weapons.
The Korean People's Army operates ZM-87 anti-personnel lasers, which are banned under the United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
Since the 1980s, North Korea has also been actively developing its own cyber warfare capabilities.
As of 2014, the secretive Bureau 121 – the elite North Korean cyber warfare unit – comprises approximately 1,800 highly trained hackers.
In December 2014, the Bureau was accused of hacking Sony and making threats, leading to the cancellation of The Interview, a political satire comedy film based on the assassination of Kim Jong-un.
The Korean People's Army has also made advances in electronic warfare by developing GPS jammers.
Current models include vehicle-mounted jammers with a range of 50 kilometres (31 mi)-100 kilometres (62 mi).
Jammers with a range of more than 100 km are being developed, along with electromagnetic pulse bombs.
The Korean People's Army has also made attempts to jam South Korean military satellites.
North Korea does not have satellites capable of obtaining satellite imagery useful for military purposes, and appears to use imagery from foreign commercial platforms.
Despite the general fuel and ammunition shortages for training, it is estimated that the wartime strategic reserves of food for the army are sufficient to feed the regular troops for 500 days, while fuel and ammunition – amounting to 1.5 million and 1.7 million tonnes respectively – are sufficient to wage a full-scale war for 100 days.
The KPA does not operate aircraft carriers, but has other means of power projection.
Korean People's Air Force Il-76MD aircraft provide a strategic airlift capacity of 6,000 troops, while the Navy's sea lift capacity amounts to 15,000 troops.
The Strategic Rocket Forces operate more than 1,000 ballistic missiles according to South Korean officials in 2010, although the U.S. Department of Defense reported in 2012 that North Korea has fewer than 200 missile launchers.
North Korea acquired 12 Foxtrot class and Golf-II class missile submarines as scrap in 1993.
Some analysts suggest that these have either been refurbished with the help of Russian experts or their launch tubes have been reverse-engineered and externally fitted to regular submarines or cargo ships.
However GlobalSecurity reports that the submarines were rust-eaten hulks with the launch tubes inactivated under Russian observation before delivery, and the U.S. Department of Defense does not list them as active.
A photograph of Kim Jong-un receiving a briefing from his top generals on 29 March 2013 showed a list that purported to show that the military had a minimum of 40 submarines, 13 landing ships, 6 minesweepers, 27 support vessels and 1,852 aircraft.
The Korean People's Army operates a very large amount of equipment, including 4,100 tanks, 2,100 APCs, 8,500 field artillery pieces, 5,100 multiple rocket launchers, 11,000 air defence guns and some 10,000 MANPADS and anti-tank guided missiles in the Ground force; about 500 vessels in the Navy and 730 combat aircraft in the Air Force, of which 478 are fighters and 180 are bombers.
North Korea also has the largest special forces in the world, as well as the largest submarine fleet.
The equipment is a mixture of World War II vintage vehicles and small arms, widely proliferated Cold War technology, and more modern Soviet or locally produced weapons.

North Korea possesses a vast array of long range artillery in shelters just north of the Korean Demilitarized Zone.
It has been a long-standing cause for concern that a preemptive strike or retaliatory strike on Seoul using this arsenal of artillery north of the Demilitarized Zone would lead to a massive loss of life in Seoul.
Estimates on how many people would die in an attack on Seoul vary.
When the Clinton administration mobilised forces over the reactor at Yongbyon in 1994, planners concluded that retaliation by North Korea against Seoul could kill 40,000 people.
Other estimates projects hundreds of thousands or possibly millions of fatalities if North Korea uses chemical munitions.

==
Military equipment ==


===
Weapons ===
The KPA possess a variety of Chinese and Soviet sourced equipment and weaponry, as well as locally produced versions and improvements of the former.
Soldiers are mostly armed with indigenous Kalashnikov-type rifles as the standard issue weapon.
Front line troops are issued the Type 88, while the older Type 58 assault rifle and Type 68A/B have been shifted to rear echelon or home guard units.

A rifle of unknown nomenclature was seen during the 2017 'Day of the Sun' military parade, appearing to consist of a grenade launcher and a standard assault rifle, similar to the U.S OICW or South Korean S&T Daewoo K11.

North Korea generally designates rifles as "Type XX", similar to the Chinese naming system.
On 15 November 2018, North Korea successfully tested a "newly developed ultramodern tactical weapon".
Leader Kim Jong-un observed the test at the Academy of Defense Science and called it a "decisive turn" in bolstering the combat power of the North Korean army.

There is a Korean People's Army Military Hardware Museum located in Pyongyang that displays a range of the equipment used.

===
Chemical weapons ===
The U.S. Department of Defense believes North Korea probably has a chemical weapons program and is likely to possess a stockpile of such weapons.

====
Nuclear capabilities ====
North Korea has tested a series of different missiles, including short-, medium-, intermediate-, and intercontinental- range, and submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
Estimates of the country's nuclear stockpile vary: some experts believe Pyongyang has between fifteen and twenty nuclear weapons, while U.S. intelligence believes the number to be between thirty and sixty bombs.
The regime conducted two tests of an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) capable of carrying a large nuclear warhead in July 2017.
The Pentagon confirmed North Korea's ICBM tests, and analysts estimate that the new missile has a potential range of 10,400 kilometres (6,500 mi) and, if fired on a flatter trajectory, could be capable of reaching mainland U.S. territory.

====
Nuclear tests ====
On 9 October 2006, the North Korean government announced that it had unsuccessfully attempted a nuclear test for the first time.
Experts at the United States Geological Survey and Japanese seismological authorities detected an earthquake with a preliminary estimated magnitude of 4.3 from the site in North Korea, proving the official claims to be true.
North Korea also went on to claim that it had developed a nuclear weapon in 2009.
It is widely believed to possess a stockpile of relatively simple nuclear weapons.
The IAEA has met Ri Je-son, The Director General of the General Department of Atomic Energy (GDAE) of North Korea, to discuss nuclear matters.
Ri Je Son was also mentioned in this role in 2002 in a United Nations article.
On 3 September 2017, the North Korean leadership announced that it had conducted a nuclear test with what it claimed to be its first hydrogen bomb detonation.
The detonation took place at an underground location at the Punggye-Ri nuclear test site in North Hamgyong Province at 12:00 pm local time.
South Korean officials claimed the test yielded 50 kilotons of explosive force, with many international observers claiming the test likely involved some form of a thermonuclear reaction.

2006
North Korean nuclear test
2009 North Korean nuclear test
2013 North Korean nuclear test
January 2016
North Korean nuclear test
September 2016
North Korean nuclear test
September 2017
North Korean nuclear test


====
Other ====
Tonghae Satellite
Launching Ground
Ryanggang explosion
Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center
Songun
Asymmetric warfare
The launching of Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 and Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2 in 2012.

== See also ==
April 25 Sports Club
Central Military Band of the Korean People's Army
Korean conflict
Republic of Korea Armed Forces
Songun
Worker-Peasant Red Guards


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
International Institute for Strategic Studies (15 February 2019).
The Military Balance 2019.
London: Routledge.
ISBN 9781857439885.

Bermudez, Joseph S. (2001).
Shield of the Great Leader.
The Armed Forces of North Korea.
The Armed Forces of Asia.
Sydney:
Allen & Unwin.
ISBN 978-1-86448-582-0.

Homer T. Hodge, North Korea's Military Strategy, Parameters, Spring 2003, pp.
68–81
The International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) (2007).
The Military Balance 2007.
Abingdon: Routledge Journals.
ISBN 978-1-85743-437-8.

Jane's World Air Forces.
Issue 25, 2007.
Coulsdon:
Jane's Information Group.

Saunders, Stephen (ed.).
Jane's Fighting Ships Vol.
110, 2007-2008.
Coulsdon:
Jane's Information Group.

This article incorporates public domain material from the United States Army document: Scobell, Andrew; Sanford, John M. "North Korea's Military Threat: Pyongyang's Conventional Forces, Weapons of Mass Destruction, and Ballistic Missiles" (PDF).
Retrieved 8 September 2014.CS1
maint: multiple names: authors list (link) April 2007.
Carlisle:
Strategic Studies Institute.
ISBN 1-58487-286-1
North Korea Country Study (PDF).
Library of Congress.
2009.

==
Further reading ==
Bermudez, Joseph S. (1998).
North Korean special forces.
Annapolis:
Naval Institute Press.
ISBN 978-1-55750-066-3.

Boik, William A. (2008).
Orders, Decorations, and Medals of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Springfield, VA: DBMPress.com.
ISBN 978-0-615-19087-7.

Mitzer, Stijn; Oliemans, Joost (2015).
North Korea's Armed Forces:
On the Path of Songun.
Solihull: Helion.
ISBN 978-1-910777-14-5.
==
External links ==
North Korea Military-Political Background
KPA Equipment Holdings
CIA World Factbook
KPA Journal
Steven Mitchell Glazer (born August 10, 1957) is an American politician and former political advisor serving as a member of the California State Senate from the 7th Senate District, which includes most of Contra Costa County and eastern portions of Alameda County in the East Bay.

Glazer was appointed by Jerry Brown in 2011 to serve as a member of the California State University Board of Trustees until 2015, when he was elected to the State Senate.
Glazer was also Brown's lead political strategist.
Glazer first worked for Brown in 1978, when he was in charge of the campaign activities at 20 colleges for Brown's re-election as Governor.
Glazer served as deputy campaign manager for Brown's unsuccessful bid for the United States Senate in 1982.

==
Early life and education ==
Glazer was born in Sacramento, California.
He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree from San Diego State University.
While attending SDSU, he served as president of Associated Students, the university's student governing group and chair of the California State Student Association.

==
Career ==


===
Consulting ===
In 1989, Glazer formed his own public relations, media and political consulting firm, Glazer & Associates.
Glazer was senior advisor to Kathleen Brown in her 1990 campaign for California State Treasurer.
Glazer was an advisor to the 1994 campaign of Democratic former Los Angeles City Councilman Michael Woo in his primary race for Secretary of State.
Glazer ran Jerry Brown's campaign for governor in 2010.
Glazer aided Governor Brown's campaign to gain voter approval of Proposition 30 in 2012, which prevented billions of dollars in additional cuts to our public schools and universities.

Glazer was spokesperson for the first female Chief Justice of California, Rose Bird, during her retention campaign from 1985 to 1986.Glazer was the press secretary for Assemblyman Gray Davis in 1983 and ran his re-election campaign in 1984.
Glazer persuaded Davis to promote the idea of placing the pictures of missing children on milk cartons, grocery bags, bus stops and billboards.
That campaign was credited with finding more than one dozen children and won Davis widespread publicity and eventually helped him win his first statewide office on his way to becoming governor.
Glazer served as press secretary for State Senate Pro Tem David Roberti from 1987 to 1993.
As press secretary for Roberti, Glazer ran a media campaign to boost legislation that became the Roberti-Roos Assault Weapons Control Act of 1989, a California law that bans the ownership and transfer of over 50 specific brands and models of semi-automatic firearms, which were classified as assault weapons.

====
Ballot measures ====
Glazer ran the campaign for the 1990 Los Angeles ballot measure, Measure H, which instituted ethics reform of Los Angeles city election campaigns.
Glazer was political strategist for the historic 1992 Los Angeles City Charter Amendment F to dramatically change the Los Angeles Police Department's power structure and make it more accountable to the community.
Charter Amendment F, headed up by former United States Secretary of State Warren Cristopher, limited a police chief to two five-year terms, allowed the mayor to select a chief with the approval of the City Council and provided civilian review of officer misconduct by adding a civilian to disciplinary panels.
Glazer led campaigns in the 1990s to protect old growth redwood forests, San Francisco Bay, parks, and open spaces.
Working with the Trust for Public Land, Glazer helped pass measures in more than 25 states that protect clean water and thousands of acres of open space.
Glazer organized campaigns that provided billions of dollars for homeless shelters and affordable housing, as well as residences for abused women and foster children.
Glazer ran the campaign for the March 7, 2000 bond measures, Proposition 12 & 13, which California voters approved.
They provided a total of $4.1 billion to go to a variety of state, local, and nonprofit agencies to implement a broad range of activities to protect and enhance resources.
In 2002, Glazer managed the successful statewide campaign for Proposition 46, created a trust fund to: provide shelters for battered women; clean and safe housing for low-income senior citizens; emergency shelters for homeless families with children; housing with social services for homeless and mentally ill; repairs/accessibility improvements to apartments for families and handicapped citizens; military veteran homeownership assistance; and security improvements/repairs to existing emergency shelters.

In 2006, Glazer served as campaign manager for Proposition 1C, which funded new and existing housing and development programs.
The programs would be aimed at increasing development in urban areas, transportation, homeless shelters, and construction and renovation of rental housing projects.
The measure would also provide funds to low income home buyers.

Glazer ran Governor Jerry Brown's tax measure campaign in 2012.Authored the $15 billion 2020 Preschool, K-12 and College Bond (the largest in California history) to repair aging schools, remove lead from school drinking water, build new classrooms, expand classroom technology, and build affordable student housing at California's colleges and universities.

===
California Senate ===
Glazer won a May 2015 special election to succeed Mark DeSaulnier, who was elected to Congress in 2014.
Glazer defeated fellow Democrat, Assemblywoman Susan Bonilla.
He won his re-election campaign in November, 2016, and began a new four-year term.
He was re-elected in November, 2020 to begin a new four-year term.
His current term ends on December 1, 2024.
Prior to being elected to the State Senate, Glazer served on the Orinda Park and Recreation Commission from 1997 to 1999; and then served on the Orinda City Council from 2004 to 2015.
During that time, he served as mayor of Orinda in 2007, 2012 and 2015.
Glazer was a 2014 Democratic candidate for District 16 of the California State Assembly.
Prior to holding elective office, he was an advisor to Governor Jerry Brown.
Glazer is a member of the California Legislative Jewish Caucus.

====
Tenure ====
Glazer authored a bill in 2015 to ban the use of Confederate leaders in state parks, buildings, schools and other public places.
Glazer authored a bill in 2016, the California Promise, to help increase the 4-year graduation rate by requiring the California State University (CSU) system to provide priority enrollment, enhanced academic advising and other support for students who carry at least 30 units per year.
Glazer co-authored (with Sen. Isadore Hall III) SB 880, in 2016, to close a loophole in the assault weapons ban.
Glazer authored a ballot measure, Proposition 72 in 2018, to improve residents’ ability to capture rainwater that passed both houses of the Legislature and made it onto the June, 2018 primary ballot.
Voters approved the measure in June 2018.Glazer authored the first-in-the-nation truth-in-lending bill for small businesses in 2018, making  lending to small businesses more transparent.
Glazer authored legislation in 2019 to create the office of Inspector General for the Bay Area Rapid Transit Authority to look for waste, fraud and abuse in the sprawling agency.
Glazer jointly authored a bill in 2020 to ban the sale of flavored tobacco. "
These flavored vaping products are addicting our children to nicotine and endangering their lives,” said Joint Author Senator Steve Glazer, D-Orinda.
“
The explosive use has become an epidemic that requires urgent action.
Thank you Senator Hill for your leadership in protecting our children."
====
Committees ====
=====
2015–2016
=====
Glazer served as Chairman of the Senate Banking and Financial Institutions Committee; and as a member of the Insurance and Public Safety committees.

=====
2017–2018 =====
Glazer served as Chairman of the Governmental Organization and Insurance committees; and as  Chairman of Senate Select Committee on Student Success; and as a member of the Budget & Fiscal Review, and Human Services committees.

=====
2019–2020
=====
Glazer served as Chairman of the Business, Professions & Economic Development; Chairman of Senate Select Committee on Student Success; and as a member of the Agriculture; Education; Governmental Organization; and Insurance committees.

===== 2021–2022
=====
Glazer is Chairman of the Elections and Constitutional Amendment Committee; and serves on the Agriculture; Education; Governmental Organization; and Insurance committees


==
Personal life ==
Glazer is married to Melba Muscarolas, a retired executive with AT&T, with whom he has two daughters.
In October 2003, Glazer was shot in the neck by a high-powered pellet rifle while driving with his family.
The .17-caliber projectile just missed his carotid artery and lodged next to his spine.
The perpetrator was caught but never charged with a crime because pellet guns were classified as toys in the criminal code.
After recovering from this injury, Glazer worked with then-Senator Tom Torlakson to author legislation establishing penalties for pellet-gun attacks (SB 532, Chapter 180, Statutes of 2006).

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Campaign website
Steve Glazer at Ballotpedia
The equipment of the Royal Malaysian Navy (RMN) can be subdivided into: ships, aircraft, radars, weapons, munitions, firearms and attire.
All RMN ships carry the prefix KD (Malay :
Kapal Di-Raja, literally "Royal Ship"), which is equivalent to "His Majesty's Ship" in English.
The training vessel Tunas Samudra, however, carries a KLD prefix (Kapal Layar Di-Raja) to mean "His Majesty's Sailing Ship".

==
Ships ==


==
Aircraft ==
== Radars ==


==
Weapons ==


==
Munitions ==


==
Firearms ==
The standard weapons of all RMN personnel is Glock 17, Heckler & Koch P9S service pistols, M4 carbines, M16 rifles and FN MAG 58 general purpose machine guns.
The RMN PASKAL units are often equipped with the most common specialised firearms including combat shotguns, submachine guns, assault rifles, carbines, sniper rifles, light machine guns, and grenade-based weapons that are generally found in most counter-terrorist tactical teams.
The following are some of the weapons of the RMN ground forces:


==
Attire ==


==
Historical equipment ==


===
Ships ===


===
Aircraft ===


==
Procurement ==
Following the completion of the New Generation Patrol Vessel (NGPV) program, RMN now moved to the next program called Second Generation Patrol Vessel (SGPV).
RMN also planned to purchase a batch of Littoral Mission Ship (LMS) and Multi Role Support Ship (MRSS).
Under recent modernisation plan also, RMN desire to add more submarine in the fleet.
Together with the modernisation plan, RMN also launches the upgrade program and Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) for the old navy's ship.

== See also ==
List of equipment of the Malaysian Army
List of equipment of the Royal Malaysian Air Force
List of aircraft of the Malaysian Armed Forces
List of equipment of the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency
List of vehicles of the Royal Malaysian Police
List of police firearms in Malaysia


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website of the Royal Malaysian Navy
Global Security website
The Mk 153 Shoulder-Launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) is a shoulder-launched rocket weapon with the primary function of being a portable assault weapon (e.g. bunker buster) and a secondary anti-armor rocket launcher.
Developed from the B-300, it was introduced to the United States Armed Forces in 1984.
It has a maximum effective range of 500 metres (550 yd) against a tank-sized target.

It can be used to destroy bunkers and other fortifications during assault operations; it can also destroy other designated targets using the dual mode rocket and main battle tanks using the high-explosive anti-tank rocket.
Operations in Afghanistan and Iraq saw a thermobaric rocket added (described as a "Novel Explosive" [NE]), which is capable of collapsing a building.

==
Service history ==
The SMAW system (launcher, ammunition and logistics support) was fielded in 1984 as a United States Marine Corps–unique system.
The Mod 0 demonstrated several shortcomings, resulting in a series of modifications in the mid-2000s.
These modifications included a re-sleeving process for bubbled launch tubes, rewriting/drafting operator and technical manuals, and a kit to reduce environmental intrusion into the trigger mechanism.
This also includes an optical sight modification to allow the high-explosive anti-armor (HEAA) rocket to be used effectively against moving armor targets.
The U.S. Armed Forces fielded boresight bracket kits which correct the loss of accurate boresight issues between the launch tube and spotting rifle.
During Operation Desert Storm, 150 launchers and 5,000 rockets were deployed by the United States Army.
Initially the Army showed interest in the system but ultimately returned the launchers and any unused rockets to the Marine Corps.
Later, the U.S. Army developed the SMAW-D ("Disposable"), designated by the Army as the M141 Bunker Defeat Munition.

===
Follow-On To SMAW ===
In 2002, the Corps began a program to develop a successor to the SMAW system, tentatively titled "Follow-On To SMAW".
The contract was awarded to Lockheed Martin and Israel Military Industries (IMI); this resulted in the enhanced FGM-172 SRAW.
In combat operations, it was ultimately used to augment, rather than replace, the SMAW system.

===
SMAW II program ===
In 2008, a replacement program was again initiated and titled the SMAW II.
It was developed in tandem with a round capable of being fired from an enclosed area without ill effects on the environment and personnel.
Its combined weight is 13.5 kilograms (29.7
lb)—5.3 kg (11.7 lb) for the launcher, 8.2 kg (18 lb) for the rocket.
The contract was worth up to US$51.7 million


===
SMAW II Serpent ===
In 2012, Raytheon Missile Systems developed a SMAW II launcher called "Serpent, and Nammo Talley developed new rounds for the Serpent.
The Serpent is similar in many respects to the first SMAW launcher, except that it replaces the standard SMAW launcher's spotting gun with sophisticated fire control electronics.
The sighting unit on the launcher is enclosed in a unique roll-cage to protect it.
The roll-cage also serves as a carry handle.
The development reduced the over-all weight by four and a half pounds (2.0 kg) from the older SMAW launcher.
The Serpent fires the same rounds as the standard SMAW and supports new and improved/enhanced rounds.

== Design ==
Compared to the Israel Military Industries' B-300 weapon that it was developed from, the SMAW has slower projectile velocities, it and its ammunition are both heavier, and it takes a second crew member to keep up with the B-300's rate-of-fire, but some of its projectile options have longer ranges than the B-300.
The Mk 153 SMAW has an 83.5 millimetres (3.29 in) diameter tube and fires 83-millimetre (3.3 in) rockets.
It is a man-portable weapon system consisting of the Mk 153 launcher, the Mk 3 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Dual-Purpose (HEDP) rocket, the Mk 6 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor (HEAA) Rocket, the Mk 7 Mod 0 Common Encased Practice Rocket, the Mk 80 Mod 0 Encased Novel Explosive (NE) rocket, and the Mk 217 Mod 0 spotting rifle cartridge.

The launcher consists of the launch tube, spotting rifle, electro-mechanical firing mechanism, mounting brackets, open battle sights and a mount for the Mk 42 Mod 0 day sight or AN/PVS-4 or AN/PVS-17B night sights.
The launch tube is made of fiberglass-epoxy composite material with a gelcoat on the bore.
The spotting rifle is mounted on the right side of the launch tube.
It functions semi-automatically by primer actuation, meaning that when fired the primer sets back and unlocks the breech of the spotting rifle, ejecting the spent round.
The firing mechanism mechanically fires the spotting rifle and uses a magnet to fire the rocket.
The mounting brackets connect the components and provide the means for boresighting the weapon, while the encased rockets are loaded at the rear of the launcher.
The spotting cartridges are stored in a magazine in the cap of the encased rocket.

The 9×51mm Mk 217 spotting round is ballistically matched to the rocket and serves to increase the gunner's first-round hit probability.
Each round consists of a special 9 mm projectile which contains a tracer compound, crimped into a 7.62×51mm NATO casing with a .22 Hornet primer.
The system can be used in conjunction with the AN
/PEQ-2 aiming light in place of the spotting rifle.

As with all of these types of recoilless rocket weapons, the backblast that is created when it is fired is a primary safety concern.
When the rocket is fired, the rocket propellant is expended entirely within the rocket encasement.
This is the cause of the extremely loud and violent backblast.
This backblast extends in a 90-meter, 60° cone to the rear of the weapon.
The backblast is lethal out to 30 metres (98 ft) and still extremely dangerous to 90 metres (300 ft).
An assistant gunner is often used during employment of the weapon system to monitor the backblast area and clear it of fellow troops, or to notify the gunner of obstructions that could reflect the force of the backblast back at the gun team.
The gunner is only cleared to launch a rocket when he hears the command "Backblast area secure" from his assistant gunner.
Rounds are under development that would enable a user to fire the rocket from an enclosed building without risk of injury.
The Mk 153 Mod 2 is an enhanced variant, featuring an electronic modular ballistic sight (MBS) in place of the 9 mm spotting system.
The MBS has a laser rangefinder and thermal weapon sight to provide a firing solution using a displaced reticle, where crosshairs are adjusted for distance and environmental factors; it is lighter, more reliable, and can be detached from the launcher.
While the Mod 0 weighs 7.5 kg (16.5 lb), the Mod 2 weighs 5.9 kg (13 lb) with the MBS attached, and 3.9 kg (8.5 lb) with the MBS detached.
Other improvements include increased pad size on the forward grip and foldable backup iron sights.
The Mod 2 systems were expected to replace the existing inventory by October 2020.

===
Rockets ===
The Mk 4 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor, Practice Rocket is used in training.
The warhead consists of a blue plastic projectile attached to a rocket motor similar to the HEDP rocket.
The rocket has no explosive capability against the target except for kinetic energy.
Upon impact against a target, the plastic warhead ruptures, dispensing an inert white spotting powder.

The Mk 3 Mod 0
Encased HEDP rocket is effective against bunkers, masonry and concrete walls and light armor.
Initiated by a crush switch in its nose, the HEDP rocket is able to distinguish between hard and soft targets resulting in greater penetration into soft targets for increased damage potential.
The HEDP round is capable of penetrating 20 centimetres (7.9 in) of concrete, 30 centimetres (12 in) of brick or up to 210 centimetres (6.9 ft) of wood-reinforced sandbags.

The Mk 6 Mod 0 Encased High-Explosive, Anti-Armor (HEAA) rocket is effective against current tanks without additional armor and utilizes a standoff rod on the detonator, allowing the explosive force to be focused on a small point and for maximum damage against armored targets.
The HEAA round is capable of penetrating up to the equivalent of 600 mm of rolled homogeneous steel.

The Mk 80 Mod 0 Encased Novel Explosive (SMAW-NE) rocket is effective against caves and bunkers.
The SMAW-NE has a 4lb charge of PBXIH-135, an enhanced-blast warhead.
The Indian Head Naval Surface Warfare Center teamed with Marine Corps Systems Command and Talley Defense Systems to respond to an urgent U.S. Marine Corps need for a shoulder-launched enhanced-blast warhead in 2003.
It was used in combat during both the First and Second offensives in Fallujah, in 2004.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
 Lebanon:
Lebanese Armed Forces
Pakistan:
Pakistan Armed Forces
Taiwan:
Republic of China Marine Corps
United States:
United States Marine Corps


==
See also ==
B-300
M141
Bunker Defeat Munition (SMAW-D)
Breda Folgore
Carl Gustaf
8.4cm recoilless rifle
LRAC F1
M79
Osa


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SMAW – Global Security
SMAW at FAS
SMAW early article
UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS INTRODUCTION TO CREW SERVED WEAPONS
U.S. MARINE CORPS TECHNICAL MANUAL OPERATOR’S MANUAL https://www.scribd.com/doc/36175656/TM-08673A-10-1B-83mm-SMAW-Mk
Shielded metal arc welding (SMAW), also known as manual metal arc welding (MMA or MMAW),
flux shielded arc welding or informally as stick welding, is a manual arc welding process that uses a consumable electrode covered with a flux to lay the weld.

An electric current, in the form of either alternating current or direct current from a welding power supply, is used to form an electric arc between the electrode and the metals to be joined.
The workpiece and the electrode melts forming a pool of molten metal (weld pool)
that cools to form a joint.
As the weld is laid, the flux coating of the electrode disintegrates, giving off vapors that serve as a shielding gas and providing a layer of slag, both of which protect the weld area from atmospheric contamination.

Because of the versatility of the process and the simplicity of its equipment and operation, shielded metal arc welding is one of the world's first and most popular welding processes.
It dominates other welding processes in the maintenance and repair industry, and though flux-cored arc welding is growing in popularity, SMAW continues to be used extensively in the construction of heavy steel structures and in industrial fabrication.
The process is used primarily to weld iron and steels (including stainless steel) but aluminium, nickel and copper alloys can also be welded with this method.
==
Development ==
After the discovery of the short pulsed electric arc in 1800 by Humphry Davy and of the continuous electric arc in 1802 by Vasily Petrov, there was little development in electrical welding until Auguste de Méritens developed a carbon arc torch that was patented in 1881.In 1885, Nikolay Benardos and Stanisław Olszewski developed carbon arc welding, obtaining American patents from 1887 showing a rudimentary electrode holder.
In 1888, the consumable metal electrode was invented by Nikolay Slavyanov.
Later in 1890, C. L. Coffin received U.S. Patent 428,459 for his arc welding method that utilized a metal electrode.
The process, like SMAW, deposited melted electrode metal into the weld as filler.
Around 1900, Arthur Percy Strohmenger and Oscar Kjellberg released the first coated electrodes.
Strohmenger used clay and lime coating to stabilize the arc, while Kjellberg dipped iron wire into mixtures of carbonates and silicates to coat the electrode.
In 1912, Strohmenger released a heavily coated electrode, but high cost and complex production methods prevented these early electrodes from gaining popularity.
In 1927, the development of an extrusion process reduced the cost of coating electrodes while allowing manufacturers to produce more complex coating mixtures designed for specific applications.
In the 1950s, manufacturers introduced iron powder into the flux coating, making it possible to increase the welding speed.
In 1945 Karl Kristian Masden described an automated variation of SMAW, now known as gravity welding.
It briefly gained popularity in the 1960s after receiving publicity for its use in Japanese shipyards though today its applications are limited.
Another little used variation of the process, known as firecracker welding, was developed around the same time by George Hafergut in Austria.
In 1964 laser welding was developed in Bell Laboratory with the intention of using this technology as a communication tool.
Due to the large force of energy coupled with the small area of focus, this laser became a powerful heat source for cutting and tooling.

==
Operation ==
To strike the electric arc, the electrode is brought into contact with the workpiece by a very light touch of the electrode to the base metal.
The electrode is then pulled back slightly.
This initiates the arc and thus the melting of the workpiece and the consumable electrode, and causes droplets of the electrode to be passed from the electrode to the weld pool.
Striking an arc, which varies widely based upon electrode and workpiece composition, can be the hardest skill for beginners.
The orientation of the electrode to workpiece is where most stumble, if the electrode is held at a perpendicular angle to the workpiece the tip will likely stick to the metal which will fuse the electrode to the workpiece which will cause it to heat up very rapidly.
The tip of the electrode needs to be at a lower angle to the workpiece, which allows the weld pool to flow out of the arc.

As the electrode melts, the flux covering disintegrates, giving off shielding gases that protect the weld area from oxygen and other atmospheric gases.
In addition, the flux provides molten slag which covers the filler as it travels from electrode to the weld pool.
Once part of the weld pool, the slag floats to the surface and protects the weld from contamination as it solidifies.
Once hardened, it must be chipped away to reveal the finished weld.
As welding progresses and the electrode melts, the welder must periodically stop welding to remove the remaining electrode stub and insert a new electrode into the electrode holder.
This activity, combined with chipping away the slag, reduces the amount of time that the welder can spend laying the weld, making SMAW one of the least efficient welding processes.
In general, the operator factor, or the percentage of operator's time spent laying weld, is approximately 25%.The actual welding technique utilized depends on the electrode,
the composition of the workpiece, and the position of the joint being welded.
The choice of electrode and welding position also determine the welding speed.
Flat welds require the least operator skill, and can be done with electrodes that melt quickly but solidify slowly.
This permits higher welding speeds.
Sloped, vertical or upside-down welding requires more operator skill, and often necessitates the use of an electrode that solidifies quickly to prevent the molten metal from flowing out of the weld pool.
However, this generally means that the electrode melts less quickly, thus increasing the time required to lay the weld.

===
Quality ===
The most common quality problems associated with SMAW include weld spatter, porosity, poor fusion, shallow penetration, and cracking.
Weld spatter, while not affecting the integrity of the weld, damages its appearance and increases cleaning costs.
Secondary finishing services are often required due to the aesthetic appearance caused by the occurrence of molten splatter.
It can be caused by excessively high current, a long arc, or arc blow, a condition associated with direct current characterized by the electric arc being deflected away from the weld pool by magnetic forces.
Arc blow can also cause porosity in the weld, as can joint contamination, high welding speed, and a long welding arc, especially when low-hydrogen electrodes are used.
Porosity, often not visible without the use of advanced nondestructive testing methods, is a serious concern because it can potentially weaken the weld.
Porosity is caused when the gaseous shield did not sufficiently shield the molten weld metal while the bead is laid or while it is cooling.
What happens is that the weld bead is overexposed to and absorbs; nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen from the atmosphere.
When a porous weld cools, the newly absorbed gaseous molecules are released and the welder is left with a porous weld bead.
Another defect affecting the strength of the weld is poor fusion, though it is often easily visible.
It is caused by low current, contaminated joint surfaces, or the use of an improper electrode.
Shallow penetration, another detriment to weld strength, can be addressed by decreasing welding speed, increasing the current or using a smaller electrode.
Any of these weld-strength-related defects can make the weld prone to cracking, but other factors are involved as well.
High carbon, alloy or sulfur content in the base material can lead to cracking, especially if low-hydrogen electrodes and preheating are not employed.
Furthermore, the workpieces should not be excessively restrained, as this introduces residual stresses into the weld and can cause cracking as the weld cools and contracts.

=== Safety ===

SMAW welding, like other welding methods, can be a dangerous and unhealthy practice if proper precautions are not taken.
The process uses an open electric arc, which presents a risk of burns which are prevented by personal protective equipment in the form of heavy leather gloves and long sleeve jackets.
Additionally, the brightness of the weld area can lead to a condition called arc eye, in which ultraviolet light causes inflammation of the cornea and can burn the retinas of the eyes.
Welding helmets with dark face plates are worn to prevent this exposure, and in recent years, new helmet models have been produced that feature a face plate that self-darkens upon exposure to high amounts of UV light.
To protect bystanders, especially in industrial environments, translucent welding curtains often surround the welding area.
These curtains, made of a polyvinyl chloride plastic film, shield nearby workers from exposure to the UV light from the electric arc, but should not be used to replace the filter glass used in helmets.
In addition, the vaporizing metal and flux materials expose welders to dangerous gases and particulate matter.
The smoke produced contains particles of various types of oxides.
The size of the particles in question tends to influence the toxicity of the fumes, with smaller particles presenting a greater danger.
Additionally, gases like carbon dioxide and ozone can form, which can prove dangerous if ventilation is inadequate.
Some of the latest welding masks are fitted with an electric powered fan to help disperse harmful fumes.

=== Application and materials ===
Shielded metal arc welding is one of the world's most popular welding processes, accounting for over half of all welding in some countries.
Because of its versatility and simplicity, it is particularly dominant in the maintenance and repair industry, and is heavily used in the construction of steel structures and in industrial fabrication.
In recent years its use has declined as flux-cored arc welding has expanded in the construction industry and gas metal arc welding has become more popular in industrial environments.
However, because of the low equipment cost and wide applicability, the process will likely remain popular, especially among amateurs and small businesses where specialized welding processes are uneconomical and unnecessary.
SMAW is often used to weld carbon steel, low and high alloy steel, stainless steel, cast iron, and ductile iron.
While less popular for non-ferrous materials, it can be used on nickel and copper and their alloys and, in rare cases, on aluminium.
The thickness of the material being welded is bounded on the low end primarily by the skill of the welder, but rarely does it drop below 1.5 mm (0.06 in).
No upper bound exists: with proper joint preparation and use of multiple passes, materials of virtually unlimited thicknesses can be joined.
Furthermore, depending on the electrode used and the skill of the welder, SMAW can be used in any position.

== Equipment ==
Shielded metal arc welding equipment typically consists of a constant current welding power supply and an electrode, with an electrode holder, a ground clamp, and welding cables (also known as welding leads) connecting the two.

===
Power supply ===
The power supply used in SMAW has constant current output, ensuring that the current (and thus the heat) remains relatively constant, even if the arc distance and voltage change.
This is important because most applications of SMAW are manual, requiring that an operator hold the torch.
Maintaining a suitably steady arc distance is difficult if a constant voltage power source is used instead, since it can cause dramatic heat variations and make welding more difficult.
However, because the current is not maintained absolutely constant, skilled welders performing complicated welds can vary the arc length to cause minor fluctuations in the current.

The preferred polarity of the SMAW system depends primarily upon the electrode being used and the desired properties of the weld.
Direct current with a negatively charged electrode (DCEN) causes heat to build up on the electrode, increasing the electrode melting rate and decreasing the depth of the weld.
Reversing the polarity so that the electrode is positively charged (DCEP) and the workpiece is negatively charged increases the weld penetration.
With alternating current the polarity changes over 100 times per second, creating an even heat distribution and providing a balance between electrode melting rate and penetration.
Typically, the equipment used for SMAW consists of a step-down transformer and for direct current models a rectifier, which converts alternating current into direct current.
Because the power normally supplied to the welding machine is high-voltage alternating current, the welding transformer is used to reduce the voltage and increase the current.
As a result, instead of 220 V at 50 A, for example, the power supplied by the transformer is around 17–45 V at currents up to 600 A.
A number of different types of transformers can be used to produce this effect, including multiple coil and inverter machines, with each using a different method to manipulate the welding current.
The multiple coil type adjusts the current by either varying the number of turns in the coil (in tap-type transformers) or by varying the distance between the primary and secondary coils (in movable coil or movable core transformers).
Inverters, which are smaller and thus more portable, use electronic components to change the current characteristics.
Electrical generators and alternators are frequently used as portable welding power supplies, but because of lower efficiency and greater costs, they are less frequently used in industry.
Maintenance also tends to be more difficult, because of the complexities of using a combustion engine as a power source.
However, in one sense they are simpler: the use of a separate rectifier is unnecessary because they can provide either AC or DC.
However, the engine driven units are most practical in field work where the welding often must be done out of doors and in locations where transformer type welders are not usable because there is no power source available to be transformed.

In some units the alternator is essentially the same as that used in portable generating sets used to supply mains power, modified to produce a higher current at a lower voltage but still at the 50 or 60 Hz grid frequency.
In higher-quality units an alternator with more poles is used and supplies current at a higher frequency, such as 400 Hz.
The smaller amount of time the high-frequency waveform spends near zero makes it much easier to strike and maintain a stable arc than with the cheaper grid-frequency sets or grid-frequency mains-powered units.

===
Electrode ===
The choice of electrode for SMAW depends on a number of factors, including the weld material, welding position and the desired weld properties.
The electrode is coated in a metal mixture called flux, which gives off gases as it decomposes to prevent weld contamination, introduces deoxidizers to purify the weld, causes weld-protecting slag to form, improves the arc stability, and provides alloying elements to improve the weld quality.
Electrodes can be divided into three groups—
those designed to melt quickly are called "fast-fill" electrodes, those designed to solidify quickly are called "fast-freeze" electrodes, and intermediate electrodes go by the name "fill-freeze" or "fast-follow" electrodes.
Fast-fill electrodes are designed to melt quickly so that the welding speed can be maximized, while fast-freeze electrodes supply filler metal that solidifies quickly, making welding in a variety of positions possible by preventing the weld pool from shifting significantly before solidifying.
The composition of the electrode core is generally similar and sometimes identical to that of the base material.
But even though a number of feasible options exist, a slight difference in alloy composition can strongly impact the properties of the resulting weld.
This is especially true of alloy steels such as HSLA steels.
Likewise, electrodes of compositions similar to those of the base materials are often used for welding nonferrous materials like aluminium and copper.
However, sometimes it is desirable to use electrodes with core materials significantly different from the base material.
For example, stainless steel electrodes are sometimes used to weld two pieces of carbon steel, and are often utilized to weld stainless steel workpieces with carbon steel workpieces.
Electrode coatings can consist of a number of different compounds, including rutile, calcium fluoride, cellulose, and iron powder.
Rutile electrodes, coated with 25%–45% TiO2, are characterized by ease of use and good appearance of the resulting weld.
However, they create welds with high hydrogen content, encouraging embrittlement and cracking.
Electrodes containing calcium fluoride (CaF2), sometimes known as basic or low-hydrogen electrodes, are hygroscopic and must be stored in dry conditions.
They produce strong welds, but with a coarse and convex-shaped joint surface.
Electrodes coated with cellulose, especially when combined with rutile, provide deep weld penetration, but because of their high moisture content, special procedures must be used to prevent excessive risk of cracking.
Finally, iron powder is a common coating additive that increases the rate at which the electrode fills the weld joint, up to twice as fast.
To identify different electrodes, the American Welding Society established a system that assigns electrodes with a four- or five-digit number.
Covered electrodes made of mild or low alloy steel carry the prefix E, followed by their number.
The first two or three digits of the number specify the tensile strength of the weld metal, in thousand pounds per square inch (ksi).
The penultimate digit generally identifies the welding positions permissible with the electrode, typically using the values 1 (normally fast-freeze electrodes, implying all position welding) and 2 (normally fast-fill electrodes, implying horizontal welding only).
The welding current and type of electrode covering are specified by the last two digits together.
When applicable, a suffix is used to denote the alloying element being contributed by the electrode.
Common electrodes include the E6010, a fast-freeze, all-position electrode with a minimum tensile strength of 60 ksi (410 MPa) which is operated using DCEP, and provides deep weld penetration with a forceful arc capable of burning through light rust or oxides on the workpiece.
E6011 is similar except its flux coating allows it to be used with alternating current in addition to DCEP.
E7024 is a fast-fill electrode, used primarily to make flat or horizontal fillet welds using AC, DCEN, or DCEP.
Examples of fill-freeze electrodes are the E6012, E6013, and E7014, all of which provide a compromise between fast welding speeds and all-position welding.

=== Process variations ===
Though SMAW is almost exclusively a manual arc welding process, one notable process variation exists, known as gravity welding or gravity arc welding.
It serves as an automated version of the traditional shielded metal arc welding process, employing an electrode holder attached to an inclined bar along the length of the weld.
Once started, the process continues until the electrode is spent, allowing the operator to manage multiple gravity welding systems.
The electrodes employed (often E6027 or E7024) are coated heavily in flux, and are typically 71 cm (28 in) in length and about 6.35 mm (0.25 in) thick.
As in manual SMAW, a constant current welding power supply is used, with either negative polarity direct current or alternating current.
Due to a rise in the use of semiautomatic welding processes such as flux-cored arc welding, the popularity of gravity welding has fallen as its economic advantage over such methods is often minimal.
Other SMAW-related methods that are even less frequently used include firecracker welding, an automatic method for making butt and fillet welds, and massive electrode welding, a process for welding large components or structures that can deposit up to 27 kg (60 lb) of weld metal per hour.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
Cary, Howard B.; Helzer, Scott C. (2005), Modern Welding Technology, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:
Pearson Education, ISBN 978-0-13-113029-6
Jeffus, Larry (1999), Welding:
Principles and Applications
(4th ed.),
Albany, New York:
Thomson Delmar, ISBN 978-0-8273-8240-4
Lincoln Electric (1994), The Procedure Handbook of Arc Welding, Cleveland, Ohio:
Lincoln Electric, ISBN 978-99949-25-82-7
Miller Electric Mfg Co (2013).
Guidelines For Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) (PDF).
Appleton, Wisconsin:
Miller Electric Mfg Co. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-12-08.

Weman, Klas (2003), Welding processes handbook, New York: CRC Press, ISBN 978-0-8493-1773-6


==
External links ==
Guidelines for Shielded Metal Arc Welding (.pdf)
Flux-cored arc welding (FCAW or FCA) is a semi-automatic or automatic arc welding process.

FCAW requires a continuously-fed consumable tubular electrode containing a flux and a constant-voltage or, less commonly, a constant-current welding power supply.

An externally supplied shielding gas is sometimes used, but often the flux itself is relied upon to generate the necessary protection from the atmosphere, producing both gaseous protection and liquid slag protecting the weld.

The process is widely used in construction because of its high welding speed and portability.

FCAW was first developed in the early 1950s as an alternative to shielded metal arc welding (SMAW).

The advantage of FCAW over SMAW is that the use of the stick electrodes used in SMAW is unnecessary.
This helped FCAW to overcome many of the restrictions associated with SMAW.

== Types ==
One type of FCAW requires no shielding gas.
This is made possible by the flux core in the tubular consumable electrode.
However, this core contains more than just flux.
It also contains various ingredients that when exposed to the high temperatures of welding generate a shielding gas for protecting the arc.
This type of FCAW is attractive because it is portable and generally has good penetration into the base metal.
Also, windy conditions need not be considered.
Some disadvantages are that this process can produce excessive, noxious smoke (making it difficult to see the weld pool).
As with all welding processes, the proper electrode must be chosen to obtain the required mechanical properties.
Operator skill is a major factor as improper electrode manipulation or machine setup can cause porosity.

Another type of FCAW uses a shielding gas that must be supplied by an external source.
This is known informally as "dual shield" welding.
This type of FCAW was developed primarily for welding structural steels.
In fact, since it uses both a flux-cored electrode and an external shielding gas, one might say that it is a combination of gas metal (GMAW) and flux-cored arc welding (FCAW).
The most often used shielding gases are either straight carbon dioxide or argon carbon dioxide blends.

The most common blend used is 75% Argon 25% Carbon Dioxide.
This particular style of FCAW is preferable for welding thicker and out-of-position metals.
The slag created by the flux is also easy to remove.
The main advantages of this process is that in a closed shop environment, it generally produces welds of better and more consistent mechanical properties, with fewer weld defects than either the SMAW or GMAW processes.
In practice it also allows a higher production rate, since the operator does not need to stop periodically to fetch a new electrode, as is the case in SMAW.
However, like GMAW, it cannot be used in a windy environment as the loss of the shielding gas from air flow will produce porosity in the weld.

== Process variables ==
Wire feed speed
Arc
voltage
Electrode extension
Travel speed and angle
Electrode angles
Electrode wire type
Shielding gas composition (if required)
Reverse polarity (Electrode Positive) is used for FCAW Gas-Shielded wire, Straight polarity (Electrode Negative) is used for self shielded
FCAW
Contact tip to work distance (CTWD)


==
Advantages and applications ==
FCAW may be an "all-position" process with the right filler metals (the consumable electrode)
No shielding gas needed with some wires making it suitable for outdoor welding and/or windy conditions
A high-deposition rate process (speed at which the filler metal is applied) in the 1G/1F/2F
Some "high-speed"
(e.g., automotive) applications
As compared to SMAW and GTAW, there is less skill required for operators.

Less precleaning of metal required
Metallurgical benefits from the flux such as the weld metal being protected initially from external factors until the slag is chipped away
Porosity chances very low
Less equipment required, easier to move around (no gas bottle)Used on the following alloys:

Mild and low alloy steels
Stainless steels
Some high nickel alloys
Some wearfacing/surfacing alloys
== Disadvantages ==
Of course, all of the usual issues that occur in welding can occur in FCAW such as incomplete fusion between base metals, slag inclusion (non-metallic inclusions), and cracks in the welds.
But there are a few concerns that come up with FCAW that are worth taking special note of:

Melted contact tip – when the contact tip actually contacts the base metal, fusing the two and melting the hole on the end.

Irregular wire feed – typically a mechanical problem.

Porosity – the gases (specifically those from the flux-core) don’t escape the welded area before the metal hardens, leaving holes in the welded metal.

More costly filler material/wire
as compared to GMAW.

The amount of smoke generated can far exceed that of SMAW, GMAW, or GTAW.

Changing filler metals requires changing an entire spool.
This can be slow and difficult as compared to changing filler metal for SMAW or GTAW.

Creates more fumes than SMAW.

==
References ==
American Welding Society, Welding Handbook, Vol 2
(9th ed.)

"Flux Cored Welding."
Welding Procedures & Techniques.
23 June 2006.
American Metallurgical Consultants.
13 Sep 2006 <http://www.weldingengineer.com/1flux.htm>.

Groover, Mikell P. Fundamentals of Modern Manufacturing.
Second.
New York City:
John Wiley & Sons, INC, 2002.

"Solid Wire Versus Flux-Cored Wire
- When to Use Them and Why."
Miller Electric Mfg.
Co. 13 Sep 2006
<http://www.millerwelds.com/education/articles/article62.html>.
The M141 Bunker Defeat Munition (BDM), or SMAW-D ("Disposable"), is a single-shot, shoulder-launched weapon designed to defeat hardened structures.
The weapon was designed as a modification of the United States Marine Corps Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) to fill the void in the United States Army inventory of a "bunker buster" weapon.

==
Service history ==
Two candidates were evaluated for the US Army's BDM program.

One candidate from McDonnell-Douglas (later Talley Defense Systems) which used the same warhead as the Marine Corps SMAW,
but with a rocket motor with a shorter burn time, and another developed by Sweden's FFV for Alliant Techsystems (later Honeywell), which replaced the standard HEAT warhead of the AT4/M136 with the same dual purpose warhead as used by the USMC SMAW.
FFV designated the bunker buster version of the AT4 as the FFV AT8.

In 1996 the McDonnell-Douglas candidate was chosen.

In a unique move, the US Army ordered one batch of 1,500 then a second batch of 4,500 which were placed in contingency storage for expedited issue to units in combat.
The SMAW-D was delivered to the Army in 1999.The conferees of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1994
agreed that the Army's BDM and the Marine Corps' SRAW were too similar to justify separate long-term projects, and that the Army should pursue an interim BDM program.
Congress limited BDM procurement to 6,000 units.

CNN news footage showed US Army Rangers firing M141s at various fortified caves during the Tora Bora operations against the Afghan Taliban and al Qaeda, being mistaken by the CNN reporters for AT4/M136 projectiles.

== Design ==
The SMAW-D operates on the principle of a recoilless rifle, in that the recoil created by launching the projectile is counteracted by a "backblast" of gases fired from the rear of the weapon.
This makes the SMAW-D inherently dangerous, especially in confined, urban areas, as is with all weapons of this design.

The M141 has two configurations: A carry mode in which the launcher is 810 mm (32 in) long, and a ready to fire mode in which the launcher is extended to its full length of 1,400 mm (55 in).

The warhead is the same High Explosive, Dual Purpose (HEDP) as the USMC SMAW.
It is effective against masonry and concrete bunkers as well as lightly armored vehicles.
The projectile is capable of penetrating up to 200 mm (8 in) of concrete, 300 mm (12 in) of brick, or 2.1 m (6.9 ft) of sandbags.
The warhead is activated by a crush switch in its nose that is able to distinguish between hard and soft targets.
On soft targets, such as sandbags, the detonation is delayed until the projectile is buried in the target, producing a devastating effect.
The warhead detonates immediately on contact with hard targets.

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
 Lebanon
United States


==
See also ==
SMAW
AT4


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SMAW-D - FAS
M141
Bunker Defeat Munition - Forecast International
The B-300 is a reusable man-portable anti-tank weapon system developed by Israel Military Industries in the late 1970s for use by the Israel Defense Forces.
The B-300 can be carried and operated by a single operator and is effective to approximately 400 meters (1,312 ft).
Pre-packaged munitions and simple operating mechanisms make the weapon quite versatile, permitting use by airborne, motorized, and ground troops alike.
When defence publications first heard reports of the B-300 in the early 1980s, various reports stated in error that it was an Israeli improved and manufactured version of the Russian RPG-7.
==
Usage ==
Munitions used by the B-300 are propelled by a solid rocket motor, and can be equipped with one of two warhead variants.
The first, high explosive anti-tank round, provides specialized support for anti-tank missions.
The second, known as a high explosive follow-through round, is designed for use against fortified targets or enemy units behind cover.
A primary charge punches a hole through the protective structure, allowing a secondary anti-personnel charge to pass through and detonate within the building.
The B-300 was produced during the 1980s and entered service in limited quantities within Israeli Defence Forces SF units.

==
Further development ==


===
SMAW ===
The Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) is a shoulder-launched rocket weapon, designed by McDonnell Douglas, with the primary function of being a portable anti-armor rocket launcher.
It was introduced to the U.S. armed forces in 1984.
It has a maximum range of 500 m against a tank-sized target.

===
Shipon ===
During the late 1990s, IMI introduced the Shipon, an advanced disposable multi-purpose shoulder-launched rocket system consisting of a launch tube and FCS module.
The Shipon includes an advanced fire-control system, helping to aim and increasing effective range to 600 meters.
The Shipon fires two types of rockets:
HEAA Tandem, which penetrates 800 mm of steel armor after explosive reactive armor, and a bunker-buster rocket.
The Shipon is in service within Israeli Special Forces units in the IDF and the YAMAM (the elite police counter-terror unit).

==
Operators ==


===
Current operators ===
Azerbaijan
 Chile
Estonia
India
Israel
Mexico
 Singapore
Sri Lanka
United States Used under the designation Mk153 SMAW.

Trinidad and Tobago


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Early Photos of Israeli B-300
A welding power supply is a device that provides or modulates an electric current to perform arc welding.
There are multiple arc welding processes in common use ranging from relatively simple Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) to more complicated welding processes using inert shielding gas like Gas metal arc welding (GMAW) or Gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW).
Welding power supplies primarily serve as devices that allow a welder to exercise control over whether current is alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC), as well as the amperage and voltage.
Power supplies for welding processes that use shielding gas also offer connections for gas and methods to control gas flow.
The operator can set these factors to within the parameters as needed by the metal type, thickness, and technique to be used.
The majority of welding power supplies do not generate power, instead functioning as controllable transformers that allow the operator to adjust electrical properties as needed.
However, in some welding applications, notably SMAW, used in areas isolated from power grids, welding power supplies are used that combine the functions of electrical generation and current modulation into a single mobile unit mounted on a vehicle or towed trailer.

==
Classification ==
Welding machines are usually classified as constant current (CC) or constant voltage (CV); a constant current machine varies its output voltage to maintain a steady current while a constant voltage machine will fluctuate its output current to maintain a set voltage.
Shielded metal arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding will use a constant current source and gas metal arc welding and flux-cored arc welding typically use constant voltage sources but constant current is also possible with a voltage sensing wire feeder.

The nature of the CV machine is required by
gas metal arc welding and flux-cored arc welding because the welder is not able to control the arc length manually.
If a welder were to attempt to use a CV machine for a shielded metal arc welding (SMAW) task, the small fluctuations in the arc distance would cause significant fluctuations in the machine's current output.
With a CC machine the welder can count on a fixed number of amps reaching the material, regardless of how short or long the electric arc gets.

==
Power supply designs ==
The welding power supplies most commonly seen can be categorized within the following types:


===
Transformer ===
A transformer-style welding power supply converts the moderate voltage and moderate current electricity from the utility mains (typically 230 or 115 VAC) into a high current and low voltage supply, typically between 17 and 45 (open-circuit) volts and 55 to 590 amperes.
A rectifier converts the AC into DC on more expensive machines.

This design typically allows the welder to select the output current by variously moving a primary winding closer or farther from a secondary winding, moving a magnetic shunt in and out of the core of the transformer, using a series saturating reactor with a variable saturating technique in series with the secondary current output, or by simply permitting the welder to select the output voltage from a set of taps on the transformer's secondary winding.

These transformer style machines are typically the least expensive.

The trade off for the reduced expense is that pure transformer designs are often bulky and massive because they operate at the utility mains frequency of 50 or 60 Hz.

Such low frequency transformers must have a high magnetizing inductance to avoid wasteful shunt currents.

The transformer may also have significant leakage inductance for short circuit protection in the event of a welding rod becoming stuck to the workpiece.

The leakage inductance may be variable
so the operator can set the output current.
===
Generator and alternator ===
Welding power supplies may also use generators or alternators to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy.
Modern designs are usually driven by an internal combustion engine but older machines may use an electric motor to drive an alternator or generator.
In this configuration the utility power is converted first into mechanical energy then back into electrical energy to achieve the step-down effect similar to a transformer.

Because the output of the generator can be direct current, or even a higher frequency AC, these older machines can produce DC from AC without any need for rectifiers of any type, or can also be used for implementing formerly-used variations on so-called heliarc (most often now called TIG) welders, where the need for a higher frequency add-on module box is avoided by the alternator simply producing higher frequency ac current directly.

===
Inverter ===
Since the advent of high-power semiconductors such as the insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT), it is now possible to build a switched-mode power supply capable of coping with the high loads of arc welding.

These designs are known as inverter welding units.

They generally first rectify the utility AC power to DC; then they switch (invert) the DC power into a stepdown transformer to produce the desired welding voltage or current.

The switching frequency is typically 10 kHz or higher.

Although the high switching frequency requires sophisticated components and circuits, it drastically reduces the bulk of the step down transformer, as the mass of magnetic components (transformers and inductors) that is required for achieving a given power level goes down rapidly as the operating (switching) frequency is increased.

The inverter circuitry can also provide features such as power control and overload protection.

The high frequency inverter-based welding machines are typically more efficient and provide better control of variable functional parameters than non-inverter welding machines.

The IGBTs in an inverter based machine are controlled by a microcontroller, so the electrical characteristics of the welding power can be changed by software in real time, even on a cycle by cycle basis, rather than making changes slowly over hundreds if not thousands of cycles.

Typically, the controller software will implement features such as pulsing the welding current, providing variable ratios and current densities through a welding cycle, enabling swept or stepped variable frequencies, and providing timing as needed for implementing automatic spot-welding; all of these features would be prohibitively expensive to design into a transformer-based machine, but require only program memory space in a software-controlled inverter machine.

Similarly, it is possible to add new features to a software-controlled inverter machine if needed, through a software update, rather than through having to buy a more modern welder.

===
Other types ===
Additional types of welders also exist, besides the types using transformers, motor/generator, and inverters.

For example, laser welders also exist, and they require an entirely different type of welding power supply design that does not fall into any of the types of welding power supplies discussed previously.

Likewise, spot welders require a different type of welding power supply, typically containing elaborate timing circuits and large capacitor banks that are not commonly found with any other types of welding power supplies.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Miller Electric news release on IGBT technology for welding inverters 8 April 2003
Frank G. Armao, Inverter Based Welding Power Supplies for Welding Aluminum, The Lincoln Electric Company (Lincoln Electric tutorial on inverter-based welding machines)
This is a list of weapons used by the United States Marine Corps:


==
Weapons used ==
The basic infantry weapon of the United States Marine Corps is the M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle.
Suppressive fire is provided by the M240B machine gun, at the squad and company levels respectively.
Marines at the rank of E4 and above rate the M17 semi-automatic pistol.
In addition, indirect fire is provided by the M203 grenade launcher in fireteams, M224a1 60 mm mortar in companies, and M252 81 mm mortar in battalions.
The M2 .50 caliber heavy machine gun and MK19 automatic grenade launcher (40 mm) are available for use by dismounted infantry, though they are more commonly vehicle-mounted.
Precision fire is provided by the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System and M40A3, A5, A6 bolt-action sniper rifle.
The Marine Corps uses a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an offensive and defensive anti-armor capability.
The SMAW and AT4 are unguided rockets that can destroy armor and fixed defenses (e.g. bunkers) at ranges up to 500 meters.
The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles; both can utilize top-attack profiles to avoid heavy frontal armor and are heavy missiles effective past 2,000 meters that give infantry an offensive capability against armor.
Marines are capable of deploying non-lethal weaponry as the situation dictates.
Part of a Marine Expeditionary Unit earning the Special Operations Capable designator requires a company-sized unit capable of riot control.

Some older weapons are used for ceremonial purposes, such as the Silent Drill Platoon's M1 Garands, or the use of the M101 howitzer for gun salutes.

==
Active use ==


===
Non-lethal weapons ===
CS gas
OC spray
Rubber, beanbag, & plastic bullet
Riot shield
Baton
M6/M7 series chemical grenade
M84 stun grenade
Sting grenade


===
Bladed weapons ===
OKC-3S bayonet
Ka-Bar
Combat Knife
Marine NCO sword
Marine Officers' Mameluke Sword
Original United States
Marine Corps Machete


===
Handguns ===
Beretta M9
Beretta M9A1
Glock 19M - Adopted in February 2015 for use by MARSOC
M45A1
CQBP - Modified M1911A1, for use by MEU(SOC) and MARSOC.
Still in use by Recon Battalions and Security and Emergency Services Battalions.

M17 - Standard issue pistol since 2019
M18 - Standard issue pistol since 2019


===
Automatic Rifles and Carbines ===
M16A2 - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M16A4 - select fire.
Safe, semi, burst.
Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle - Support weapon based on the Heckler & Koch HK416 (itself a piston-driven M4) using a free-floating barrel.

Initially issued as a replacement for the M249, in 2018 the decision was made to adopt the M27 as the standard USMC assault rifle in infantry battalions.

MK18 Mod 1 - Modified M4 with 10.3-inch barrel.
Used by MARSOC
M4 Carbine - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

M4A1 Carbine - Mostly being replaced by M27 in infantry battalions.

Mk 17 Mod 0 used by MARSOC
Mk 16 Mod 0 used by MARSOC


===
Designated Marksman Rifles ===
M39 Enhanced Marksman Rifle - Improved marksman version of the M14 rifle.

Mk 12
Mod 1 - Improved marksman version of the M16 rifle.

M38 Designated Marksman Rifle - Modified M27 IAR fielded as a marksman rifle


===
Sniper Rifles ===
Mk 13 mod 7 - .300 Winchester Magnum chambered sniper rifle built on Accuracy International Chassis System with Remington 700 long action.

Mk 11 Mod 0 - 7.62×51mm
sniper rifle based on the M16 direct impingement gas system.

M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System - Improved version of the Mk 11, replacing the M39 and Mk 11.

M40 rifle - M40A3, M40A5 and M40A6
variants in use as sniper rifles.

Barrett M82 - in use as the M82A3 and M107 variants.
The M82A3 being an upgraded M82A1A, and the M107 being a variant made in response to requirements issued for an anti-materiel rifle.

M21 - modified M14 rifle


===
Shotguns ===
Remington 870 - as the M870 and Modular Combat Shotgun.

M1014 - semi automatic 12-gauge shotgun.

Mossberg
590A1 12-gauge pump


===
Submachine Guns ===
Colt 9mm SMG - variant of the M16 chambered in 9×19mm Parabellum
Heckler & Koch
MP5


===
Machine Guns ===
M2HB - heavy machine gun chambered in .50 BMG used primarily as a secondary weapon on the M1 Abrams and other vehicles.

M240G - 7.62×51mm medium machine gun used by infantry and in the M1 Abrams, light vehicles, and helicopters.

Mk48
Mod 1 - 7.62×51mm light machine gun, uses by US MARSOC.

M249E4 - 5.56×45mm light machine gun, infantry support weapon.
Not replaced, but being supplanted by the  M27 IAR.

===
Hand Grenades ===
M67 Hand Grenade (Fragmentation)
AN-M14 Hand Grenade (Incendiary)
Mk
141 Mod 0 Hand Grenade "flash-bang"
AN-M18 Smoke grenade


===
Grenade Launchers ===
M203A1/A2 40 mm Rifle-Mounted Grenade Launcher
M320 Grenade Launcher Module
M32 MGL 40mm 6
shot Revolver type Grenade Launcher
MK19 40 mm
Automatic Grenade Launcher


===
Mortars ===
M224 60 mm Mortar
M252 81 mm Extended Range Mortar
M327
120 mm Expeditionary Fire Support System


===
Artillery ===
M777 155mm
Lightweight Howitzer
High Mobility Artillery Rocket System (HIMARS)


===
Shoulder-fired Missile and Rocket Launchers ===
M72 LAW
M202 FLASH
M136 AT4 Anti-Tank Weapon
MK153 Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW II)
FGM-148 Javelin Anti-Tank missile
BGM-71 Tube Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire Guided (TOW) Missile Weapon System
FIM-92 Stinger anti-aircraft missile


===
Vehicle-mounted Weapons ===
M240G 7.62 mm Medium Machine Gun
M2 .50 Caliber Machine Gun
M48 Turret-type .50 Caliber Machine Gun
MK19 40 mm Grenade Machine Gun
BGM-71 Tube Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire Guided (TOW) Missile Weapon System
M242
Bushmaster 25mm
Autocannon
M256A1
120 mm smoothbore gun


===
Aircraft-mounted Weapons ===
GunsGAU-12/U 25 mm Gatling gun
GAU-16/A .50 Caliber Machine gun
GAU-17/
A
7.62 mm automatic gun
GAU-21/
A .50 Caliber Machine gun
GAU-8
/
A Avenger 30mm Gatling cannon
M61A1
20 mm automatic cannon
M197
20 mm automatic cannonBombsCBU-99
Cluster Bomb
GBU-10
2000 lb laser-guided bomb
GBU-12 500 lb laser-guided bomb
GBU-16 1000 lb laser-guided bomb
MK82 series 500 lb bomb
MK83 series 1000 lb bomb
MK84 series 2000 lb bomb
Mk 77 incendiary
bombMissilesAGM-65 Maverick
AGM-84 Harpoon
AGM-88 HARM
AGM-114 Hellfire
AGM-154
Joint Standoff Weapon
AIM-7
Sparrow
AIM-9 Sidewinder
AIM-120
AMRAAM
Hydra 70
M260 70 mm Rocket Launcher
Advanced Precision Kill Weapon System


===
Other ===
M18A1
Claymore anti-personnel mine
M15 anti-tank mine
M19 anti-tank mine
M21 anti-tank mine
M58
Mine Clearing Line Charge (MICLIC)
Marine Corps Martial Arts Program (MCMAP)


===
Accessories ===
Advanced Combat Optical Gunsight (ACOG), recently renamed Rifle Combat Optic (RCO)
ITL MARS reflex sight
AN/PSQ-18 day/night grenade launcher sight
AN/PVS-10 night vision sight
AN/PVS-14 night vision sight
AN/PVS-17 night vision sight
AN/PVS-21 night vision sight
AN/PAS-13 thermal sight
AN/PAQ-4 IR laser sight
AN
/PEQ-2 IR laser sight
various suppressors (MARSOC and Reconnaissance units only)
various tactical lights
M2 tripod for light and medium machine guns
M122 tripod for light and medium machine guns
M3 tripod for heavy machine guns


==
Testing/limited use ==
Marines with MARSOC, Force Reconnaissance, and MEU(SOC)s occasionally use specialized weapons that the rest of the fleet does not.
In addition, some weapons are tested and evaluated in select units before acceptance and large-scale adoption.
In a few cases, older weapons are brought out of retirement for limited use.

M45A1 Close Quarter Battle Pistol - issued to MEU (SOC) forces
High Standard HDM (.22 LR) (USMC Force Recon, limited issue of 10 per company)
Heckler & Koch MP5-N  - MARSOC, Force Reconnaissance and SRT only
Multi-shot Accessory Underbarrel Launcher - in evaluation
Mk 18 CQBR - subcompact variant of the M4 carbine which replaces burst fire with fully automatic capabilities - Force Recon
FN SCAR - MARSOC
only
Mk 12 Special Purpose Rifle - MARSOC
only
Glock 19 - MARSOC


==
Retired ==
Bladed Weapons
M9 Bayonet
M7 Bayonet
M6 Bayonet
M5
Bayonet
Raider Stiletto
M1 Bayonet
M1942 Bayonet
M1917 Bayonet
M1905 Bayonet
Pistols
M1911
S&W Model 10
S&W Model 66
M1905 Marine
1873 Colt Single Action
Colt M1861 Navy
Colt 1851 Navy Revolver
Harper's Ferry Model 1805Rifles, Carbines, & Muskets
United States Marine Corps Squad Advanced Marksman Rifle (SAM-R)
Designated Marksman Rifle (DMR)
M16A1
/
M16A2
M14 Rifle
M1 Garand
M1917 Enfield
M1903 Springfield
Springfield Model 1892-99
M1895 Lee Navy
Springfield Model 1882
Short Rifle
M1872 Springfield
Spencer repeating rifle
Springfield Model 1863
Springfield Model 1861
1853
Enfield musket
Springfield Model 1855
M1819 Hall Rifle
Model 1816
Musket
Springfield Model 1812 Musket
Model 1795 Musket
M1/M2/M3 carbine
M50 Reising
Colt Model 733Submachine guns
Model of 1921 Thompson
Model of 1928 and M1928A1 Thompson
M50 and M55 Reising
M1 and
M1A1 Thompson
M3 and M3A1
Heckler & Koch MP5 (some variants)Machine guns
M1895 Colt–Browning machine gun
Hotchkiss M1909 Benét–
Mercié machine gun
M1917 Browning machine gun
M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle
M1919 Browning machine gun
M60
machine gunExplosives & Launchers
M61 hand grenade
Mk2 hand grenade
FGM-172
Predator Short-Range Assault Weapon (SRAW)
M79 grenade launcher
XM148 grenade launcher
M75 grenade launcher
M29 mortar
M19 mortar
M1 mortar
M2 mortar
M101 Howitzer
M102 Howitzer
M114 155
MM Howitzer
M59 Field Gun
M116 Howitzer
M67 Recoilless Rifle
M20 Recoilless Rifle
M47 Dragon Anti-tank Missile System
Bazooka Series Rocket Launcher
FIM-43
Redeye Anti-aircraft Missile
MIM-23
Hawk Anti-aircraft Missile
M2
FlamethrowerAircraft/vehicle-mountedM2/M3 cannon
M85
Machine Gun
M73/M219 Machine
GunOtherLinear
Infighting Neural Override Engagement (LINE)
Combat System
AN
/PVS-4 Night Vision Sight
AN/TVS-5 Night Vision Sight


==
See also ==
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
List of crew-served weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
Lists of weapons
List of firearms
U.S. Helicopter Armament Subsystems
Rubber duck (military)


==
References ==
This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Marine Corps.

==
External links ==
 Media related to Weapons of the United States Marine Corps at Wikimedia Commons
A spotting rifle or ranging gun is a small-calibre rifle used as a sighting device for artillery.
The ballistics of the spotting rifle are matched to those of the artillery piece, so that if a shot from the spotting rifle lands on the target, it may be assumed that the main weapon will also do so.

==
Anti-tank recoilless rifles ==
Spotting rifles were most commonly used with recoilless rifles as anti-tank artillery, from the 1950s to the 1970s.
These weapons are used for direct fire with line-of-sight visibility to the target.
As recoilless rifles have a relatively low muzzle velocity and thus a high trajectory, accurate ranging is important
An optical sight can measure the bearing to a target, but not easily or accurately measure the range.
Optical rangefinders were too large for lightweight portable artillery, and the later development of laser rangefinders would in turn make spotting rifles obsolete.

The British BAT series of 120 mm anti-tank recoilless rifles used a variety of sighting systems.
The original BAT used a purely optical sight.
The MoBAT, a lightweight and more portable version, had a 7.62×51mm NATO Bren light machine gun.
The final version, the WOMBAT, used the same American Remington M8C .50
in as the M40 recoilless rifle.
Both of these were used as gas-operated semi-automatic rifles.
The .50 was not, as often assumed, a development of the .50 M2 machine gun using the 12.7×99mm NATO cartridge, but was a shortened 12.7×76mm cartridge.
Where a vehicle, such as the M50 Ontos, used multiple barrels, spotting rifles were usually provided for each barrel so that each could be accurately boresighted to its own barrel.
The Ontos used six barrels with four spotting rifles; two without, to avoid making an already tall vehicle even higher.
This provision may have been over-generous, although it did also increase the magazine capacity available for repeated ranging shots.
Many photographs of the Ontos in service in Vietnam show it with only two of the spotting rifles installed in their mounts.
The Ontos also often carried only four or even two main gun tubes.

===
Recoilless rifles using spotting rifles ===
Davis gun
M40 recoilless rifle
M50 Ontos
Model 1968
Recoilless Gun
MoBAT
Type 60 Self-propelled 106 mm Recoilless Gun
WOMBAT


==
Rocket launchers ==
Perhaps the smallest weapons to use spotting rifles are man-portable shoulder-launched rocket launchers.

The British 94mm LAW 80 is a rocket launcher developed as a replacement for the LAW 66 and Carl Gustav to give a more powerful infantry anti-tank capability.
This uses a 9 mm rifle with a 5-round magazine and a particularly unusual design of ballistically matched cartridge.
This same spotting rifle (Mk 8 Mod 0) and round was later adopted for the US 83 mm Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW).
==
Tank main guns ==
A rare few tanks have used spotting rifles, termed a "ranging gun" for ranging their main gun.
This was a short-lived use, from the period in the 1950s when the increasingly powerful tank guns (and their reduced capacity for spare ammunition) encouraged a more carefully ranged first shot in the hope of an immediate kill, and the later development of laser rangefinders.
The British Centurion Mk 5/2 with its new 105mm L7 main gun introduced a ranging gun.
This was derived from the M2 Browning design, both the L6 variant of the gun and also its 12.7×99mm ammunition.
This ammunition was once again ballistically matched to the main gun.
As this was a rather higher velocity round than the recoilless rifles, the case was the same as the M2 and the rounds could be used in either weapon.
The enhanced tracer effect of the spotting round was sometimes used in an M2.
Mounted in the Centurion it was alongside another conventional co-axial machine gun, the ranging gun being the one in the mantlet closest to the main gun.

The ranging gun was considered a success on the Centurion and was fitted to several marks of it, including retrofitting to earlier models with the 84 mm gun.
The same ranging gun principle was later used for the 120mm gun of the Chieftain.
It was considered less successful with the more powerful gun, as the range for accurate ranging was limited to 2,600 yards — beyond this the tracer element burned out and the fall of shot could no longer be seen.
As the gun's own range with HESH could be up to 8,700 yards, this represented a serious limitation on performance.
Battle planning at this time also saw a need for combat at increasing ranges, from the 2,000 yards expected for the Centurion's vintage out to 3,000 yards and beyond.
As soon as they became available, the Chieftain rapidly adopted a laser rangefinder instead.

A later UK light tank using a ranging gun is the FV101 Scorpion, which uses a 7.62mm L43A1 machine gun.
This is mounted as a normal co-axial machine gun and may be used as such.
it is a development of the standard British L8 Tk MG, used on a number of AFVs and Artillery Pieces.
It has an additional barrel bearing that is used to mount the gun.
This bearing, rather than mounting by the receiver as for the L8, gives a more consistent point of impact between a cold and hot barrel, which is important for use when ranging.

==
References ==
Notes
BibliographyUser Handbook for the Gun, Equipment, 120mm BAT, L6 (WOMBAT).
Director of Infantry, Ministry of Defence.
1964.
WO Code 14202.

Jane's Weapon Systems.
Jane's.
1977.
The AT4 (also AT-4) is an 84-mm unguided, portable, single-shot recoilless smoothbore anti-tank weapon built in Sweden by Saab Bofors Dynamics (previously Bofors Anti-Armour Systems).
Saab has had considerable sales success with the AT4, making it one of the most common light anti-tank weapons in the world.

The AT4 is intended to give infantry units a means to destroy or disable armoured vehicles and fortifications, although it is generally ineffective against current modern main battle tanks (MBT).
The launcher and projectile are manufactured prepacked and issued as a single unit of ammunition, with the launcher discarded after a single use.

==
Development ==
The AT4 is a development of the 74-mm Pansarskott m/68 (Miniman), adopted by the Swedish Army in the late 1960s.
Like the m/68, the AT4 was designed by Förenade Fabriksverken (FFV) and manufactured at their facility at Zakrisdal, Karlstad, Sweden.
FFV began research in a replacement for the m/68 in 1976, deliberately designing an individual anti-armor weapon that would not be able to defeat the heavy armour protection of MBTs (main battle tanks) in frontal engagements, believing that to be counterproductive.
The AT4 was designed as a weapon to engage medium to light armoured vehicles from any direction, MBTs from the sides or rear, and as an assault weapon against buildings and fortifications.
FFV also had the design goal of a weapon that was simple to use, rugged, and far more accurate than previous individual antiarmor weapons against moving targets.
Another key requirement was that the AT4 not only be able to penetrate armour, but also have a devastating beyond-armour effect after penetration.
FFV and the Swedish Army began the first evaluation firings of the prototype AT4s in the spring of 1981 with 100 tested by early 1982.Even before the AT4 had been adopted by Sweden, it was entered into a US Army competition for a new anti-tank weapon mandated by Congress in 1982 when the FGR-17 Viper failed as a replacement for the M72 LAW.
Six weapons were tested in 1983 by the US Army: the British LAW 80, the German Armbrust, the French APILAS, the Norwegian M72E4 (an upgraded M72 LAW), the US Viper (for baseline comparison purposes) and the Swedish AT4.
The US Army reported to Congress in November 1983 that the FFV AT4 came the closest to meeting all the major requirements established to replace the M72 LAW, with the Armbrust coming in second.
Though very impressed with the simplicity and durability of the tested version of the AT4, the US Army saw some room for improvement, specifically the addition of rear and front bumpers on the launch tube and changes to the sights and slings.
After these changes, the AT4 was adopted by the US Army as the Lightweight Multipurpose Weapon M136.
The Swedish Army also recognized these improvements and subsequently adopted the Americanized version of the AT4 as the Pansarskott
m/86 (Pskott m/86), with the addition of a forward folding hand grip to help steady the AT4 when being aimed and fired.
The forward folding grip is the only difference between the AT4 adopted by Sweden and the US Army version.

Due to the urban combat conditions that US military forces faced regularly during the Iraq War, the US Army Close Combat Systems manager in charge of purchases of the AT4 suspended orders for the standard version of the AT4 and US military forces are now only ordering the AT4 CS (Confined Space) version.

==
Operation ==
The AT4 may be considered a disposable, low-cost alternative to a Carl Gustaf 8.4cm recoilless rifle.
The AT4 took many of its design features from the Carl Gustaf, which operates on the principle of a recoilless weapon, where the forward inertia of the projectile is balanced by the inertia of propellant gases ejecting from the rear of the barrel.
But unlike the Carl Gustaf, which uses a heavier and more expensive steel tube with rifling, the disposable AT4 design greatly reduces manufacturing costs by using a reinforced smoothbore fiberglass outer tube.
Being a disposable gun also allows for lighter and cheaper construction.
In a single-use disposable gun, the barrel only needs to be able to contain a single pressure spike when firing, when it can be disposed of, even if it is ruined, burnt-out and strained, unlike traditional guns which are required to survive many pressure spikes without failure and thus need to be strongly overbuilt and made of heat-proof materials.
Pressures are also kept quite low compared to many traditional guns.
This lightweight and thin barrel and low pressure, combined with the almost complete lack of recoil, means that relatively large projectiles (comparable to those found in mortars and artillery systems) can be utilised, which would otherwise be impossible in a man-portable weapon.

In the system originally developed by FFV for the Carl Gustaf, a plastic blowout plug is placed at the center rear of the shell casing containing the projectile and propellant, which itself is enclosed in the AT4 outer tube.
When the gases build up to the correct pressure level, the blowout plug disintegrates, allowing the proper amount of gases to be vented to the rear, balancing the propellant gases pushing the projectile forward.

The AT4 uses a unique method developed earlier by FFV and adopted for the AT4: the spring-loaded firing rod is located down the side of the outer tube, with the firing pin at the rear of the tube.
When released, the firing pin strikes a primer located in the side of the casing's rim.

The disadvantage of the recoilless design is that it creates a large back blast area behind the weapon, which can cause severe burns and overpressure injuries to friendly personnel in the vicinity of the user and sometimes even to the users themselves, especially in confined spaces.
The back blast may also reveal the user's position to the enemy.
The problem of back blast was solved with the AT4-CS (Confined Space) version, specially designed for urban warfare.
This version uses a saltwater countermass in the rear of the launcher to absorb the back blast; the resulting spray captures and dramatically slows down the pressure wave, allowing troops to fire from enclosed areas.
The AT4-CS version also reduced its muzzle velocity from the original 290 m/s to 220 m/s as part of its effort to be user-safe in a confined space, making the AT4-CS version more difficult to use as the drop is more pronounced.
The effectiveness of the HEAT warhead is not dependent on speed.
To fire, the gunner first removes the safety pin located at the rear of the tube, which unblocks the firing rod.
He then takes a firing position ensuring that no one is present in the back blast area.
If firing from the prone position, he must also place his legs well to the side to avoid burning himself.
Then the gunner moves back the front and rear sight covers, allowing the sights to pop up into their firing positions.
The AT4 has iron sights that were originally developed for the cancelled Viper, and are similar in concept and use to those on assault rifles.
He then removes the first of two safeties by moving the firing rod cocking lever (located on the left side) forward and then over the top to the right side.
The gunner takes aim, while at the same time holding down the red safety lever located in front of the cocking lever, and then fires by pressing forward the red firing button with his right thumb.
Both the red safety lever and the firing button must be pressed down at the same time to fire the AT4.
The red firing button has a similar resistance to the trigger pull of a rifle, so the gunner does not have to jab at the firing button, which could throw his aim off.

After firing, the AT4 is discarded.
Unlike the heavier Carl Gustaf, the AT4 outer tube is built to take the stress of just one firing; it is not reusable and cannot be reloaded.

The AT4 can mount an optical night sight on a removable fixture.
In US military use, the launcher can be fitted with the AN/PAQ-4C, AN/PEQ-2, or the AN/PAS-13 night sights.

The AT4 requires little training and is quite simple to use, making it suitable for general issue.
However, as the cost of each launcher makes regular live-fire training very expensive, practice versions exist that are identical in operation but fire reloadable 9×19mm or 20mm tracer ammunition.
Both practice cartridges are unique to their respective weapons, with their trajectory matched to that of the live round.
The 20mm version also has a recoilless weapon effect with the same high noise and back blast as the AT4 firing and is favoured by the Swedish army because of the added realism of the back blast as compared to the "plonk" sound of the 9mm round (similar to the sound of a finger tapping on an empty can).

==
Specifications ==
Length: 101.6 cm (40 in.)

Weight: 6.7 kg (14.77 pounds)
Bore
diameter:
84 mm
Maximum effective range: 300 metres (328 yards), although it has been used in excess of 500 meters (547 yards) for area fire.

Penetration: 420 mm (15.7 inches) of rolled homogeneous armour (RHA; also see below)
Time of flight (to 250 metres, or 273 yards): less than 1 second
Muzzle velocity: 290 metres (950 ft) per second
Operating temperature: −40 to +60 °C (−40 to +140 °F)
Ammunition: fin-stabilized projectile with HEAT warhead


==
Projectiles ==
There are several different projectiles for the AT4.
Note that because the AT4 is a one-shot weapon, projectiles are preloaded into the launcher tubes.

HEAT (High Explosive Anti-Tank)
The HEAT projectile can penetrate up to 420 mm (16.5 inches) of RHA with beyond-armour effect.
HEDP 502
(High Explosive Dual Purpose)
For use against bunkers, buildings, enemy personnel in the open and light armour.
The projectile can be set to detonate on impact or with a slightly delayed detonation.
The heavier nose cap allows for the HEDP projectile to either penetrate light walls or windows and then explode, or be "skipped" off the ground for an airburst.
For use against light armour, there is a smaller cone HEAT warhead with 150 mm (5.9 inches) of penetration against RHA.HP (High Penetration)
Extra high penetration ability (up to 500 mm to 600 mm (19.7 inches to 23.6 inches) of RHA.)AST
(Anti Structure Tandem-warheads)
Designed for urban warfare where a projectile heavier than the HEDP AT4 is needed.
This projectile combines a HEAT warhead with a shallow cone, which results in low penetration but produces a wide hole, with a follow-through high-blast warhead.
It has two settings: one for destroying bunkers and one for mouse-holing a building wall for combat entry.

ER
(Extended Range)
Anti-armor version with HEAT warhead that extends range from 300 m to 600 m.
HE (High Explosive)
High explosive anti-personnel weapon that can be set for impact or airburst detonation, with an effective range of up to 1,000 m.


==
Variants ==
M136 AT4
American version with modified launch tube bumpers, sights and slings.
AT8 (Bunker-Busting)
A version of the AT4 where the standard HEAT projectile is replaced with the bunker-busting warhead developed for the SMAW.
No orders were ever placed.
AT12-T
In the early 1990s, there were tests of a tandem charge 120-mm version (
Bofors AT 12-T) that would be able to penetrate the front armour of any modern main battle tank.
However, the project was cancelled due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the subsequent cuts in Western defence budgets.

==
Operators ==
Albania
Argentina:
Argentine Army and Argentine Marines.

Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Brazil
Canada:
JTF2
 Chile:
Chilean Marine Corps, Chilean Army
 Colombia
Croatia
Denmark:
Designated PVV M/95
(Panserværnsvåben Model 1995).

Dominican Republic
France: Designated ABL (Anti Blindé Lourd) by the French Army.

Georgia
Greece:
Used by Hellenic Navy Seals
Indonesia
Iraq:
The Iraqi Army was supplied with the AT4.

Ireland: Called the SRAAW
(Short Range Anti Armour Weapon) by the Irish Defence Forces.

Jaysh al-Islam (Captured from the Syrian Democratic Forces)
Latvia
 Lebanon: Roughly 1,000 pieces purchased.

Lithuania: Lithuanian Armed Forces.

Malaysia:
In Service with the Grup Gerak Khas.

Netherlands (Replaced by Pzf-3)
 Poland (limited use in Special Operations Forces and Air Mobile Forces)
 Sweden: Designated Pansarskott m/86.
Syrian Democratic Forces
Taiwan (Republic of China)
United Kingdom:
Small quantities of AT4 and HP projectiles purchased.

United States: Designated M136 AT4 in USMC and United States Army service, beginning in early 1987.
The AT4 was used in the US invasion of Panama, the War in Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf War, and the Iraq War.
Over 300,000 have been built locally, under license by ATK.

Venezuela:
The AT4 has been in the Venezuelan arsenal since the 1980s.
In 2009, it was reported that AT4s sold to Venezuela had been captured from FARC insurgents in Colombia, leading Colombia to accuse Venezuela of selling the weapons to the insurgents, and Venezuela reporting that they were stolen by a rebel attack on a Venezuelan position in 1995, thus heightening tensions between the two countries.

== See also ==
ALAC (Arma Leve Anticarro)
Alcotan-100
APILAS
B-300
Carl Gustaf 8.4cm recoilless rifle
there is some crossover with warhead types between the two systems.
Both are 84mm
DZJ-08
LAW 80
MARA (anti-tank weapon)
MATADOR
Panzerfaust 3
RPG-76
Komar
RPG-75
Urban Assault Weapon
M141 Bunker Defeat Munition
Kestrel


== References and notes ==


==
External links ==
Official site for the AT4, covering the different versions of AT4
Saab AT4 PDF Archived 19 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine
AT4 – Saab Bofors Dynamics video of various AT4 versions
AT4 Information Page – Modern Firearms
Swedish article on AT4 translated to English
M136 AT4 –
Global Security
U.S. Army field manual 3–23.25
Brazilian newspaper recorded a AT-4
at Rocinha slum (translated to English)
A particle-beam weapon uses a high-energy beam of atomic or subatomic particles to damage the target by disrupting its atomic and/or molecular structure.
A particle-beam weapon is a type of directed-energy weapon, which directs energy in a particular and focused direction using particles with minuscule mass.
Some particle-beam weapons have potential practical applications, e.g. as an antiballistic missile defense system for the United States and its cancelled Strategic Defense Initiative.
They have been known by myriad names: phasers, disruptors, particle accelerator guns, ion cannons, proton beams, lightning rays, rayguns, etc.

The concept of particle-beam weapons comes from sound scientific principles and experiments currently underway around the world.
One effective process to cause damage to or destroy a target is to simply overheat it until it is no longer operational.
However, after decades of R&D, particle-beam weapons are still very much at the research stage and it remains to be seen if or when they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons.

Particle accelerators are a well-developed technology used in scientific research for decades.
They use electromagnetic fields to accelerate and direct charged particles along a predetermined path, and electrostatic "lenses" to focus these streams for collisions.
The cathode ray tube in many twentieth-century televisions and computer monitors is a very simple type of particle accelerator.
More powerful versions include synchrotrons and cyclotrons used in nuclear research.
A particle-beam weapon is a weaponized version of this technology.
It accelerates charged particles (in most cases electrons, positrons, protons, or ionized atoms, but very advanced versions can accelerate other particles such as mercury nuclei) to near-light speed and then shoots them at a target.
These particles have tremendous kinetic energy which they impart to matter in the target, inducing near-instantaneous and catastrophic superheating at the surface, and when penetrating deeper, ionization effects which can be especially detrimental to electronics in the target.
However, high-power accelerators are extremely massive (sometimes in the order of kilometers, like the LHC), with highly constricted construction, operation and maintenance requirements, and thus unable to be weaponized using present or near-future technologies.

==
Beam generation ==
Charged particle beams diverge rapidly due to mutual repulsion, so neutral particle beams are more commonly proposed..
A neutral-particle-beam weapon ionizes atoms by either stripping an electron off of each atom, or by allowing each atom to capture an extra electron.
The charged particles are then accelerated, and neutralized again by adding or removing electrons afterwards.

Cyclotron particle accelerators, linear particle accelerators, and Synchrotron particle accelerators can accelerate positively charged hydrogen ions until their velocity approaches the speed of light, and each individual ion has a kinetic energy range of 100 MeV to 1000 MeV or more.
Then the resulting high energy protons can capture electrons from electron emitter electrodes, and be thus electrically neutralized.
This creates an electrically neutral beam of high energy hydrogen atoms, that can proceed in a straight line at near the speed of light to smash into its target and damage it.

The pulsed particle beam emitted by such a weapon may contain 1 gigajoule of kinetic energy or more.
The speed of a beam approaching that of light (299,792,458 m/s in a vacuum) in combination with the energy created by the weapon was thought to negate any realistic means of defending a target against the beam.
Target hardening through shielding or materials selection was thought to be impractical or ineffective in 1984, especially if the beam could be maintained at full power and precisely focused on the target.

==
Experiments ==
The U.S. Defense Strategic Defense Initiative put into development the technology of a neutral particle beam to be used as a weapon in outer space.
Neutral beam accelerator technology was developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory.
A prototype neutral hydrogen beam weapon was launched aboard a suborbital sounding rocket from White Sands Missile Range in July 1989 as part of the Beam Experiments Aboard Rocket (BEAR) project.
It reached a maximum altitude of 124 miles, and successfully operated in space for 4 minutes before returning to earth intact.
In 2006, the recovered experimental device was transferred from Los Alamos to the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC.

== See also ==
Raygun


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Beam Weapons
Almost Ready for Battle
Military science is the study of military processes, institutions, and behavior, along with the study of warfare, and the theory and application of organized coercive force.
It is mainly focused on theory, method, and practice of producing military capability in a manner consistent with national defense policy.
Military science serves to identify the strategic, political, economic, psychological, social, operational, technological, and tactical elements necessary to sustain relative advantage of military force; and to increase the likelihood and favorable outcomes of victory in peace or during a war.
Military scientists include theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and other military personnel.

Military personnel obtain weapons, equipment, and training to achieve specific strategic goals.
Military science is also used to establish enemy capability as part of technical intelligence.

In military history, military science had been used during the period of Industrial Revolution as a general term to refer to all matters of military theory and technology application as a single academic discipline, including that of the deployment and employment of troops in peacetime or in battle.

In military education, military science is often the name of the department in the education institution that administers officer candidate education.
However, this education usually focuses on the officer leadership training and basic information about employment of military theories, concepts, methods and systems, and graduates are not military scientists on completion of studies, but rather junior military officers.

==
History ==
Even until the Second World War, military science was written in English starting with capital letters, and was thought of as an academic discipline alongside Physics, Philosophy and the Medical Science.
In part this was due to the general mystique that accompanied education in a World where as late as the 1880s 75% of the European population was illiterate.
The ability by the officers to make complex calculations required for the equally complex "evolutions" of the troop movements in linear warfare that increasingly dominated the Renaissance and later history, and the introduction of the gunpowder weapons into the equation of warfare only added to the veritable arcana of building fortifications as it seemed to the average individual.

Until the early 19th century, one observer, a British veteran of the Napoleonic Wars, Major John Mitchell thought that it seemed nothing much had changed from the application of force on a battlefield since the days of the Greeks.
He suggested that this was primarily so because as Clausewitz suggested, "unlike in any other science or art, in war the object reacts".
Until this time, and even after the Franco-Prussian War, military science continued to be divided between the formal thinking of officers brought up in the "shadow" of Napoleonic Wars and younger officers like Ardant du Picq who tended to view fighting performance as rooted in the individual's and group psychology and suggested detailed analysis of this.
This set in motion the eventual fascination of the military organisations with application of quantitative and qualitative research to their theories of combat; the attempt to translate military thinking as philosophic concepts into concrete methods of combat.

Military implements, the supply of an army, its organization, tactics, and discipline, have constituted the elements of military science in all ages; but improvement in weapons and accoutrements appears to lead and control all the rest.
The breakthrough of sorts made by Clausewitz in suggesting eight principles on which such methods can be based, in Europe, for the first time presented an opportunity to largely remove the element of chance and error from command decision making process.
At this time emphasis was made on the Topography (including Trigonometry), Military art (Military science), Military history, Organisation of the Army in the field, Artillery and Science of Projectiles, Field fortifications and Permanent fortifications, Military legislation, Military administration and Manoeuvres.
The military science on which the model of German combat operations was built for the First World War remained largely unaltered from the Napoleonic model, but took into the consideration the vast improvements in the firepower and the ability to conduct "great battles of annihilation" through rapid concentration of force, strategic mobility, and the maintenance of the strategic offensive better known as the Cult of the offensive.
The key to this, and other modes of thinking about war remained analysis of military history and attempts to derive tangible lessons that could be replicated again with equal success on another battlefield as a sort of bloody laboratory of military science.
Few were bloodier than the fields of the Western Front between 1914 and 1918.
Fascinatingly the man who probably understood Clausewitz better than most, Marshal Foch would initially participate in events that nearly destroyed the French Army.
It is not however true to say that military theorists and commanders were suffering from some collective case of stupidity; quite the opposite is true.
Their analysis of military history convinced them that decisive and aggressive strategic offensive was the only doctrine of victory, and feared that overemphasis of firepower, and the resultant dependence on entrenchment would make this all but impossible, and leading to the battlefield stagnant in advantages of the defensive position, destroying troop morale and willingness to fight.
Because only the offensive could bring victory, lack of it, and not the firepower, was blamed for the defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in the Russo-Japanese War.
Foch thought that "In strategy as well as in tactics one
attacks".
In many ways military science was born as a result of the experiences of the Great War. "
Military implements" had changed armies beyond recognition with cavalry to virtually disappear in the next 20 years.
The "supply of an army" would become a science of logistics in the wake of massive armies, operations and troops that could fire ammunition faster than it could be produced, for the first time using vehicles that used the combustion engine, a watershed of change.
Military "organisation" would no longer be that of the linear warfare, but assault teams, and battalions that were becoming multi-skilled with introduction of machine gun and mortar, and for the first time forcing military commanders to think not only in terms of rank and file, but force structure.

Tactics changed too, with infantry for the first time segregated from the horse-mounted troops, and required to cooperate with tanks, aircraft and new artillery tactics.
Perception of military discipline too had changed.
Morale, despite strict disciplinarian attitudes, had cracked in all armies during the war, but best performing troops were found to be those where emphasis on discipline had been replaced with display of personal initiative and group cohesiveness such as that found in the Australian Corps during the Hundred Days Offensive.
The military sciences' analysis of military history that had failed European commanders was about to give way to a new military science, less conspicuous in appearance, but more aligned to the processes of science of testing and experimentation, the scientific method, and forever "wed" to the idea of the superiority of technology on the battlefield.

Currently military science still means many things to different organisations.
In the United Kingdom and much of the European Union the approach is to relate it closely to the civilian application and understanding.
,
for example Belgium's Royal Military Academy, military science remains an academic discipline, and is studied alongside Social Sciences, including such subjects as Humanitarian law.
The United States Department of Defense defines military science in terms of specific systems and operational requirements, and include among other areas civil defense and force structure.

==
Employment of military skills ==
In the first instance military science is concerned with who will participate in military operations, and what sets of skills and knowledge they will require to do so effectively and somewhat ingeniously.
===
Military organization ===

Develops optimal methods for the administration and organization of military units, as well as the military as a whole.

In addition, this area studies other associated aspects as mobilization/demobilization, and military government for areas recently conquered (or liberated) from enemy control.
===
Force structuring ===
Force structuring is the method by which personnel and the weapons and equipment they use are organized and trained for military operations, including combat.
Development of force structure in any country is based on strategic, operational, and tactical needs of the national defense policy, the identified threats to the country, and the technological capabilities of the threats and the armed forces.

Force structure development is guided by doctrinal considerations of strategic, operational and tactical deployment and employment of formations and units to territories, areas and zones where they are expected to perform their missions and tasks.
Force structuring applies to all Armed Services, but not to their supporting organisations such as those used for defense science research activities.

In the United States force structure is guided by the table of organization and equipment (TOE or TO&E).
The TOE is a document published by the U.S. Department of Defense which prescribes the organization, manning, and equipage of units from divisional size and down, but also including the headquarters of Corps and Armies.

Force structuring also provides information on the mission and capabilities of specific units, as well as the unit's current status in terms of posture and readiness.
A general TOE is applicable to a type of unit (for instance, infantry) rather than a specific unit (the 3rd Infantry Division).
In this way, all units of the same branch (such as Infantry) follow the same structural guidelines which allows for more efficient financing, training, and employment of like units operationally.

===
Military education and training ===
Studies the methodology and practices involved in training soldiers, NCOs (non-commissioned officers, i.e. sergeants and corporals), and officers.

It also extends this to training small and large units, both individually and in concert with one another for both the regular and reserve organizations.

Military training, especially for officers, also concerns itself with general education and political indoctrination of the armed forces.

==
Military concepts and methods ==
Much of capability development depends on the concepts which guide use of the armed forces and their weapons and equipment, and the methods employed in any given theatre of war or combat environment.

===
Military history ===
Military activity has been a constant process over thousands of years, and the essential tactics, strategy, and goals of military operations have been unchanging throughout history.
As an example, one notable maneuver is the double envelopment, considered to be the consummate military maneuver, first executed by Hannibal at the Battle of Cannae in 216 BCE, and later by Khalid ibn al-Walid at the Battle of Walaja in 633 CE.

Via the study of history, the military seeks to avoid past mistakes, and improve upon its current performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical parallels during battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned.
The main areas military history includes are the history of wars, battles, and combats, history of the military art, and history of each specific military service.

===
Military strategy and doctrines ===
Main articles:
Military strategy, Military doctrineMilitary strategy is in many ways the centerpiece of military science.
It studies the specifics of planning for, and engaging in combat, and attempts to reduce the many factors to a set of principles that govern all interactions of the field of battle.
In Europe these principles were first defined by Clausewitz in his Principles of War.
As such, it directs the planning and execution of battles, operations, and wars as a whole.
Two major systems prevail on the planet today.
Broadly speaking, these may be described as the "Western" system, and the "Russian" system.
Each system reflects and supports strengths and weakness in the underlying society.

Modern Western military art is composed primarily of an amalgam of French, German, British, and American systems.

The Russian system borrows from these systems as well, either through study, or personal observation in the form of invasion (Napoleon's War of 1812, and The Great Patriotic War), and form a unique product suited for the conditions practitioners of this system will encounter.

The system that is produced by the analysis provided by Military Art is known as doctrine.

Western military doctrine relies heavily on technology, the use of a well-trained and empowered NCO cadre, and superior information processing and dissemination to provide a level of battlefield awareness that opponents cannot match.
Its advantages are extreme flexibility, extreme lethality, and a focus on removing an opponent's C3I (command, communications, control, and intelligence) to paralyze and incapacitate rather than destroying their combat power directly (hopefully saving lives in the process).
Its drawbacks are high expense, a reliance on difficult-to-replace personnel, an enormous logistic train, and a difficulty in operating without high technology assets if depleted or destroyed.

Soviet military doctrine (and its descendants, in CIS countries) relies heavily on masses of machinery and troops, a highly educated (albeit very small) officer corps, and pre-planned missions.
Its advantages are that it does not require well educated troops, does not require a large logistic train, is under tight central control, and does not rely on a sophisticated C3I system after the initiation of a course of action.
Its disadvantages are inflexibility, a reliance on the shock effect of mass (with a resulting high cost in lives and material), and overall inability to exploit unexpected success or respond to unexpected loss.

Chinese military doctrine is currently in a state of flux as the People's Liberation Army is evaluating military trends of relevance to China.
Chinese military doctrine is influenced by a number of sources including an indigenous classical military tradition characterized by strategists such as Sun Tzu, Western and Soviet influences, as well as indigenous modern strategists such as Mao Zedong.
One distinctive characteristic of Chinese military science is that it places emphasis on the relationship between the military and society as well as viewing military force as merely one part of an overarching grand strategy.

Each system trains its officer corps in its philosophy regarding military art.

The differences in content and emphasis are illustrative.
The United States Army principles of war are defined in the U.S. Army Field Manual FM 100–5.
The Canadian Forces principles of war/military science are defined by Land Forces Doctrine and Training System (LFDTS) to focus on principles of command, principles of war, operational art and campaign planning, and scientific principles.

Russian Federation armed forces derive their principles of war predominantly from those developed during the existence of the Soviet Union.
These, although based significantly on the Second World War experience in conventional war fighting, have been substantially modified since the introduction of the nuclear arms into strategic considerations.

The Soviet–Afghan War and the First and Second Chechen Wars further modified the principles that Soviet theorists had divided into the operational art and tactics.
The very scientific approach to military science thinking in the Soviet union had been perceived as overly rigid at the tactical level, and had affected the training in the Russian Federation's much reduced forces to instil greater professionalism and initiative in the forces.

The military principles of war of the People's Liberation Army were loosely based on those of the Soviet Union until the 1980s when a significant shift begun to be seen in a more regionally-aware, and geographically-specific strategic, operational and tactical thinking in all services.
The PLA is currently influenced by three doctrinal schools which both conflict and complement each other: the People's war, the Regional war, and the Revolution in military affairs that led to substantial increase in the defense spending and rate of technological modernisation of the forces.

The differences in the specifics of Military art notwithstanding, Military science strives to provide an integrated picture of the chaos of battle, and illuminate basic insights that apply to all combatants, not just those who agree with your formulation of the principles.

===
Military geography ===
Military geography encompasses much more than simple protestations to take the high ground.
Military geography studies the obvious, the geography of theatres of war, but also the additional characteristics of politics, economics, and other natural features of locations of likely conflict (the political "landscape", for example).

As an example, the Soviet–Afghan War was predicated on the ability of the Soviet Union to not only successfully invade Afghanistan, but also to militarily and politically flank the Islamic Republic of Iran simultaneously.

==
Military systems ==
How effectively and efficiently militaries accomplish their operations, missions and tasks is closely related not only to the methods they use, but the equipment and weapons they use.

===
Military intelligence ===
Military intelligence supports the combat commanders' decision making process by providing intelligence analysis of available data from a wide range of sources.
To provide that informed analysis the commanders information requirements are identified and input to a process of gathering, analysis, protection, and dissemination of information about the operational environment, hostile, friendly and neutral forces and the civilian population in an area of combat operations, and broader area of interest.
Intelligence activities are conducted at all levels from tactical to strategic, in peacetime, the period of transition to war, and during the war.

Most militaries maintain a military intelligence capability to provide analytical and information collection personnel in both specialist units and from other arms and services.

Personnel selected for intelligence duties, whether specialist intelligence officers and enlisted soldiers or non-specialist assigned to intelligence may be selected for their analytical abilities and intelligence before receiving formal training.

Military intelligence serves to identify the threat, and provide information on understanding best methods and weapons to use in deterring or defeating it.

===
Military logistics ===
The art and science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance of military forces.
In its most comprehensive sense, it is those aspects or military operations that deal with the design, development, acquisition, storage, distribution, maintenance, evacuation, and disposition of material; the movement, evacuation, and hospitalization of personnel; the acquisition or construction, maintenance, operation, and disposition of facilities; and the acquisition or furnishing of services.

===
Military technology and equipment ===
Military technology is not just the study of various technologies and applicable physical sciences used to increase military power.

It may also extend to the study of production methods of military equipment, and ways to improve performance and reduce material and/or technological requirements for its production.

An example is the effort expended by Nazi Germany to produce artificial rubbers and fuels to reduce or eliminate their dependence on imported POL (petroleum, oil, and lubricants) and rubber supplies.

Military technology is unique only in its application, not in its use of basic scientific and technological achievements.

Because of the uniqueness of use, military technological studies strive to incorporate evolutionary, as well as the rare revolutionary technologies, into their proper place of military application.

==
Military and Society ==
This speciality examines the ways that military and society interact and shape each other.
The dynamic intersection where military and society meet is influenced by trends in society and the security environment.
This field of study can be linked to works by Clausewitz ("War is the continuation of politics by other means") and Sun Tzu ("If not in the interest of the state, do not act" ).
The contemporary multi and interdisciplinary field traces its origin to World War II and works by sociologists and political scientists.
This field of study includes "all aspects of relations between armed forces, as a political, social and economic institution, and the society, state or political ethnic movement of which they are a part".

Topics often included within the purview of military and society include: veterans, women in the military, military families, enlistment and retention, reserve forces, military and religion, military privatization, Civil-military relations, civil-military cooperation, military and popular culture, military and the media, military and disaster assistance, military and the environment and the blurring of military and police functions.

===
Recruitment and Retention ===
In an all volunteer military, the armed forces relies on market forces and careful recruiting to fill its ranks.
It is thus, very important to understand factors that motivate enlistment and reenlistment.
Service members must have the mental and physical ability to meet the challenges of military service and adapt to the military's values and culture.
Studies show that enlistment motivation generally incorporates both self-interest (pay) and non-market values like adventure, patriotism, and comradeship.

===
Veterans ===
The study veterans or members of the military who leave and return to the society is one of the most important subfields of the military and society field of study.
Veterans and their issues represent a microcosm of the field.
Military recruits represent inputs that flow from the community into the armed forces, veterans are outputs that leave the military and reenter society changed by their time as soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen.
Both society and veteran face multiple layers of adaptation and adjustment upon their reentry.
The definition of veteran is surprisingly fluid across countries.
In the US veteran’s status is established after a service member has completed a minimum period of service.
Australia requires deployment to a combat zone.
In the UK “Everyone who has performed military service for at least one day and drawn a day’s pay is termed a veteran.”

The study of veterans focuses much attention on their, sometimes, uneasy transition back to civilian society.

“Veterans must navigate a complex cultural transition when moving between environments,” and they can expect positive and negative transition outcomes.

Finding a good job and reestablishing a fulfilling family life is high on their resettlement agenda.
Military life is often violent and dangerous.
The trauma of combat often results in post-traumatic stress disorder as well as painful physical health challenges  which often lead to homelessness, suicide, drug and alcohol abuse and family dysfunction.

Society recognizes its responsibilities to veterans by offering programs and policies designed to redress these problems.
Veterans also exert an influence on society often through the political process.
For example, how do veterans vote and establish party affiliation?
During the 2004 presidential election veterans were basically bipartisan.

Veterans who fought in Croatia
’s war of independence voted for the nationalist parties in greater numbers.

===
Reserve Forces ===
Reserve Forces are service members who serve the armed forces on a part-time basis.
These men and women constitute a “reserve” force that countries rely on for their defense, disaster support, and some day-to-day operations etc.
In the United States an active reservist spends a weekend a month and two weeks a year in training.
The size of a county’s reserve force often depends on the type of recruitment method.
Nations with a volunteer force tend to have a lower reserve percentage.
Recently the role of the reserves has changed.

In many countries it [has] gone from a strategic force, largely static, to an operational force, largely dynamic.
After WWII, relatively large standing forces took care of most operational needs.
Reserves were held back strategically and deployed in times of emergency for example during the Cuban missile crisis.
Subsequently, the strategic and budget situation changed and as a result the active duty military began to rely on reserve force, particularly for combat support and combat service support.
Further large-scale military operation, routinely mobilize and deploy reservists Lomsky-Feder et al
(2008p.
594) introduced the metaphor of reserve forces as Transmigrants who live “betwixt and between the civilian and military worlds”.
This metaphor captures “their structural duality” and suggests dynamic nature of reservist experience as they navigate commitments to their often conflicting civilian and military worlds.

Given their greater likelihood of lengthy deployment, reservists face many of the same stresses as active duty but often with fewer support services.

==
University studies ==
Universities (or colleges) around the world also offer a degree(s) in military science:
Belgium:
Royal Military Academy
(Belgium)- BA Social and Military Science;
MA Social and Military ScienceIsrael:
Tel Aviv University – MA in Security.

Bar-Ilan University – MA in Military, Security and Intelligence.
Finland:
National Defence University – Bachelor, Master, and PhD in Military scienceFrance:
Sciences Po, Paris School of International Affairs - Master in International Security.
New Zealand:
Massey University, Centre for Defence and Security Studies – BA in Defence Studies.

Victoria University of Wellington – Centre for Strategic Studies – Master of Strategic Studies
(MSS).Slovenia:University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Studies – BA, MA and PhD in Defence studies; PhD in Military-Social SciencesUnited Kingdom:King's College London – MA in International Security and Strategy; MA, MPhil/PhD in Defence Studies
University of Hull – MA in Strategy and International Security
University of St Andrews - MLitt in Strategic StudiesSri LankaSri Lanka Military Academy - (Bachelor and Masters degree in Military Studies) Military training school Diyatalawa, Sri LankaSouth AfricaSouth African Military Academy / University of Stellenbosch - Bachelor of Military Science (BMil), Master of Military Science (MMil), MPhil in Security Management United States:
United States Air Force Academy – Major in Military and Strategic Studies; Minor in Nuclear Weapons and Strategy
United States Military Academy – Major in Defense and Strategic Studies
Hawaii Pacific University –
Major in Diplomacy and Military Studies
Missouri State University –
Minor in Military Studies


==
International Military Sciences or Studies Associations ==
There are many international associations with the core purpose of bringing scholars in the field of Military Science together.
Some are inter-disciplinary and have a broad scope, whilst others are confined and specialized focusing on more specific disciplines or subjects.
Some are integrated in larger scientific communities like the International Sociological Association (ISA) and the American Psychological Association (APA) where others have grown out of military institutions or individuals who have had a particular interest in areas of military science and are military, defense or armed forces oriented.
Some of these associations are:

American Psychological Association; Division 19: Society for Military Psychology (APA-Div19)
European Research Group on Military and Society
(ERGOMAS)
Inter-University Seminar on Armed Forces and Society (IUS)
International Congress on Soldiers
Physical Performance (ICSPP) 
International Military Testing Association (IMTA)
International Society of Military Sciences (ISMS)
International Sociological Association; RC01 Armed Forces and Conflict Resolution


==
Military studies journals ==
The following are notable journals in the field:


==
See also ==
Military doctrine
Military theory
War
List of basic military science and technology topics
List of military inventions
List of military writers


==
References ==
Notes
Bibliography


== External links ==
Military TechnologyUS Military/Government Texts
The Logic of Warfighting Experiments by Kass (CCRP, 2006)
Complexity, Networking, and Effects Based Approaches to Operations by Smith (CCRP, 2006)
Understanding Command and Control by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2006)
The Agile Organization by Atkinson and Moffat (CCRP, 2005)
Power to the Edge by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2003)
Network Centric Warfare by Alberts et al.
(
CCRP, 1999)
The sai (釵, lit. '
Hairpin') is a traditional Okinawan melee weapon used for stabbing and blocking.
It is used in ninjutsu and kobujutsu.
The basic form of the weapon is that of a sharp metal prong with two curved sideprongs (yoku) projecting from the handle (tsuka).
There are many different types of sai with varying prongs for trapping and blocking.

==
History ==
Before its arrival in Okinawa, the sai was already being used in other Asian countries including India, Thailand, China, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia.
It may have been brought to Okinawa from one or several of these places simultaneously.
Based on the Indian trisula, early evidence in the form of Japanese art shows that the chabang predates the sai's use in Okinawa and China.
The word trisula itself can refer to either a long or short-handled trident.
Because the trisula was created in South Asia, it is possible that the sai originated in India and spread along with Hinduism and Buddhism.
This is supported by the fact that the trisula is important as a Hindu-Buddhist symbol.

In Okinawa the sai was used by domestic police (ufuchiku) to arrest criminals and for crowd control.
Use of the sai in Japanese martial arts was improved in 1668 by Moto Chohei, an Okinawan prince.
The sai eventually reached Japan in the form of the jitte, which usually has only a single prong although some jitte have two prongs like a sai.
Both are stabbing weapons, used for striking and stabbing over different positions on the body.

==
Parts of the sai ==
Monouchi, the main prong of the sai, this can be round or faceted.

Yoku, the prong like side guards which are usually symmetrical but the manji design developed by Taira Shinken employs oppositely-facing yoku resembling the swastika (manji) from which it takes its name.

Tsume, the tip of the side guard (yoku).

Moto, the actual center point between the two side guards.

Tsuka, the handle of the sai.

The tsuka can be wrapped with different materials such as cord or ray skin (same) to provide a grip.
This tsuka is 5 inches (13 cm) long.

Tsukagashira, the butt end of the handle (tsuka).

Saki, the tip or point of the sai which is usually sharp.
==
Technique ==
The sai is typically used in pairs, with one in each hand.
Five kata are commonly taught, including two kihon kata.
The utility of the sai as a weapon is reflected in its distinctive shape.
It is a weapon used for fast stabs but it also has many defensive techniques.
The style includes a variety of strikes, blocks, parries and captures against attackers from all directions and height levels.
Use of the point, knuckle and main prong is emphasized, as well as rapid grip changes for multiple strikes and blocks.

There are several different ways of wielding the sai, which give it the versatility to be used both lethally and non-lethally.
One way to hold it is by gripping the handle with all of the fingers and pinching the thumb against the joint between the handle bar and the main prong.
This allows one to manipulate the sai so that it can be pressed against the forearm and also help avoid getting the thumb caught in the handle when blocking an attack.
The change is made by putting pressure on the thumbs and rotating the sai around until it is facing backwards and the index finger is aligned with the handle.

The knuckle end is good for concentrating the force of a punch, while the long prong can be wielded to thrust at enemies, to serve as a protection for a blow to the forearm, or to stab as one would use a common dagger.
In practice, some prefer to keep the index finger extended in alignment with the main prong regardless of whether the knuckle end or the main prong is exposed.
The finger may be straight or slightly curled.
Used in this way, the other fingers are kept on the main prong, with the thumb supporting the handle.

One technique commonly depicted is the use of one of a sai's hooks to entrap and lock an attacker's blade.
Some variations of sai have their hooks pointing inwards towards the main prong to facilitate this maneuver.
While this does not completely immobilize the attacker, it encumbers them in close quarters, especially if the defender can use twisting techniques to disarm the attacker.

The grips described above leverage the versatility of this implement as both an offensive and a defensive weapon.
Both grips facilitate flipping between the point and the knuckle being exposed while the sai is held in strong grip positions.

Because there is no morphological plural in Japanese, the word "sai" refers to either a single weapon or multiple.
Nicho sai refers to a kata that uses two sai, while sancho sai kata refers to kata using three sai.

== See also ==
Okinawan kobudō
Jitte
Tekpi
Nunti Bo
Trishula
Trident
Parrying dagger
Raphael
Elektra
Mileena


==
Further reading ==
Fumio Demura, Sai:
Karate Weapon of Self-Defense


==
References ==


==
External links ==
How to Use Sai Intructional Video
The AN/SEQ-3 Laser Weapon System or XN-1 LaWS is a laser weapon developed by the United States Navy.
The weapon was installed on USS Ponce for field testing in 2014.
In December 2014, the United States Navy reported that the LaWS system worked perfectly against low-end asymmetric threats, and that the commander of Ponce is authorized to use the system as a defensive weapon.

==
Purpose ==
The LaWS is a ship-defense system that has so far publicly engaged an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV or drone) and a simulated small-boat attacker.
LaWS uses an infrared beam from a solid-state laser array which can be tuned to high output to destroy the target or low output to warn or cripple the sensors of a target.
Among the advantages of this device versus projectile weapons is the low cost per shot, as each firing of the weapon requires only the minimal cost of generating the energetic pulse; by contrast ordnance for projectile weapons must be designed, manufactured, handled, transported and maintained, and takes up storage space.

The LaWS is designed to be used against low-end asymmetric threats.

Scalable power levels allow it to be used on low-power to dazzle a person's eye to
non-lethally make them turn away from a threatening posture, and increase to 30 thousand watts (30 kW) to fry sensors, burn out motors, and detonate explosive materials.

Against a vital point on small UAVs, one can be shot down in as little as two seconds.

When facing small boats, the laser would target a craft's motor to disable it and make it "dead in the water," then repeating this against others in rapid succession, requiring only a few seconds of firing per boat.

Targeting the platform is more effective than individual crewmembers, although the LaWS is accurate enough to target explosive rockets if on board, whose detonations could kill the operators.
Against a larger aircraft like a helicopter, LaWS can burn through some vital components to cause it to fall and crash.

==
History ==
In 2010, Kratos Defense & Security Solutions was awarded an $11 million contract to support the Naval Surface Warfare Center (NSWC) in the development of LaWS for the U.S. Navy's Directed Energy and Electric Weapon Systems (DE&EWS) program.
The May 2012 NSWC test used a close-in weapon control system to enable the beam director to track an unmanned aerial vehicle target.
The LaWS was to be installed on USS Ponce in summer 2014 for a 12-month trial deployment.

The Navy spent about $40 million over the past six years on research, development, and testing of the laser weapon.

It is directed to targets by the Phalanx CIWS radar.
With tests going well, the Navy expected to deploy a laser weapon operationally between 2017 and 2021 with an effective range of 1 mi (1.6 km; 0.87 nmi).
The exact level of power the LaWS will use is unknown but estimated between 15–50 kW for engaging small aircraft and high-speed boats.

Directed-energy weapons are being pursued for economic reasons, as they can be fired for as little as one dollar per shot, while conventional gun rounds and missiles can cost thousands of dollars each.

The Navy has a history of testing energy weapons, including megawatt chemical lasers in the 1980s.

Their chemicals were found to be too hazardous for shipboard use, so they turned to less powerful fiber solid-state lasers.

Other types can include slab solid state and free electron lasers.
The LaWS benefitted from commercial laser developments, with the system basically being six welding lasers "strapped together"
that, although they don't become a single beam, all converge on the target at the same time.

It generates 33 kW in testing, with follow-on deployable weapons generating 60–100 kW mounted on a Littoral Combat Ship or Arleigh Burke-class destroyer to destroy fast-attack boats, drones, manned aircraft, and anti-ship cruise missiles out to a few miles.
In the short term, the LaWS will act as a short-range, self-defense system against drones and boats, while more powerful lasers in the future should have enough power to destroy anti-ship missiles; Navy slab lasers have been tested at 105 kW with increases to 300 kW planned.

Laser weapons like the LaWS are meant to complement other missile and gun-based defense systems rather than replace them.

While lasers are significantly cheaper and have virtually unlimited magazines, their beams can be disrupted by atmospheric and weather conditions (especially when operating at the ocean's surface) and are restricted to line-of-sight firing to continuously keep the beam on target.

More conventional systems will remain in place for larger and longer-range targets that require the use of kinetic defense.

===
Deployment ===
The LaWS was deployed on Ponce in late August 2014 to the Persian Gulf with the U.S. 5th Fleet.
The deployment is to test the feasibility of a laser weapon in a maritime environment against heat, humidity, dust, and salt water and to see how much power is used.

The system has scalable power levels to be able to fire a non-lethal beam to dazzle a suspect vessel, and fire stronger beams to physically destroy a target; range is classified.

Although neighboring Iran has threatened to block the Strait of Hormuz out of the Gulf using small boat swarms that the LaWS is able to counter, it was not designed or deployed specifically to be used against any one particular country.
In September 2014, the LaWS was declared an operational asset, so the ship commander has permission to use it for self-defense.

Humans are not a target of the weapon under stipulations of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons, but targets do include UAVs, helicopters, and fast patrol craft.

Rules of engagement have been developed for its use, but details have not been released, although the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons Rules of Engagement (ROE) prohibit using laser weapons against humans.
The Navy has released video of the LaWS on deployment disabling a ScanEagle UAV, detonating a rocket propelled grenade, and burning out the engine of a rigid hull inflatable boat.

Officials said it is working beyond expectations.
Compared to hundreds of thousands or millions of dollars for a missile, one laser shot costs only 59 cents.

Composed of commercial laser components and proprietary Navy software, it is powered and cooled by a "skid" through a diesel generator, separate from the ship's electrical systems, giving greater efficiency relative to power provided of 35 percent.

Mounted on Ponce's superstructure above the bridge, its powerful optics are also useful as a surveillance tool that can detect objects at unspecified but "tactically significant ranges"; sailors have equated its surveillance abilities to having the Hubble telescope at sea.

Sailors are using it for targeting and training daily, whether to disable or destroy test targets or for potential target identification.

The system is operated through a flat screen monitor and a gaming system-like controller integrated into the ship's combat system, so anyone with experience playing common video games can operate the weapon.
It has functioned well against adverse weather, and is able to work in high humidity and after a dust storm.
However, the system is not expected to work during harsh sandstorms and has not been tested in such conditions because "it didn't make much sense to", but threats would also not be expected to be operational under the same conditions.

Deployments on other ships are being examined and although the LaWS was planned to remain deployed for one year, it performed so well that fleet leadership decided to keep it on Ponce as long as it was at sea.
Following a review of several ship classes to determine which had available space, power, and cooling, it was decided that after Ponce's planned decommissioning in 2018, the LaWS will be moved to the new amphibious transport dock ship USS Portland (LPD-27) for indefinite testing.
It will utilise the space and power connections reserved for its vertical launching system to house the LaWS power and control modules while the laser itself will be bolted to the deck.
Because the installation will be only a trial, LaWS will not be integrated into the ship's warfare system.
In January 2018, the Navy announced a $150 million contract with Lockheed Martin for the production of two more LaWS units to be delivered in 2020; one will be fitted to USS Arleigh Burke (DDG-51) while the other will be used for land-based testing.
Further contract options could bring its value to $942.8 million.

== See also ==
Laser weapon
Iron Beam
Tactical High Energy Laser
Peresvet (laser weapon)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Laser test on drone on YouTube
This is a list of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces currently in service.

==
Individual equipment ==


==
Small arms ==


==
Artillery ==


== Vehicles ==


==
Unmanned vehicles ==


==
Future equipment ==


==
Future vehicles ==


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
GlobalSecurity
Warfare.be Russian Military Analysis
(Archived 18 May 2016)
Russian Army Military equipment and vehicles of Russia on armyrecognition.com
ЦАМТО /
Новости / Валерий Герасимов:
за
пятилетний период принято
на
вооружение более
300 новых образцов
ВиВТ
World War III (WWIII or WW3) and the Third World War are names given to a hypothetical third worldwide large-scale military conflict subsequent to World War I and II.
The term has been in use since at least as early as 1941.
Some have applied it loosely to refer to limited or smaller conflicts such as the Cold War or the War on Terror, while others assumed that such a conflict would surpass prior world wars both in its scope and in its destructive impact.
Due to the development and use of nuclear weapons near the end of World War II and their subsequent acquisition and deployment by many countries, the potential risk of a nuclear devastation of Earth's civilization and life is a common theme in speculations about a Third World War.
Another major concern is that biological warfare could cause a very large number of casualties, either intentionally or inadvertently by an accidental release of a biological agent, the unexpected mutation of an agent, or its adaptation to other species after use.
Large-scale apocalyptic events like these, caused by advanced technology used for destruction, could potentially make the Earth's surface uninhabitable.

Prior to the beginning of the Second World War, the First World War (1914–1918) was believed to have been "the war to end all wars", as it was popularly believed that never again could there possibly be a global conflict of such magnitude.
During the interwar period, WWI was typically referred to simply as "The Great War".
The outbreak of World War II in 1939 disproved the hope that mankind might have already "outgrown" the need for such widespread global wars.

With the advent of the Cold War in 1945 and with the spread of nuclear weapons technology to the Soviet Union, the possibility of a third global conflict became more plausible.
During the Cold War years, the possibility of a Third World War was anticipated and planned for by military and civil authorities in many countries.
Scenarios ranged from conventional warfare to limited or total nuclear warfare.
At the height of the Cold War, the doctrine of Mutually Assured Destruction ("MAD") had been developed, in which determined an all-out nuclear confrontation would cause the annihilation of all of the states involved in the confrontation.
The potential absolute destruction of the human race may have contributed to the ability of both American and Soviet leaders to avoid such a scenario.

==
Origin of the term ==


===
Time magazine ===
Time magazine was an early adopter, if not originator, of the term "World War III".
The first usage appears in its 3 November 1941 issue (preceding the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941) under its "National Affairs" section and entitled "World War III?"
about Nazi refugee Dr. Hermann Rauschning, who had just arrived in the United States.
In its 22 March 1943, issue under its "Foreign News" section, Time reused the same title "World War III?"
with regard to statements by then-U.S. Vice President Henry A. Wallace: "We shall decide some time in 1943 or 1944 ... whether to plant the seeds of World War III.
"
Time continued to entitle with or mention in stories the term "World War III" for the rest of the decade (and onwards): 1944, 1945, 1946 ("bacterial warfare"), 1947, and 1948.
(
Time persists in using this term, for example, in a 2015 book review entitled
"This Is What World War III Will Look Like".)
==
Military plans ==
Military planners have been war gaming various scenarios, preparing for the worst, since the early days of the Cold War.
Some of those plans are now out of date and have been partially or fully declassified.

===
Operation Unthinkable ===
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was concerned that, with the enormous size of Soviet forces deployed in Europe at the end of WWII and the unreliability of the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, there was a serious threat to Western Europe.
In April–May 1945, the British Armed Forces developed Operation Unthinkable, thought to be the first scenario of the Third World War.
Its primary goal was "to impose upon Russia the will of the United States and the British Empire".
The plan was rejected by the British Chiefs of Staff Committee as militarily unfeasible.
===
Operation Dropshot ===
"Operation Dropshot" was the 1950s United States contingency plan for a possible nuclear and conventional war with the Soviet Union in the Western European and Asian theaters.
Although the scenario made use of nuclear weapons, they were not expected to play a decisive role.

At the time the US nuclear arsenal was limited in size, based mostly in the United States, and depended on bombers for delivery.
"
Dropshot" included mission profiles that would have used 300 nuclear bombs and 29,000 high-explosive bombs on 200 targets in 100 cities and towns to wipe out 85% of the Soviet Union's industrial potential at a single stroke.
Between 75 and 100 of the 300 nuclear weapons were targeted to destroy Soviet combat aircraft on the ground.

The scenario was devised prior to the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles.
It was also devised before U.S. President John F. Kennedy and his Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara changed the US Nuclear War plan from the 'city killing' countervalue strike plan to a "counterforce" plan (targeted more at military forces).
Nuclear weapons at this time were not accurate enough to hit a naval base without destroying the city adjacent to it, so the aim in using them was to destroy the enemy industrial capacity in an effort to cripple their war economy.

===
Exercises Grand Slam, Longstep, and Mainbrace ===
In January 1950, the North Atlantic Council approved NATO's military strategy of containment.
NATO military planning took on a renewed urgency following the outbreak of the Korean War in the early 1950s, prompting NATO to establish a "force under a centralised command, adequate to deter aggression and to ensure the defence of Western Europe".
Allied Command Europe was established under General of the Army Dwight D. Eisenhower, US Army, on 2 April 1951.
The Western Union Defence Organization had previously carried out Exercise Verity, a 1949 multilateral exercise involving naval air strikes and submarine attacks.

Exercise Mainbrace brought together 200 ships and over 50,000 personnel to practice the defence of Denmark and Norway from Soviet attack in 1952.
It was the first major NATO exercise.
The exercise was jointly commanded by Supreme Allied Commander Atlantic Admiral Lynde D. McCormick, USN, and Supreme Allied Commander Europe General Matthew B. Ridgeway, US Army, during the autumn of 1952.

The United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Netherlands, and Belgium all participated.

Exercises Grand Slam and Longstep
were naval exercises held in the Mediterranean Sea during 1952 to practice dislodging an enemy occupying force and amphibious assault.
It involved over 170 warships and 700 aircraft under the overall command of Admiral Robert B. Carney.
The overall exercise commander, Admiral Carney summarized the accomplishments of Exercise Grand Slam by stating: "We have demonstrated that the senior commanders of all four powers can successfully take charge of a mixed task force and handle it effectively as a working unit.
"The
Soviet Union called the exercises "war-like acts" by NATO, with particular reference to the participation of Norway and Denmark, and prepared for its own military maneuvers in the Soviet Zone.

===
Exercise Strikeback ===
This was a major NATO naval exercise held in 1957, simulating a response to an all-out Soviet attack on NATO.
The exercise involved over 200 warships, 650 aircraft, and 75,000 personnel from the United States Navy, the United Kingdom's Royal Navy, the Royal Canadian Navy, the French Navy, the Royal Netherlands Navy, and the Royal Norwegian Navy.
As the largest peacetime naval operation up to that time, Exercise Strikeback was characterized by military analyst Hanson W. Baldwin of The New York Times as "constituting the strongest striking fleet assembled since World War II".
===
Exercise Reforger ===
Exercise Reforger (from return of forces to Germany) was an annual exercise conducted, during the Cold War, by NATO.
The exercise was intended to ensure that NATO had the ability to quickly deploy forces to West Germany in the event of a conflict with the Warsaw Pact.

The Warsaw Pact outnumbered NATO throughout the Cold War in conventional forces, especially armor.
Therefore, in the event of a Soviet invasion, in order not to resort to tactical nuclear strikes, NATO forces holding the line against a Warsaw Pact armored spearhead would have to be quickly resupplied and replaced.
Most of this support would have come across the Atlantic from North America.

Reforger was not merely a show of force—in the event of a conflict, it would be the actual plan to strengthen the NATO presence in Europe.
In that instance, it would have been referred to as Operation Reforger.
Important components in Reforger included the Military Airlift Command, the Military Sealift Command, and the Civil Reserve Air Fleet.

===
Seven Days to the River Rhine ===
Seven Days to the River Rhine was a top-secret military simulation exercise developed in 1979 by the Warsaw Pact.
It started with the assumption that NATO would launch a nuclear attack on the Vistula river valley in a first-strike scenario, which would result in as many as two million Polish civilian casualties.
In response, a Soviet counter-strike would be carried out against West Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands and Denmark, with Warsaw Pact forces invading West Germany and aiming to stop at the River Rhine by the seventh day.
Other USSR plans stopped only upon reaching the French border on day nine.
Individual Warsaw Pact states were only assigned their own subpart of the strategic picture; in this case, the Polish forces were only expected to go as far as Germany.
The Seven Days to the Rhine plan envisioned that Poland and Germany would be largely destroyed by nuclear exchanges, and that large numbers of troops would die of radiation sickness.
It was estimated that NATO would fire nuclear weapons behind the advancing Soviet lines to cut off their supply lines and thus blunt their advance.
While this plan assumed that NATO would use nuclear weapons to push back any Warsaw Pact invasion, it did not include nuclear strikes on France or the United Kingdom.
Newspapers speculated when this plan was declassified, that France and the UK were not to be hit in an effort to get them to withhold use of their own nuclear weapons.

===
Exercise
Able Archer ===
Exercise
Able Archer was an annual exercise by the U.S. European Command that practised command and control procedures, with emphasis on the transition from solely conventional operations to chemical, nuclear, and conventional operations during a time of war.

"Able Archer 83" was a five-day North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
command post exercise starting on 7 November 1983, that spanned Western Europe, centered on the Supreme Headquarters
Allied Powers Europe
(SHAPE) Headquarters in Casteau, north of the city of Mons.
Able Archer exercises simulated a period of conflict escalation, culminating in a coordinated nuclear attack.
The realistic nature of the 1983 exercise, coupled with deteriorating relations between the United States and the Soviet Union and the anticipated arrival of strategic Pershing II nuclear missiles in Europe, led some members of the Soviet Politburo and military to believe that Able Archer 83 was a ruse of war, obscuring preparations for a genuine nuclear first strike.
In response, the Soviets readied their nuclear forces and placed air units in East Germany and Poland on alert.

This "1983 war scare" is considered by many historians to be the closest the world has come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962.
The threat of nuclear war ended with the conclusion of the exercise on 11 November, however.
===
Strategic Defense Initiative ===
The Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) was proposed by U.S. President Ronald Reagan on 23 March 1983.
In the latter part of his presidency, numerous factors (which included watching the 1983 movie The Day After and hearing through a Soviet defector that Able Archer 83 almost triggered a Russian first strike) had turned Ronald Reagan against the concept of winnable nuclear war, and he began to see nuclear weapons as more of a "wild card" than a strategic deterrent.
Although he later believed in disarmament treaties slowly blunting the danger of nuclear weaponry by reducing their number and alert status, he also believed a technological solution might allow incoming ICBMs to be shot down, thus making the US invulnerable to a first strike.
However, the USSR saw the SDI concept as a major threat, since a unilateral deployment of the system would allow the US to launch a massive first strike on the Soviet Union without any fear of retaliation.

The SDI concept was to use ground-based and space-based systems to protect the United States from attack by strategic nuclear ballistic missiles.
The initiative focused on strategic defense rather than the prior strategic offense doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction (MAD).
The Strategic Defense Initiative Organization (SDIO) was set up in 1984 within the United States Department of Defense to oversee the Strategic Defense Initiative.

===
NATO nuclear sharing ===
NATO operational plans for a Third World War have involved NATO allies who do not have their own nuclear weapons, using nuclear weapons supplied by the United States as part of a general NATO war plan, under the direction of NATO's Supreme Allied Commander.

Of the three nuclear powers in NATO (France, the United Kingdom, and the United States)
only the United States has provided weapons for nuclear sharing.
As of November 2009, Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands and Turkey are still hosting US nuclear weapons as part of NATO's nuclear sharing policy.
Canada hosted weapons until 1984, and Greece until 2001.
The United Kingdom also received US tactical nuclear weapons such as nuclear artillery and Lance missiles until 1992, despite the UK being a nuclear weapons state in its own right; these were mainly deployed in Germany.

In peacetime, the nuclear weapons stored in non-nuclear countries are guarded by US airmen though previously some artillery and missile systems were guarded by US Army soldiers; the codes required for detonating them are under American control.
In case of war, the weapons are to be mounted on the participating countries' warplanes.
The weapons are under custody and control of USAF Munitions Support Squadrons co-located on NATO main operating bases who work together with the host nation forces.
As of 2005, 180 tactical B61 nuclear bombs of the 480 US nuclear weapons believed to be deployed in Europe fall under the nuclear sharing arrangement.
The weapons are stored within a vault in hardened aircraft shelters, using the USAF WS3 Weapon Storage and Security System.
The delivery warplanes used are F-16 Fighting Falcons and Panavia Tornados.

==
Historical close calls ==
With the initiation of the Cold War arms race in the 1950s, an apocalyptic war between the United States and the Soviet Union became a real possibility.
During the Cold War era (1947–1991), a number of military events have been described as having come quite close to potentially triggering World War III.

===
Korean War: 25 June 1950 – 27 July 1953 ===
The Korean War was a war between two coalitions fighting for control over the Korean Peninsula: a communist coalition including North Korea, China and the Soviet Union, and a capitalist coalition including South Korea, the United States and the United Nations Command.
Many then believed that the conflict was likely to soon escalate into a full-scale war between the three countries, the US, the USSR, and China.
CBS war correspondent Bill Downs wrote in 1951 that, "To my mind, the answer is: Yes, Korea is the beginning of World War III.
The brilliant landings at Inchon and the cooperative efforts of the American armed forces with the United Nations Allies have won us a victory in Korea.
But this is only the first battle in a major international struggle which now is engulfing the Far East and the entire world."
Downs afterwards repeated this belief on ABC Evening News while reporting on the USS Pueblo incident in 1968.

===
Berlin Crisis: 4 June – 9 November 1961 ===
The Berlin Crisis of 1961 was a political-military confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union at Checkpoint Charlie with both a number of American and Soviet tanks and troops at stand off at each other only 100 yards on either side of the checkpoint.
The reason behind the confrontation was about the occupational status of the German capital city, Berlin, and of post–World War II Germany.
The Berlin Crisis started when the USSR launched an ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of all armed forces from Berlin, including the Western armed forces in West Berlin.
The crisis culminated in the city's de facto partition with the East German erection of the Berlin Wall.
This stand-off ended peacefully on 28 October following a US-Soviet understanding to withdraw tanks and reduce tensions.

===
Cuban Missile Crisis:
15–28 October 1962 ===
The Cuban Missile Crisis: a confrontation on the stationing of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, in response to the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion, is considered as having been the closest to a nuclear exchange, which could have precipitated a Third World War.
The crisis peaked on 27 October, with three separate major incidents occurring on the same day, all of these incidents having been initiated by the US military.

The "Arkhipov save" incident occurred when a Soviet submarine nearly launched a nuclear-tipped torpedo in response to having been targeted by American naval depth charges in international waters, with the Soviet nuclear launch response only having being prevented by Soviet Navy executive officer Vasily Arkhipov.

The shooting down of a Lockheed U-2 spy plane piloted by Rudolf Anderson while violating Cuban airspace.

The near interception of another U-2 that had somehow managed to stray into Soviet airspace over Siberia, which airspace violation nearly caused the Soviets to believe that this might be the vanguard of a US aerial bombardment.
Despite what many believe to be the closest the world has come to a nuclear conflict, throughout the entire standoff, the Doomsday Clock, which is run by the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists to estimate how close the end of the world, or doomsday, is, with midnight being the apocalypse, stayed at a relatively stable seven minutes to midnight.
This has been explained as being due to the brevity of the crisis, since the clock monitored more long term factors such as leadership of countries, conflicts, wars, and political upheavals, as well as societies reactions to said factors.

The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists now credits the political developments resulting from the Cuban Missile Crisis with having actually enhanced global stability.
The Bulletin posits that future crises and occasions that might otherwise escalate, were rendered as more stable due to two major factors: 

A Washington to Moscow direct telephone line, resulted from the communication trouble between the White House and the Kremlin during the crisis, giving the leaders of the two largest nuclear powers the ability to contact each other in real time, rather than sending written messages that needed to be translated and wired, which had dragged out conversations in which seconds could have potentially prevented a nuclear exchange.

The second factor was caused in part due to the worldwide reaction to how close the US and USSR had come to the brink of World War III during the standoff.
As the public began to more closely monitor topics involving nuclear weapons, and therefore to rally support for the cause of non-proliferation, the 1963 test ban treaty was signed.
To date this treaty has been signed by 126 total nations, with the most notable exceptions being France and China.
Both of these countries were still in the relative beginning stages of their nuclear programs at the time of the original treaty signing, and both sought nuclear capabilities independent of their allies.
This Test Ban Treaty prevented the testing of nuclear ordnance that detonated in the atmosphere, limiting testing to below ground and under water, decreasing fallout and effects on the environment, and subsequently caused the Doomsday Clock to decrease by five minutes, to arrive at a total of twelve minutes to midnight.
Up until this point, over 1000 nuclear bombs had been detonated, and concerns over both long and short term affects to the planet became increasingly more worrisome to scientists.

=== Sino-Soviet border conflicts ===
The Sino-Soviet border conflict was a seven-month undeclared military conflict between the Soviet Union and China at the height of the Sino-Soviet split in 1969.
The most serious of these border clashes, which brought the world's two largest communist states to the brink of war, occurred in March 1969 in the vicinity of Zhenbao (Damansky) Island on the Ussuri (Wusuli) River, near Manchuria.

The conflict resulted in a ceasefire, with a return to the status quo.
Critics point out that the Chinese attack on Zhenbao was to deter any potential future Soviet invasions; that by killing some Soviets, China demonstrated that it could not be 'bullied'; and that Mao wanted to teach them 'a bitter lesson'.

China's relations with the USSR remained sour after the conflict, despite the border talks, which began in 1969 and continued inconclusively for a decade.
Domestically, the threat of war caused by the border clashes inaugurated a new stage in the Cultural Revolution; that of China's thorough militarization.
The 9th National Congress of the Communist Party of China, held in the aftermath of the Zhenbao Island incident, confirmed Defense Minister Lin Biao as Mao's heir apparent.

Following the events of 1969, the Soviet Union further increased its forces along the Sino-Soviet border, and in the Mongolian People's Republic.

===
Bangladesh liberation War of 1971 ===
The Bangladesh Liberation War was a military confrontation between Bangladeshi nationalist forces called Mukti Bahini and Pakistan that occurred in East Pakistan as a war independence.
The war began with the Bangladeshi declaration of independence on 26th March, following the Operation Searchlight by the Pakistan armed forces.

The preemptive aerial strikes on 11 Indian Air Force stations by Pakistan led to the commencement of hostilities with India and India's entry into the war of independence in East Pakistan on the side of Bengali nationalist forces.

The Soviet Union sympathised with the East Pakistanis, and supported the Indian Army and Mukti Bahini's incursion against Pakistan during the war, in a broader view of recognising that the succession of East Pakistan as Independent Bangladesh would weaken the position of its rivals—the United States and China.
The Soviet Union gave assurances to India that if a confrontation with the United States or China developed, it would take counter-measures.
This assurance was enshrined in the Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation signed in August 1971.

The United States stood with Pakistan by supporting it morally, politically, economically and materially when U.S. President Richard Nixon and his Secretary of State Henry Kissinger refused to use rhetoric in a hopeless attempt to intervene in a large civil war.
The U.S. establishment perceived to the impression that they needed Pakistan to help stop Soviet influence in South Asia in an informal alliance with India.
Nixon feared that an Indian invasion of Pakistan would mean total Soviet domination of the region, and that it would seriously undermine the global position of the United States and the regional position of America's new tactical ally, China.
Nixon encouraged Jordan and Iran to send military supplies to Pakistan, while also encouraging China to increase its arms supplies to Pakistan, but all supplies were very limited.
The Nixon administration also ignored reports it received of the "genocidal" activities of the Pakistani Armed Forces in East Pakistan, most notably the Blood telegram, and this prompted widespread criticism and condemnation—both by the United States Congress and in the international press.

Then United States Ambassador to the United Nations, George H. W. Bush, introduced a resolution in the United Nations Security Council calling for a cease-fire and the withdrawal of armed forces by India and Pakistan.
However, it was vetoed by the Soviet Union, and the following days witnessed the use of great pressure on the Soviets from the Nixon-Kissinger duo to get India to withdraw, but to no avail.

When Pakistan's defeat in the eastern sector seemed certain, Nixon deployed Task Force
74—led by the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise—into the Bay of Bengal.
Enterprise and its escort ships arrived on station on 11 December 1971.
The United Kingdom also deployed a carrier battle group led by the aircraft carrier HMS Eagle to the Bay, on her final deployment.

On 6 and 13 December, the Soviet Navy dispatched two groups of cruisers and destroyers from Vladivostok; they trailed US Task Force 74 into the Indian Ocean from 18 December 1971 until 7 January 1972.
The Soviets also had a nuclear submarine to help ward off the threat posed by the USS Enterprise task force in the Indian Ocean.

As the war progressed, it became apparent to the United States that India was going to invade and disintegrate Pakistan in a matter of weeks, therefore President Nixon spoke with the USSR General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev on a hotline on 10 December, where Nixon reportedly urged Brezhnev to restrain India as he quoted: "in the strongest possible terms to restrain India with which … you [Brezhnev] have great influence and for whose actions you must share responsibility."

After the war, the United States accepted the new balance of power and recognised India as a dominant player in South Asia; the US immediately engaged in strengthening bilateral relations between the two countries in the successive years.
The Soviet Union, while being sympathetic to Pakistan's loss, decided to engage with Pakistan after sending an invitation through Rodionov to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who paid a state visit to the Soviet Union in 1972 to strengthen bilateral relations that continued over the years.

===
Yom Kippur
War super-power tensions: 6–25 October 1973 ===
The Yom Kippur War, also known as the Ramadan War, or October War, began with Arab victories.
Israel successfully counterattacked.
Tensions grew between the US (which supported Israel) and the Soviet Union (which sided with the Arab states).
American and Soviet naval forces came close to firing upon each other.
Admiral Murphy of the US reckoned the chances of the Soviet squadron attempting a first strike against his fleet at 40 percent.
The Pentagon moved Defcon status from 4 to 3.
The superpowers had been pushed to the brink of war, but tensions eased with the ceasefire brought in under UNSC 339.
===
NORAD computer error of 1979: 9 November 1979 ===
The United States made emergency retaliation preparations after NORAD saw on-screen indications that a full-scale Soviet attack had been launched.
No attempt was made to use the "red telephone" hotline to clarify the situation with the USSR and it was not until early-warning radar systems confirmed no such launch had taken place that NORAD realized that a computer system test had caused the display errors.
A senator inside the NORAD facility at the time described an atmosphere of absolute panic.
A GAO investigation led to the construction of an off-site test facility to prevent similar mistakes.

===
"Petrov save" incident: 26 September 1983 ===
A false alarm occurred on the Soviet nuclear early warning system, showing the launch of American LGM-30 Minuteman intercontinental ballistic missiles from bases in the United States.
A retaliatory attack was prevented by Stanislav Petrov, a Soviet Air Defence Forces officer, who realised the system had simply malfunctioned (which was borne out by later investigations).
===
Able Archer escalations:
2–11 November 1983 ==
=
During Able Archer 83, a ten-day NATO exercise simulating a period of conflict escalation that culminated in a DEFCON 1 nuclear strike, some members of the Soviet Politburo and armed forces treated the events as a ruse of war concealing a genuine first strike.
In response, the military prepared for a coordinated counter-attack by readying nuclear forces and placing air units stationed in the Warsaw Pact states of East Germany and Poland under high alert.
However, the state of Soviet preparation for retaliation ceased upon completion of the Able Archer exercises.

===
Norwegian rocket incident: 25 January 1995 ===
The Norwegian rocket incident is the first World War III close call to occur outside the Cold War.
This incident occurred when Russia's Olenegorsk early warning station accidentally mistook the radar signature from a Black Brant XII research rocket (being jointly launched by Norwegian and US scientists from Andøya Rocket Range), as appearing to be the radar signature of the launch of a Trident SLBM missile.
In response, Russian President Boris Yeltsin was summoned and the Cheget nuclear briefcase was activated for the first and only time.
However, the high command was soon able to determine that the rocket was not entering Russian airspace, and promptly aborted plans for combat readiness and retaliation.
It was retrospectively determined that, while the rocket scientists had informed thirty states including Russia about the test launch, the information had not reached Russian radar technicians.

===
Incident at Pristina airport: 12 June 1999 ===
On 12 June 1999, the day following the end of the Kosovo War, some 250 Russian peacekeepers occupied the Pristina International Airport ahead of the arrival of NATO troops and were to secure the arrival of reinforcements by air.
American NATO Supreme Allied Commander Europe General Wesley Clark ordered the use of force against the Russians.
Mike Jackson, a British Army general who contacted the Russians during the incident, refused to enforce Clark's orders, famously telling him "I'm not going to start the Third World War for you".
Captain James Blunt, the lead officer at the front of the NATO column in the direct armed stand-off against the Russians, received the "Destroy!"
orders from Clark over the radio, but he followed Jackson's orders to encircle the airfield instead and later said in an interview that even without Jackson's intervention he would have refused to follow Clark's order.

==
Extended usage of the term ==


===
Cold War ===
As Soviet-American relations grew more tense in the post-World War II period, the fear that it could escalate into World War III was ever-present.
A Gallup poll in December 1950 found that more than half of Americans considered World War III to have already started.
In 2004, commentator Norman Podhoretz proposed that the Cold War, lasting from the surrender of the Axis Powers until the fall of the Berlin Wall, might rightly be called World War III.
By Podhoretz's reckoning, "World War IV" would be the global campaign against Islamofascism.
Still the majority of historians would seem to hold that World War III would necessarily have to be a worldwide "war in which large forces from many countries fought" and a war that "involves most of the principal nations of the world".
In his book Secret Weapons of the Cold War, Bill Yenne explains that the military standoff that occurred between the two 'Superpowers', namely the United States and the Soviet Union, from the 1940s through to 1991, was only the Cold War, which ultimately helped to enable mankind to avert the possibility of an all out nuclear confrontation, and that it certainly was not World War III.

===
War on terror ===
The "war on terror" that began with the September 11 attacks has been claimed by some to be World War III or sometimes as World War IV.
Others have disparaged such claims as "distorting American history."
While there is general agreement amongst historians regarding the definitions and extent of the first two world wars, namely due to the unmistakable global scale of aggression and self-destruction of these two wars, a few have claimed that a "World War" might now no longer require such worldwide and large scale aggression and carnage.
Still, such claims of a new "lower threshold of aggression", that might now be sufficient to qualify a war as a "World War" have not gained such widespread acceptance and support as the definitions of the first two world wars have received amongst historians.

====
War on ISIL ====
On 1 February 2015, Iraqi Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari declared that the War on ISIL was effectively "World War III", due to ISIL's declaration of a Worldwide Caliphate, its aims to conquer the world, and its success in spreading the conflict to multiple countries outside of the Levant region.
In response to the November 2015 Paris attacks, King of Jordan Abdullah II said "We are facing a Third World War [within Islam]".
In his State of the Union Address on 12 January 2016, U.S. President Barack Obama warned that news reports granting ISIL the supposed ability to foment WWIII might be excessive and irresponsible, stating that, "as we focus on destroying ISIL, over-the-top claims that this is World War III just play into their hands.
Masses of fighters on the back of pickup trucks and twisted souls plotting in apartments or garages pose an enormous danger to civilians and must be stopped.
But they do not threaten our national existence."

===
Multiple small wars as a "third war" ===
In multiple recorded interviews under somewhat casual circumstances, comparing the conflagrations of World War I and II to the ongoing lower intensity wars of the 21st century, Pope Francis has said, "The world is at war, because it has lost peace", and "perhaps one can speak of a third war, one fought piecemeal".

==
Hypothetical scenarios ==
In 1949, after the unleashing of nuclear weaponry at the end of WWII, physicist Albert Einstein suggested that any outcome of a possible WWIII would be so dire as to revert mankind back to the Stone Age.
When asked by journalist Alfred Werner what types of weapons
Einstein believed World War III might be fought with, Einstein warned, "I know not with what weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones".

A 1998 New England Journal of Medicine overview found that "Although many people believe that the threat of a nuclear attack largely disappeared with the end of the Cold War, there is considerable evidence to the contrary".
The United States – Russia mutual detargeting agreement in 1994 was largely symbolic, and did not change the amount of time required to launch an attack.
The most likely "accidental-attack" scenario was believed to be a retaliatory launch due to a false warning.
Historically, World War I happened through an escalating crisis; World War II happened through deliberate action.
Both sides often assume their side will win a "short" fight; according to a 2014 poll, 3/4 of the public in China believes their military would win in a war with the U.S. Hypothesized flashpoints in the 2010s included Russian intervention in Ukraine, and Chinese expansion into adjacent islands and seas.
Other hypothesized risks are that a war involving Iran, Israel, Pakistan, India, North Korea, or Taiwan, could escalate via alliances or intervention into a war between "great powers" such as the U.S., Russia, or China; or that a "rogue commander" under any nuclear power might launch an unauthorized strike that escalates into full war.
Some scenarios involve risks due to upcoming changes from the known "status quo".
In the 1980s the Strategic Defense Initiative made an effort at nullifying the USSR's nuclear arsenal; some analysts believe the initiative was "destabilizing".
In his book Destined for War, Graham Allison views the global rivalry between the established power, the US, and the rising power, China, as an example of the Thucydides Trap.
Allison states that historically, "12 of 16 past cases where a rising power has confronted a ruling power" have led to fighting.
In January 2020 the Union of Concerned Scientists advanced its Doomsday Clock, citing (among other factors)
a predicted destabilizing effect from upcoming hypersonic weapons.
Emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence, could hypothetically generate risk in the decades ahead.
A 2018 RAND Corporation report has argued that AI and associated information technology "will have a large effect on nuclear-security issues in the next quarter century".
A hypothetical future AI could provide a destabilizing ability to track "second-launch" launchers.
Incorporating AI into decision support systems used to decide whether to launch, could also generate new risks, including the risk of an adversarial exploitation of such an AI's algorithms by a third party to trigger a launch recommendation.
A perception that some sort of emerging technology would lead to "world domination" might also be destabilizing, for example by leading to fear of a pre-emptive strike.

== See also ==
Nuclear arms race
Anti-nuclear movement
Second Cold War
List of estimated death tolls from nuclear attacks on cities
Global issue
Nuclear holocaust
Nuclear terrorism
World War III in popular culture
==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Huntington, Samuel (1996).
The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order Simon & Schuster, New York.
ISBN 978-0-684-84441-1.

Langford, David (1981).
War in 2080 : the future of military technology.
London:
Sphere Books.
ISBN 978-0-7221-5393-2.

Mearsheimer, John (2001).
The Tragedy of Great Power Politics.
W. W. Norton, New York.
ISBN 978-0-393-34927-6.

Pamidi, G.G. (2012).
Possibility of a nuclear war in Asia : an Indian perspective.
New Delhi:
United Service Institution of India : Vij Books India.
ISBN 978-93-81411-51-3.

Piepers, Ingo (2016).
2020: WARning.
Conijn Advies.
ISBN 978-90-824118-1-2.
No War
But The Class War (NWBTCW) is a motto expressing opposition to capitalism used by anarchist and communist groups.
It is also the name for a number of anti-authoritarian and anti-capitalist groups.

==
Group names ==
The first two NWBTCW groups appeared in London during the 1990–1991 Gulf War and the 1999 Kosovo War.
Both groups, which included ex-members of the London-based Class War, dissolved after the respective war they were protesting stopped.
The third NWBTCW group appeared in London following the start of the War in Afghanistan in October 2001.
Efforts, particularly by the Communist Workers' Organisation, to turn this into a network of groups across Britain failed.
A split in the group which was characterised as between theory and practice led to the 'actionists' leaving to form the Disobedients, whose activities included an attempt to occupy Old Street Roundabout along with Critical Mass which was swamped by police much like all the other actions by this group.
The 'theorist' section transmuted itself into the No War but the Class War Discussion Group, which eventually also dissolved.

==
As a slogan ==
As a slogan, "No War
But The Class War" has been used by people not necessarily linked to any of the above groups.
It is widely used by diverse Marxist groups as a means of underlining the priority of class struggle above other political aims and as a general anti-militarist slogan.

The phrase was used in the first episode of the 1975 series Days of Hope, written by Jim Allen and directed by Ken Loach (both socialists), which caused controversy in Britain over its portrayal of the British military during World War I. A socialist who has deserted from the British army says, "I'm no pacifist.
I'll fight in a war, but I'll fight in the only war that counts, and that's the class war, and it'll come when all this lot's over."

== Notes ==


==
External links ==
No War
But The Class War – archive of texts by the various London NWBTCW groups.

The story of this group (in its various incarnations) – article by the third NWBTCW group, looking at the history and limitations of the group.

No War
But The Class War: remembering and reflecting 10 years after – reflective analysis on the first NWBTCW group by a former member.
World War II or the Second World War, often abbreviated as WWII or WW2, was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945.
It involved the vast majority of the world's countries—including all the great powers—forming two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis.
In a state of total war, directly involving more than 100 million personnel from more than 30 countries, the major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, blurring the distinction between civilian and military resources.
World War II was the deadliest conflict in human history, resulting in 70 to 85 million fatalities, with more civilians than military personnel killed.
Tens of millions of people died due to genocides (including the Holocaust), premeditated death from starvation, massacres, and disease.
Aircraft played a major role in the conflict, including in strategic bombing of population centres, the development of nuclear weapons, and the only two uses of such in war.

World War II is generally considered to have begun on 1 September 1939, with the invasion of Poland by Germany and subsequent declarations of war on Germany by the United Kingdom and France on the 3rd.
From late 1939 to early 1941, in a series of campaigns and treaties, Germany conquered or controlled much of continental Europe, and formed the Axis alliance with Italy and Japan, along with other countries later on.
Under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union partitioned and annexed territories of their European neighbours: Poland, Finland, Romania and the Baltic states.
Following the onset of campaigns in North Africa and East Africa, and the fall of France in mid-1940, the war continued primarily between the European Axis powers and the British Empire, with war in the Balkans, the aerial Battle of Britain, the Blitz, and the Battle of the Atlantic.
On 22 June 1941, Germany led the European Axis powers in an invasion of the Soviet Union, opening the Eastern Front, the largest land theatre of war in history and trapping the Axis, crucially the German Wehrmacht, in a war of attrition.

Japan, which aimed to dominate Asia and the Pacific, was at war with the Republic of China by 1937.
In December 1941, Japan attacked American and British territories with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific including an attack on the US fleet at Pearl Harbor.
Following a US declaration of war against Japan, which followed one from the UK, the European Axis powers declared war on the United States in solidarity with their ally.
Japan soon captured much of the Western Pacific, but its advances were halted in 1942 after losing the critical Battle of Midway; later, Germany and Italy were defeated in North Africa and at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union.
Key setbacks in 1943—including a series of German defeats on the Eastern Front, the Allied invasions of Sicily and the Italian mainland, and Allied offensives in the Pacific—cost the Axis its initiative and forced it into strategic retreat on all fronts.
In 1944, the Western Allies invaded German-occupied France, while the Soviet Union regained its territorial losses and turned towards Germany and its allies.
During 1944 and 1945, Japan suffered reversals in mainland Asia, while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands.

The war in Europe concluded with the liberation of German-occupied territories, and the invasion of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, culminating in the fall of Berlin to Soviet troops, the suicide of Adolf Hitler and the German unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945.
Following the Potsdam Declaration by the Allies on 26 July 1945 and the refusal of Japan to surrender on its terms, the United States dropped the first atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima, on 6 August 1945, and Nagasaki, on 9 August.
Faced with an imminent invasion of the Japanese archipelago, the possibility of additional atomic bombings, and the Soviet entry into the war against Japan and its invasion of Manchuria on 9 August, Japan announced its intention to surrender on 15 August 1945 (then signed the surrender document on 2 September 1945), cementing total victory in Asia for the Allies.
In the wake of the war, Germany and Japan were occupied, and war crimes tribunals were conducted against German and Japanese leaders.

World War II changed the political alignment and social structure of the globe.
The United Nations (UN) was established to foster international co-operation and prevent future conflicts, and the victorious great powers—China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States—became the permanent members of its Security Council.
The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the nearly half-century-long Cold War.
In the wake of European devastation, the influence of its great powers waned, triggering the decolonisation of Africa and Asia.
Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion.
Political integration, especially in Europe, began as an effort to forestall future hostilities, end pre-war enmities and forge a sense of common identity.

==
Chronology ==
The war in Europe is generally considered to have started on 1 September 1939, beginning with the German invasion of Poland; the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany two days later.
The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937, or the earlier Japanese invasion of Manchuria, on 19 September 1931.Others follow the British historian A. J. P. Taylor, who held that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously, and the two wars merged in 1941.
This article uses conventional dating.
Other starting dates sometimes used for World War II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935.
The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World War II as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939.The exact date of the war's end
is also not universally agreed upon.
It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than with the formal surrender of Japan on 2 September 1945, which officially ended the war in Asia.
A peace treaty between Japan and the Allies was signed in 1951.
A 1990 treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place and resolved most post-World War II issues.
No formal peace treaty between Japan and the Soviet Union was ever signed.

==
Background ==


===
Europe ===
World War
I had radically altered the political European map, with the defeat of the Central Powers—including Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire—and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia, which led to the founding of the Soviet Union.
Meanwhile, the victorious Allies of World War I, such as France, Belgium, Italy, Romania, and Greece, gained territory, and new nation-states were created out of the collapse of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman and Russian Empires.

To prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was created during the 1919 Paris Peace Conference.
The organisation's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military and naval disarmament, and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.

Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I, irredentist and revanchist nationalism emerged in several European states in the same period.
These sentiments were especially marked in Germany because of the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses imposed by the Treaty of Versailles.
Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.
The German Empire was dissolved in the German Revolution of 1918–1919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created.
The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left.
Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains; however, Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by the United Kingdom and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled in the peace settlement.
From 1922 to 1925, the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, and promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire".

Adolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the Chancellor of Germany in 1933 when Paul Von Hindenburg and the Reichstag appointed him.
He abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign.
Meanwhile, France, to secure its alliance, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession.
The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany, and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.
The United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front in April 1935 in order to contain Germany, a key step towards military globalisation; however, that June, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions.
The Soviet Union, concerned by Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of Eastern Europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France.
Before taking effect, though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless.
The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year.
Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936, encountering little opposition due to the policy of appeasement.
In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome–Berlin Axis.
A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy joined the following year.

===
Asia ===
The Kuomintang (KMT) party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid-1920s, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese Communist Party allies and new regional warlords.
In 1931, an increasingly militaristic Empire of Japan, which had long sought influence in China as the first step of what its government saw as the country's right to rule Asia, staged the Mukden Incident as a pretext to invade Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo.
China appealed to the League of Nations to stop the Japanese invasion of Manchuria.
Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria.
The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933.
Thereafter, Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria, and Chahar and Suiyuan.
After the 1936 Xi'an Incident, the Kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan.

== Pre-war events ==


===
Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935) ===
The Second Italo-Ethiopian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936.
The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire (also known as Abyssinia) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy (Regno d'Italia), which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea.
The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (Africa Orientale Italiana, or AOI); in addition it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace.
Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations, but the League did little when the former clearly violated Article X of the League's Covenant.
The United Kingdom and France supported imposing sanctions on Italy for the invasion, but the sanctions were not fully enforced and failed to end the Italian invasion.
Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany's goal of absorbing Austria.

===
Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) ===
When civil war broke out in Spain, Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels, led by General Francisco Franco.
Italy supported the Nationalists to a greater extent than the Nazis did: altogether Mussolini sent to Spain more than 70,000 ground troops and 6,000 aviation personnel, as well as about 720 aircraft.
The Soviet Union supported the existing government of the Spanish Republic.
More than 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists.
Both Germany and the Soviet Union used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics.
The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, remained officially neutral during World War II but generally favoured the Axis.
His greatest collaboration with Germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front.

===
Japanese invasion of China (1937) ===
In July 1937, Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Peking after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China.
The Soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with China to lend materiel support, effectively ending China's prior co-operation with Germany.
From September to November, the Japanese attacked Taiyuan, engaged the Kuomintang Army around Xinkou, and fought Communist forces in Pingxingguan.
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but after three months of fighting, Shanghai fell.
The Japanese continued to push the Chinese forces back, capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937.
After the fall of Nanking, tens or hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the Japanese.
In March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at Taierzhuang
but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by the Japanese in
May. In June 1938, Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River; this manoeuvre bought time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan, but the city was taken by October.
Japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of Chinese resistance that Japan had hoped to achieve; instead, the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war.

===
Soviet–
Japanese border conflicts ===
In the mid-to-late 1930s, Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union and Mongolia.
The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin-ron, which emphasised Japan's expansion northward, was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time.
With the Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol in 1939, the ongoing Second Sino-Japanese War and ally Nazi Germany pursuing neutrality with the Soviets, this policy would prove difficult to maintain.
Japan and the Soviet Union eventually signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941, and Japan adopted the doctrine of Nanshin-ron, promoted by the Navy, which took its focus southward, eventually leading to its war with the United States and the Western Allies.

===
European occupations and agreements ===
In Europe, Germany and Italy were becoming more aggressive.
In March 1938, Germany annexed Austria, again provoking little response from other European powers.
Encouraged, Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population.
Soon the United Kingdom and France followed the appeasement policy of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement, which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands.
Soon afterwards, Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary, and Poland annexed Czechoslovakia's Zaolzie region.
Although all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation.
In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish "war-mongers" and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build-up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy.
In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic.
Hitler also delivered an ultimatum to Lithuania on 20 March 1939, forcing the concession of the Klaipėda Region, formerly the German Memelland.

Greatly alarmed and with Hitler making further demands on the Free City of Danzig, the United Kingdom and France guaranteed their support for Polish independence; when Italy conquered Albania in April 1939, the same guarantee was extended to the Kingdoms of Romania and Greece.
Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel.
Hitler accused the United Kingdom and Poland of trying to "encircle" Germany and renounced the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish Non-Aggression Pact.
The situation reached a general crisis in late August as German troops continued to mobilise against the Polish border.
On 23 August, when tripartite negotiations about a military alliance between France, the United Kingdom and Soviet Union stalled, the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact with Germany.
This pact had a secret protocol that defined German and Soviet "spheres of influence" (western Poland and Lithuania for Germany; eastern Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Bessarabia for the Soviet Union), and raised the question of continuing Polish independence.
The pact neutralised the possibility of Soviet opposition to a campaign against Poland and assured that Germany would not have to face the prospect of a two-front war, as it had in World War I.
Immediately after that, Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August, but upon hearing that the United Kingdom had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland and that Italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.
In response to British requests for direct negotiations to avoid war, Germany made demands on Poland, which only served as a pretext to worsen relations.
On 29 August, Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig, and to allow a plebiscite in the Polish Corridor in which the German minority would vote on secession.
The Poles refused to comply with the German demands, and on the night of 30–31 August in a stormy meeting with the British ambassador Nevile Henderson, Ribbentrop declared that Germany considered its claims rejected.

==
Course of the war ==


===
War breaks out in Europe (1939–40) ===
On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland after having staged several false flag border incidents as a pretext to initiate the invasion.
The first German attack of the war came against the Polish defenses at Westerplatte.
The United Kingdom responded with an ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations, and on 3 September, after the ultimatum was ignored, France and Britain declared war on Germany, followed by Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Canada.
The alliance provided no direct military support to Poland, outside of a cautious French probe into the Saarland.
The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and the war effort.
Germany responded by ordering U-boat warfare against Allied merchant and warships, which would later escalate into the Battle of the Atlantic.

On 8 September, German troops reached the suburbs of Warsaw.
The Polish counter offensive to the west halted the German advance for several days, but it was outflanked and encircled by the Wehrmacht.
Remnants of the Polish army broke through to besieged Warsaw.
On 17 September 1939, after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviet Union invaded Eastern Poland under a pretext that the Polish state had ostensibly ceased to exist.
On 27 September, the Warsaw garrison surrendered to the Germans, and the last large operational unit of the Polish Army surrendered on 6 October.
Despite the military defeat, Poland never surrendered; instead it formed the Polish government-in-exile and a clandestine state apparatus remained in occupied Poland.
A significant part of Polish military personnel evacuated to Romania and the Baltic countries; many of them later fought against the Axis in other theatres of the war.
Germany annexed the western and occupied the central part of Poland, and the Soviet Union annexed its eastern part; small shares of Polish territory were transferred to Lithuania and Slovakia.
On 6 October, Hitler made a public peace overture to the United Kingdom and France but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union.
The proposal was rejected, and Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France, which was postponed until the spring of 1940 due to bad weather.

The Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, which were in the Soviet "sphere of influence" under the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact—to sign "mutual assistance pacts" that stipulated stationing Soviet troops in these countries.
Soon after, significant Soviet military contingents were moved there.
Finland refused to sign a similar pact and rejected ceding part of its territory to the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939, and the Soviet Union was expelled from the League of Nations.
Despite overwhelming numerical superiority, Soviet military success was modest, and the Finno-Soviet war ended in March 1940 with minimal Finnish concessions.
In June 1940, the Soviet Union forcibly annexed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and the Romanian regions of Bessarabia, northern Bukovina and Hertza.
Meanwhile, Nazi-Soviet political rapprochement and economic co-operation gradually stalled, and both states began preparations for war.

===
Western Europe
(1940–41) ===
In April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off.
Denmark capitulated after a few hours, and Norway was conquered within two months despite Allied support.
British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the appointment of Winston Churchill as Prime Minister on 10 May 1940.On the same day, Germany launched an offensive against France.
To circumvent the strong Maginot Line fortifications on the Franco-German border, Germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
The Germans carried out a flanking manoeuvre through the Ardennes region, which was mistakenly perceived by Allies as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles.
By successfully implementing new blitzkrieg tactics, the Wehrmacht rapidly advanced to the Channel and cut off the Allied forces in Belgium, trapping the bulk of the Allied armies in a cauldron on the Franco-Belgian border near Lille.
The United Kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of Allied troops from the continent by early June, although abandoning almost all their equipment.
On 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom.
The Germans turned south against the weakened French army, and Paris fell to them on 14 June.
Eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany; it was divided into German and Italian occupation zones, and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany.
France kept its fleet, which the United Kingdom attacked on 3 July in an attempt to prevent its seizure by Germany.

The air Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours.
The United Kingdom rejected Hitler's peace offer, and the German air superiority campaign started in August but failed to defeat RAF Fighter Command, forcing the indefinite postponement of the proposed German invasion of Britain.
The German strategic bombing offensive intensified with night attacks on London and other cities in the Blitz, but failed to significantly disrupt the British war effort and largely ended in May 1941.Using newly captured French ports, the German Navy enjoyed success against an over-extended Royal Navy, using U-boats against British shipping in the Atlantic.
The British Home Fleet scored a significant victory on 27 May 1941 by sinking the German battleship Bismarck.
In November 1939, the United States was taking measures to assist China and the Western Allies and amended the Neutrality Act to allow "cash and carry" purchases by the Allies.
In 1940, following the German capture of Paris, the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased.
In September the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases.
Still, a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention in the conflict well into 1941.
In December 1940 Roosevelt accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless, calling for the United States to become an "arsenal of democracy" and promoting Lend-Lease programmes of aid to support the British war effort.
The United States started strategic planning to prepare for a full-scale offensive against Germany.
At the end of September 1940, the Tripartite Pact formally united Japan, Italy, and Germany as the Axis powers.
The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country, with the exception of the Soviet Union, which attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three.
The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia and Romania joined.
Romania and Hungary later made major contributions to the Axis war against the Soviet Union, in Romania's case partially to recapture territory ceded to the Soviet Union.

===
Mediterranean
(1940–41) ===
In early June 1940, the Italian Regia Aeronautica attacked and besieged Malta, a British possession.
From late summer to early autumn, Italy conquered British Somaliland and made an incursion into British-held Egypt.
In October, Italy attacked Greece, but the attack was repulsed with heavy Italian casualties; the campaign ended within months with minor territorial changes.
Germany started preparation for an invasion of the Balkans to assist Italy, to prevent the British from gaining a foothold there, which would be a potential threat for Romanian oil fields, and to strike against the British dominance of the Mediterranean.
In December 1940, British Empire forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa.
The offensives were highly successful; by early February 1941, Italy had lost control of eastern Libya, and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner.
The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats, with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission by means of a carrier attack at Taranto, and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan.

Italian defeats prompted Germany to deploy an expeditionary force to North Africa and at the end of March 1941, Rommel's Afrika Korps launched an offensive which drove back the Commonwealth forces.
In under a month, Axis forces advanced to western Egypt and besieged the port of Tobruk.
By late March 1941, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact; however, the Yugoslav government was overthrown two days later by pro-British nationalists.
Germany responded with simultaneous invasions of both Yugoslavia and Greece, commencing on 6 April 1941; both nations were forced to surrender within the month.
The airborne invasion of the Greek island of Crete at the end of May completed the German conquest of the Balkans.
Although the Axis victory was swift, bitter and large-scale partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.
In the Middle East in May, Commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy-controlled Syria.
Between June and July, they invaded and occupied the French possessions Syria and Lebanon, with the assistance of the Free French.

===
Axis attack on the Soviet Union (1941) ===
With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations.
With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource-rich European possessions in Southeast Asia, the two powers signed the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941.
By contrast, the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union, massing forces on the Soviet border.
Hitler believed that the United Kingdom's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany sooner or later.
He, therefore, decided to try to strengthen Germany's relations with the Soviets or failing that to attack and eliminate them as a factor.
In November 1940, negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the Tripartite Pact.
The Soviets showed some interest but asked for concessions from Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable.
On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.

On 22 June 1941, Germany, supported by Italy and Romania, invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them.
They were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary.
The primary targets of this surprise offensive were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk-Astrakhan line, from the Caspian to the White Seas.
Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate Communism, generate Lebensraum ("living space") by dispossessing the native population and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.
Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war, Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence.
During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel.
By mid-August, however, the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre, and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad.
The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made possible further advance into Crimea and industrially developed Eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov).

The diversion of three quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front prompted the United Kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy.
In July, the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany and in August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter, which outlined British and American goals for the postwar world.
In late August the British and Soviets invaded neutral Iran to secure the Persian Corridor, Iran's oil fields, and preempt any Axis advances through Iran toward the Baku oil fields or British India.
By October Axis operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region were achieved, with only the sieges of Leningrad and Sevastopol continuing.
A major offensive against Moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather, the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow, where the exhausted troops were forced to suspend their offensive.
Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives: two key cities remained in Soviet hands, the Soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential.
The blitzkrieg phase of the war in Europe had ended.
By early December, freshly mobilised reserves allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops.
This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army, allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops 100–250 kilometres (62–155 mi) west.

===
War breaks out in the Pacific (1941) ===
Following the Japanese false flag Mukden Incident in 1931, the Japanese shelling of the American gunboat USS Panay in 1937, and the 1937-38 Nanjing Massacre, Japanese-American relations deteriorated.
In 1939, the United States notified Japan that it would not be extending its trade treaty and American public opinion opposing Japanese expansionism led to a series of economic sanctions, the Export Control Acts, which banned U.S. exports of chemicals, minerals and military parts to Japan and increased economic pressure on the Japanese regime.
During 1939 Japan launched its first attack against Changsha, a strategically important Chinese city, but was repulsed by late September.
Despite several offensives by both sides, the war between China and Japan was stalemated by 1940.
To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina in September 1940.

Chinese nationalist forces launched a large-scale counter-offensive in early 1940.
In August, Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China; in retaliation, Japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists.
The continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation.
In March, the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during Battle of Shanggao.
In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.
German successes in Europe encouraged Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia.
The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan with some oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941.
In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina, thus threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East.
The United States, the United Kingdom, and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo.
At the same time, Japan was planning an invasion of the Soviet Far East, intending to capitalise off the German invasion in the west, but abandoned the operation after the sanctions.
Since early 1941 the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China.
During these negotiations, Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate.
At the same time the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them.
Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines (an American protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946) and warned Japan that the United States would react to Japanese attacks against any "neighboring countries".

Frustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the American–British–Dutch sanctions, Japan prepared for war.
On 20 November, a new government under Hideki Tojo presented an interim proposal as its final offer.
It called for the end of American aid to China and for lifting the embargo on the supply of oil and other resources to Japan.
In exchange, Japan promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw its forces from southern Indochina.
The American counter-proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with all Pacific powers.
That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force; the Japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.
Japan planned to rapidly seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific.
The Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over-stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war.
To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter, it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset.
On 7 December 1941 (8 December in Asian time zones), Japan attacked British and American holdings with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific.
These included an attack on the American fleets at Pearl Harbor and the Philippines, Guam, Wake Island, landings in Malaya, Thailand and the Battle of Hong Kong.
The Japanese invasion of Thailand led to Thailand's decision to ally itself with Japan and the other Japanese attacks led the United States, United Kingdom, China, Australia, and several other states to formally declare war on Japan, whereas the Soviet Union, being heavily involved in large-scale hostilities with European Axis countries, maintained its neutrality agreement with Japan.
Germany, followed by the other Axis states, declared war on the United States in solidarity with Japan, citing as justification the American attacks on German war vessels that had been ordered by Roosevelt.

===
Axis
advance stalls (1942–43) ===
On 1 January 1942, the Allied Big Four—the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom and the United States—and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations, thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter, and agreeing not to sign a separate peace with the Axis powers.
During 1942, Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue.
All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective.
The Americans favoured a straightforward, large-scale attack on Germany through France.
The Soviets were also demanding a second front.
The British, on the other hand, argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out German strength, leading to increasing demoralisation, and bolster resistance forces.
Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign.
An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour without using large-scale armies.
Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.
At the Casablanca Conference in early 1943, the Allies reiterated the statements issued in the 1942 Declaration and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies.
The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes.
Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland and to invade France in 1944.

====
Pacific (1942–43) ====
By the end of April 1942, Japan and its ally Thailand had almost fully conquered Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Singapore, and Rabaul, inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners.
Despite stubborn resistance by Filipino and US forces, the Philippine Commonwealth was eventually captured in May 1942, forcing its government into exile.
On 16 April, in Burma, 7,000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of Yenangyaung and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division.
Japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the South China Sea, Java Sea and Indian Ocean, and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin, Australia.
In January 1942, the only Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha.
These easy victories over the unprepared US and European opponents left Japan overconfident, as well as overextended.
In early May 1942, Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia.
The planned invasion was thwarted when an Allied task force, centred on two American fleet carriers, fought Japanese naval forces to a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea.
Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.
In mid-May, Japan started the Zhejiang-Jiangxi campaign in China, with the goal of inflicting retribution on the Chinese who aided the surviving American airmen in the Doolittle Raid by destroying air bases and fighting against the Chinese 23rd and 32nd Army Groups.
In early June, Japan put its operations into action, but the Americans, having broken Japanese naval codes in late May, were fully aware of the plans and order of battle, and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.

With its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle, Japan chose to focus on a belated attempt to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua.
The Americans planned a counter-attack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.
Both plans started in July, but by mid-September, the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese, and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna–Gona.
Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal.
By the start of 1943, the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops.
In Burma, Commonwealth forces mounted two operations.
The first, an offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942, went disastrously, forcing a retreat back to India by May 1943.
The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese front-lines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.

====
Eastern Front (1942–43) ====
Despite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year.
In May the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkov, and then launched their main summer offensive against southern Russia in June 1942, to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy the Kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front.
The Germans split Army Group South into two groups:
Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River.
The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.
By mid-November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting.
The Soviets began their second winter counter-offensive, starting with an encirclement of German forces at Stalingrad, and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow, though the latter failed disastrously.
By early February 1943, the German Army had taken tremendous losses; German troops at Stalingrad had been defeated, and the front-line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive.
In mid-February, after the Soviet push had tapered off, the Germans launched another attack on Kharkov, creating a salient in their front line around the Soviet city of Kursk.

====
Western Europe/Atlantic and Mediterranean (1942–43) ====
Exploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast.
By November 1941, Commonwealth forces had launched a counter-offensive, Operation Crusader, in North Africa, and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made.
In North Africa, the Germans launched an offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala line by early February, followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives.
Concerns the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942.
An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein.
On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the disastrous Dieppe Raid, demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.
In August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta.
A few months later, the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt, dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya.
This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies.
Hitler responded to the French colony's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France; although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces.
The Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia, which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943.In June 1943
the British and Americans began a strategic bombing campaign against Germany with a goal to disrupt the war economy, reduce morale, and "de-house" the civilian population.
The firebombing of Hamburg was among the first attacks in this campaign, inflicting significant casualties and considerable losses on infrastructure of this important industrial centre.

===
Allies gain momentum (1943–44) ===
After the Guadalcanal Campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific.
In May 1943, Canadian and US forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians.
Soon after, the United States, with support from Australia, New Zealand and Pacific Islander forces, began major ground, sea and air operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands.
By the end of March 1944, the Allies had completed both of these objectives and had also neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands.
In April, the Allies launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea.
In the Soviet Union, both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large offensives in central Russia.
On 4 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge.
Within a week, German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets' deeply echeloned and well-constructed defences, and for the first time in the war Hitler cancelled the operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success.
This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July, which, combined with previous Italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month.

On 12 July 1943, the Soviets launched their own counter-offensives, thereby dispelling any chance of German victory or even stalemate in the east.
The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority, giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front.
The Germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther–Wotan line, but the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and by the Lower Dnieper Offensive.
On 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following Italy's armistice with the Allies.
Germany with the help of fascists responded by disarming Italian forces that were in many places without superior orders, seizing military control of Italian areas, and creating a series of defensive lines.
German special forces then rescued Mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in German-occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic, causing an Italian civil war.
The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid-November.
German operations in the Atlantic also suffered.
By May 1943, as Allied counter-measures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign.
In November 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran.
The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory and the military planning for the Burma campaign, while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.

From November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition, while awaiting Allied relief.
In January 1944, the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at Anzio.
On 27 January 1944, Soviet troops launched a major offensive that expelled German forces from the Leningrad region, thereby ending the most lethal siege in history.
The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre-war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re-establish national independence.
This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region.
By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops.
The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and, at the expense of allowing several German divisions to retreat, on 4 June Rome was captured.
The Allies had mixed success in mainland Asia.
In March 1944, the Japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against British positions in Assam, India, and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima.
In May 1944, British forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma by July, and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina.
The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields.
By June, the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a new attack on Changsha.

===
Allies close in (1944) ===
On 6 June 1944 (known as D-Day), after three years of Soviet pressure, the Western Allies invaded northern France.
After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy, they also attacked southern France.
These landings were successful and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France.
Paris was liberated on 25 August by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces, both led by General Charles de Gaulle, and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year.
An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands failed.
After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, but failed to cross the Rur river in a large offensive.
In Italy, Allied advance also slowed due to the last major German defensive line.

On 22 June, the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus ("Operation Bagration")
that destroyed the German Army Group Centre almost completely.
Soon after that, another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland.
The Soviets formed the Polish Committee of National Liberation to control territory in Poland and combat the Polish Armia Krajowa; The Soviet Red Army remained in the Praga district on the other side of the Vistula and watched passively as the Germans quelled the Warsaw Uprising initiated by the Armia Krajowa.
The national uprising in Slovakia was also quelled by the Germans.
The Soviet Red Army's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d'état in Romania and in Bulgaria, followed by those countries' shift to the Allied side.
In September 1944, Soviet troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of German Army Groups E and F in Greece, Albania and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off.
By this point, the Communist-led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941, controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against German forces further south.
In northern Serbia, the Soviet Red Army, with limited support from Bulgarian forces, assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October.
A few days later, the Soviets launched a massive assault against German-occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945.
Unlike impressive Soviet victories in the Balkans, bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to a Soviet-Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions, although Finland was forced to fight their former ally Germany.

By the start of July 1944, Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam, pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River while the Chinese captured Myitkyina.
In September 1944, Chinese forces captured Mount Song and reopened the Burma Road.
In China, the Japanese had more successes, having finally captured Changsha in mid-June and the city of Hengyang by early August.
Soon after, they invaded the province of Guangxi, winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by mid-December.
In the Pacific, US forces continued to press back the Japanese perimeter.
In mid-June 1944, they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea.
These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, Hideki Tojo, and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands.
In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.

===
Axis collapse, Allied victory (1944–45) ===
On 16 December 1944, Germany made a last attempt on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter-offensive in the Ardennes and along with the French-German border to split the Western Allies, encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and capture their primary supply port at Antwerp to prompt a political settlement.
By January, the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled.
In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line.
In mid-January 1945, the Soviets and Poles attacked in Poland, pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany, and overran East Prussia.
On 4 February Soviet, British, and US leaders met for the Yalta Conference.
They agreed on the occupation of post-war Germany, and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan.
In February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river.
By March, the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr, encircling the German Army Group B.
In early March, in an attempt to protect its last oil reserves in Hungary and to retake Budapest, Germany launched its last major offensive against Soviet troops near Lake Balaton.
In two weeks, the offensive had been repulsed, the Soviets advanced to Vienna, and captured the city.
In early April, Soviet troops captured Königsberg, while the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany capturing Hamburg and Nuremberg.
American and Soviet forces met at the Elbe river on 25 April, leaving several unoccupied pockets in southern Germany and around Berlin.

Soviet and Polish forces stormed and captured Berlin in late April.
In Italy, German forces surrendered on 29 April.
On 30 April, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany, Berlin garrison surrendered on 2 May.
Several changes in leadership occurred during this period.
On 12 April, President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by Harry S. Truman.
Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April.
Two days later, Hitler committed suicide in besieged Berlin, and he was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz.
Total and unconditional surrender in Europe was signed on 7 and 8 May, to be effective by the end of
8 May. German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May.
In the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945.
They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and recaptured Manila in March.
Fighting continued on Luzon, Mindanao, and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war.
Meanwhile, the United States Army Air Forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in Japan in an effort to destroy Japanese war industry and civilian morale.
A devastating bombing raid on Tokyo of 9–10
March was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history.

In May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, overrunning the oilfields there.
British, American, and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March, and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by
3 May. Chinese forces started a counterattack in the Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945.
American naval and amphibious forces also moved towards Japan, taking Iwo Jima by March, and Okinawa by the end of June.
At the same time, American submarines cut off Japanese imports, drastically reducing Japan's ability to supply its overseas forces.
On 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany.
They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany, and the American, British and Chinese governments reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of Japan, specifically stating that "the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction".
During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.
The call for unconditional surrender was rejected by the Japanese government, which believed it would be capable of negotiating for more favourable surrender terms.
In early August, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
Between the two bombings, the Soviets, pursuant to the Yalta agreement, invaded Japanese-held Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army, which was the largest Japanese fighting force.
These two events persuaded previously adamant Imperial Army leaders to accept surrender terms.
The Red Army also captured the southern part of Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands.
On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed at Tokyo Bay on the deck of the American battleship USS Missouri on 2 September 1945, ending the war.

==
Aftermath ==
The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany.
The former became a neutral state, non-aligned with any political bloc.
The latter was divided into western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union.
A denazification programme in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals in the Nuremberg trials and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.
Germany lost a quarter of its pre-war (1937) territory.
Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland, and East Prussia was divided between Poland and the Soviet Union, followed by the expulsion to Germany of the nine million Germans from these provinces, as well as three million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia.
By the 1950s, one-fifth of West Germans were refugees from the east.
The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon line, from which 2 million Poles were expelled; north-east Romania, parts of eastern Finland, and the three Baltic states were incorporated into the Soviet Union.

In an effort to maintain world peace, the Allies formed the United Nations, which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945, and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 as a common standard for all member nations.
The great powers that were the victors of the war—France, China, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States—became the permanent members of the UN's Security Council.
The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.

Germany had been de facto divided, and two independent states, the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany), were created within the borders of Allied and Soviet occupation zones.
The rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence.
Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere, which led to establishment of Communist-led regimes, with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities.
As a result, East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Albania became Soviet satellite states.
Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the Soviet Union.
Post-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.
The long period of political tensions and military competition between them, the Cold War, would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars.
In Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administered Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed South Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.
Korea, formerly under Japanese rule, was divided and occupied by the Soviet Union in the North and the United States in the South between 1945 and 1948.
Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948, each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea, which led ultimately to the Korean War.

In China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946.
Communist forces were victorious and established the People's Republic of China on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949.
In the Middle East, the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab–Israeli conflict.
While European powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.
The global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently.
The United States emerged much richer than any other nation, leading to a baby boom, and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers, and it dominated the world economy.
The UK and US pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany in the years 1945–1948.
Because of international trade interdependencies this led to European economic stagnation and delayed European recovery for several years.
Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in Western Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the Marshall Plan (1948–1951) both directly and indirectly caused.
The post-1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle.
Italy also experienced an economic boom and the French economy rebounded.
By contrast, the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin, and although receiving a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance, more than any other European country, it continued in relative economic decline for decades.
The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate post-war era.
Japan recovered much later.
China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.

==
Impact ==


===
Casualties and war crimes ===
Estimates for the total number of casualties in the war vary, because many deaths went unrecorded.
Most suggest that some 60 million people died in the war, including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians.

Many of the civilians died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass bombings, disease, and starvation.

The Soviet Union alone lost around 27 million people during the war, including 8.7 million military and 19 million civilian deaths.
A quarter of the people in the Soviet Union were wounded or killed.
Germany sustained 5.3 million military losses, mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany.
An estimated 11 to 17 million civilians died as a direct or as an indirect result of Nazi racist policies, including mass killing of around 6 million Jews, along with Roma, homosexuals, at least 1.9 million ethnic Poles and millions of other Slavs (including Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians), and other ethnic and minority groups.
Between 1941 and 1945, more than 200,000 ethnic Serbs, along with gypsies and Jews, were persecuted and murdered by the Axis-aligned Croatian Ustaše in Yugoslavia.
Also, more than 100,000 Poles were massacred by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in the Volhynia massacres, between 1943 and 1945.
At the same time about 10,000–15,000 Ukrainians were killed by the Polish Home Army and other Polish units, in reprisal attacks.

In Asia and the Pacific, between 3 million and more than 10 million civilians, mostly Chinese (estimated at 7.5 million), were killed by the Japanese occupation forces.
The most infamous Japanese atrocity was the Nanking Massacre, in which fifty to three hundred thousand Chinese civilians were raped and murdered.
Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2.7 million casualties occurred during the Sankō Sakusen.
General Yasuji Okamura implemented the policy in Heipei and Shantung.
Axis forces employed biological and chemical weapons.
The Imperial Japanese Army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of China (see Unit 731) and in early conflicts against the Soviets.
Both the Germans and the Japanese tested such weapons against civilians, and sometimes on prisoners of war.
The Soviet Union was responsible for the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers, and the imprisonment or execution of thousands of political prisoners by the NKVD, along with mass civilian deportations to Siberia, in the Baltic states and eastern Poland annexed by the Red Army.
The mass bombing of cities in Europe and Asia has often been called a war crime, although no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War II.
The USAAF firebombed a total of 67 Japanese cities, killing 393,000 civilians and destroying 65% of built-up areas.

===
Genocide, concentration camps, and slave labour ===
Nazi Germany was responsible for the Holocaust (which killed approximately 6 million Jews) as well as for killing 2.7 million ethnic Poles and 4 million others who were deemed "unworthy of life" (including the disabled and mentally ill, Soviet prisoners of war, Romani, homosexuals, Freemasons, and Jehovah's Witnesses) as part of a programme of deliberate extermination, in effect becoming a "genocidal state".
Soviet POWs were kept in especially unbearable conditions, and 3.6 million Soviet POWs out of 5.7 million died in Nazi camps during the war.
In addition to concentration camps, death camps were created in Nazi Germany to exterminate people on an industrial scale.
Nazi Germany extensively used forced labourers; about 12 million Europeans from German occupied countries were abducted and used as a slave work force in German industry, agriculture and war economy.
The Soviet Gulag became a de facto system of deadly camps during 1942–43, when wartime privation and hunger caused numerous deaths of inmates, including foreign citizens of Poland and other countries occupied in 1939–40 by the Soviet Union, as well as Axis POWs.
By the end of the war, most Soviet POWs liberated from Nazi camps and many repatriated civilians were detained in special filtration camps where they were subjected to NKVD evaluation, and 226,127 were sent to the Gulag as real or perceived Nazi collaborators.

Japanese prisoner-of-war camps, many of which were used as labour camps, also had high death rates.
The International Military Tribunal for the Far East found the death rate of Western prisoners was 27 per cent (for American POWs, 37 per cent), seven times that of POWs under the Germans and Italians.
While 37,583 prisoners from the UK, 28,500 from the Netherlands, and 14,473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan, the number of Chinese released was only 56.At least five million Chinese civilians from northern China and Manchukuo were enslaved between 1935 and 1941 by the East Asia Development Board, or Kōain, for work in mines and war industries.
After 1942, the number reached 10 million.
In Java, between 4 and 10 million rōmusha (Japanese: "manual labourers"), were forced to work by the Japanese military.
About 270,000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese-held areas in South East Asia, and only 52,000 were repatriated to Java.

===
Occupation ===
In Europe, occupation came under two forms.
In Western, Northern, and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia)
Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.5 billion reichsmarks (27.8 billion US dollars) by the end of the war; this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods.
Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 percent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 percent of total German income as the war went on.

In the East, the intended gains of Lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders.
Unlike in the West, the Nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the "inferior people" of Slavic descent; most German advances were thus followed by mass executions.
Although resistance groups formed in most occupied territories, they did not significantly hamper German operations in either the East or the West until late 1943.

In Asia, Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples.
Although Japanese forces were sometimes welcomed as liberators from European domination, Japanese war crimes frequently turned local public opinion against them.
During Japan's initial conquest it captured 4,000,000 barrels (640,000 m3) of oil (~5.5×105 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces, and by 1943 was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to 50 million barrels (~6.8×10^6 t), 76 per cent of its 1940 output rate.

===
Home fronts and production ===
In Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics.
In 1938, the Western Allies (United Kingdom, France, Poland and the British Dominions) had a 30 percent larger population and a 30 percent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis powers (Germany and Italy); if colonies are included, the Allies had more than a 5:1 advantage in population and a nearly 2:1 advantage in GDP.
In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan but only an 89 percent higher GDP; this is reduced to three times the population and only a 38 percent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.
The United States produced about two-thirds of all the munitions used by the Allies in WWII, including warships, transports, warplanes, artillery, tanks, trucks, and ammunition.

Though the Allies' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan, they became the decisive factor by 1942, after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies, as the war largely settled into one of attrition.
While the Allies' ability to out-produce the Axis is often attributed to the Allies having more access to natural resources, other factors, such as Germany and Japan's reluctance to employ women in the labour force, Allied strategic bombing, and Germany's late shift to a war economy contributed significantly.
Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and had not equipped themselves to do so.
To improve their production, Germany and Japan used millions of slave labourers; Germany used about 12 million people, mostly from Eastern Europe, while Japan used more than 18 million people in Far East Asia.

===
Advances in technology and warfare ===
Aircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and ground-support, and each role was advanced considerably.
Innovation included airlift (the capability to quickly move limited high-priority supplies, equipment, and personnel); and of strategic bombing (the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy's ability to wage war).
Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery.
The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and, though late introduction meant it had little impact, it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.
Although guided missiles were being developed, they were not advanced enough to reliably target aircraft until some years after the war.

Advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines.
Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship in place of the battleship.
In the Atlantic, escort carriers proved to be a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap.
Carriers were also more economical than battleships because of the relatively low cost of aircraft and their not requiring to be as heavily armoured.
Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War, were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second.
The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics.
Gradually, improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh light, hedgehog, squid, and homing torpedoes proved victorious over the German submarines.

Land warfare changed from the static front lines of trench warfare of World War I, which had relied on improved artillery that outmatched the speed of both infantry and cavalry, to increased mobility and combined arms.
The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon.
In the late 1930s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World War I, and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower.
At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications.
This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat.
This, along with Germany's use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France.
Many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, anti-tank guns (both towed and self-propelled), mines, short-ranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were used.
Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces, and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War I.
The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG34, and
various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings.
The assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces.

Most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most well known being the German Enigma machine.
Development of SIGINT (signals intelligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption.
Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes and British Ultra, a pioneering method for decoding Enigma benefiting from information given to the United Kingdom by the Polish Cipher Bureau, which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war.
Another aspect of military intelligence was the use of deception, which the Allies used to great effect, such as in operations Mincemeat and Bodyguard.
Other technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the world's first programmable computers (Z3, Colossus, and ENIAC), guided missiles and modern rockets, the Manhattan Project's development of nuclear weapons, operations research and the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the English Channel.
Penicillin was first mass-produced and used during the war (see Stabilization and mass production of penicillin).

==
See also ==
Index of World War II articles
Lists of World War II topics
Outline of World War II


==
Notes ==


==
Citations ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Barrett, David P.; Shyu, Lawrence N. (2001).
China in the Anti-Japanese War, 1937–1945: Politics, Culture and Society.
New York:
Peter Lang.
ISBN 978-0-8204-4556-4.

Budiansky, Stephen (2001).
Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II.
London:
Penguin Books.
ISBN 978-0-14-028105-7.

Davidson, Eugene (1999).
The Death and Life of Germany:
An Account of the American Occupation.
University of Missouri Press.
ISBN 978-0-8262-1249-8.

Fitzgerald, Stephanie (2011).
Children of the Holocaust.
Mankato, MN: Compass Point Books.
ISBN 978-0-7565-4390-7.

Garthoff, Raymond L. (1969). "
The Soviet Manchurian Campaign, August 1945".
Military Affairs.
33 (2):
312–36.
doi:10.2307/1983926.
JSTOR 1983926.

Gilbert, Martin (2001).
"
Final Solution".

In Dear, Ian; Foot, Richard D. (eds.).
The Oxford Companion to World War II.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
pp.
285–92.
ISBN 978-0-19-280670-3.

Hedgepeth, Sonja; Saidel, Rochelle (2010).
Sexual Violence against Jewish Women During the Holocaust.
Lebanon, NH:
University Press of New England.
ISBN 978-1-58465-904-4.

Macksey, Kenneth (1997) [1979].
Rommel: Battles and Campaigns.
Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.
ISBN 978-0-306-80786-2.

Morison, Samuel Eliot (2002).
History of United States Naval Operations in World War II.
14
: Victory in the Pacific, 1945.
Champaign, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
ISBN 978-0-252-07065-5.

Schofield, B.B. (1981).
"
The Defeat of the U-Boats during World War II".
Journal of Contemporary History.
16 (1): 119–29.
doi:10.1177/002200948101600107.
JSTOR 260619.
S2CID 161422881.

Sommerville, Donald (2008).
The Complete Illustrated History of World War Two:
An Authoritative Account of the Deadliest Conflict in Human History with Analysis of Decisive Encounters and Landmark Engagements.
Leicester: Lorenz Books.
ISBN 978-0-7548-1898-4.
==
External links ==

World War II (1939–1945) at the Encyclopædia Britannica
West Point Maps of the European War
West Point Maps of the Asian-Pacific War
Atlas of the World Battle Fronts
(July 1943 to August 1945)
Records of World War II propaganda posters are held by Simon Fraser University's Special Collections and Rare Books
Maps of World War II in Europe at Omniatlas
Astra (Sanskrit: "weapon thrown as projectile") is an Indian all weather beyond-visual-range air-to-air missile, developed by the Defence Research and Development Organisation.
It is the first air-to-air missile developed by India.
Astra is designed to be capable of engaging targets at varying range and altitudes allowing for engagement of both short-range targets at a distance of 10 km (6.2 mi) and long-range targets up to a distance of 110 km (68 mi).
Astra has been integrated with Indian Air Force's Sukhoi Su-30MKI and will be integrated with Dassault Mirage 2000, HAL Tejas and Mikoyan MiG-29 in the future.
Limited series production of Astra missiles began in 2017.

== Description ==
Astra's older design resembled Matra Super 530D and Vympel R-77 in a few aspects.
Astra is 3.6 m (12 ft)
long with a diameter of 178 mm (7.0 in) and weighs 154 kg (340 lb).
It uses mid-course inertial guidance driven by fibre optic gyroscope with terminal guidance through active radar homing.
It is capable of receiving course corrections through a secure data link.
The missile's active radar seeker with a homing range of 25 km (16 mi) is supplied by Agat and will be manufactured locally.
The seeker can lock-on to a target with a radar cross section of 5 square metres from a distance of 15 km and enables off-boresight launches up to an angle of 45°.
Some tests have been conducted in 2017 and 2018 using an indigenous seeker developed by Research Centre Imarat.
Astra is equipped with electronic counter-countermeasures to allow operation even during enemy attempts to jam the seeker using electronic countermeasures.
It carries a 15 kg (33 lb) high explosive pre-fragmented warhead activated by a proximity fuse.
Astra uses a smokeless solid fuelled motor that can propel the missile to a speed of Mach 4.5 and allows operation from a maximum altitude of 20 km (66,000 ft).
The maximum range of Astra is 110 km (68 mi) in head-on chase mode and 20 km (12 mi) in tail chase mode.
The maximum range is achieved when the missile launched from an altitude of 3 km (9,800 ft).
When it is fired from an altitude of 2 km (6,600 ft), the range drops to 44 km (27 mi) and when it is launched from sea level, the range drops further to 21 km (13 mi).
Astra's low aspect ratio wings allow it to engage manoeuvring targets up to a range of 90 km (56 mi) in head-on chase mode and 60 km (37 mi) in tail chase mode.
It can be launched in both autonomous and buddy mode operation and can lock on to its target before or after it is launched.

==
Development ==
Preliminary work on Astra had begun by 1990 with the completion of a pre-feasibility study.
Astra was revealed to the public for the first time at Aero India 1998.
It was described as an elongated Matra Super 530D with a smaller diametre in front of the wings.
The project to develop Astra missile was officially sanctioned in 2004 with a budget of ₹955 crore (equivalent to ₹27 billion or US$380 million in 2019).
The project was to be led by Defence Research and Development Laboratory with assistance from Hindustan Aeronautics Limited and Electronics Corporation of India Limited.
The initial version of Astra reportedly weighed 300 kg (660 lb) with a range of 25–40 km (16–25 mi) and was planned to be integrated with HAL Tejas.
It was tested for the first time in May 2003.The missile was redesigned around 2006 due to control issues and performance deficiencies at high altitude.
The initial design of four cruciform short-span long-chord wings were replaced by cropped delta wings placed near the nose.
The redesigned missile had an improved propulsion system and was tested for the first time in 2008.
By 2013, the missile had been redesigned again in response to multiple failures caused by adverse interactions between flight control surfaces.
The control, guidance, and propulsion systems were also reconfigured.
After the second redesign, the missile was lighter than the initial version by around 130 kg (290 lb).
It was tested from the ground thrice in December 2012 and captive trials from a Sukhoi Su-30MKI were held in April 2013.Astra completed final development trials in September 2017 and was cleared for production at Bharat Dynamics Limited's manufacturing facility in Bhanur, Telangana for an initial order of 50 missiles.
An additional order of 248 missiles were placed for Indian Air Force and Indian Navy for use on various platforms like Sukhoi Su-30MKI, HAL Tejas, MiG-29 /
MiG-29K. Taking the total order number to 298 missiles.

==
Variants ==


===
Air-to-air missile versions ===
After the deployment of Astra Mk.
1, several offshoot version are being planned including within visual range   imaging Infra-red homing missile tentatively classified as Astra IR, whereas trials for a longer range version Astra Mk.
2 and a further development called Astra Mk.
3 is being planned.
Astra Mk.
2 will use dual pulse solid rocket motor for extended reach and better kinematics during the kill phase.
The missile will share smokeless propulsion of its predecessor Mk.
1, whilst imbibing newer technologies being implemented in other missile program of DRDO like Barak 8 and Rudram-1.
The plan is to extend the range of Mk.
2
version to 160 kilometres (99 mi) rivaling American AMRAAM
AIM 120-D. Astra Mk.
2 variant will make use of indigenous seeker manufactured by Bharat Electronics Limited.
The testing for the Mk.
2 variant is schedule to being in the second half of 2022 with focus on improving the range by the use of dual-pulse motor and increasing the indigenous content to 100% inline with Atmanirbhar Bharat mission.
A future variant Mk.
3 based on Solid Fuel Ducted Ramjet (SFDR) engine is being jointly developed by India and Russia.

The missile was first tested on 30 May 2018 and further test was carried out on 8 February 2019.

The aim of the program to develop an indigenous missile rivaling China's PL-15,  AIM-260 JATM and MBDA Meteor missile with a range of 350 km (220 mi).
=== Surface-to-air missile versions ===
To fulfill the need of Indian Navy's replacement of Barak-1 short range surface-to-air missile system, DRDO successfully test fired two VL-SRSAM on 22 February 2021 at Odisha coast.
The maiden launch tested the efficacy of vertical launch system and missile's maximum and minimum range.
Both the missile successfully intercepted their target with pin point accuracy.
VL-SRSAM supersedes the cancelled Maitri missile project undertaken jointly by MBDA and DRDO based on the work done on MICA and Trishul.
The missile will arm Indian Navy ships like Kamorta-class corvette with short range air defense system.
The missile use jet vane based thrust vectoring control to give high maneuverability to the missile.
The missile maybe guided by Revathi radar which is extensively being used in Indian Navy ship like Kamorta-class corvette.
Indian Air Force may also sport VL-SRSAM in truck-based launcher to supplement its Akash surface-to-air missile as a quick reaction system similar to Norwegian/American NASAM 2.
==
Trials ==
Astra went through a series of ground tests from 2003 till 2012 in three different configurations to validate the airframe, propulsion system, control system, dual mode guidance and night firing capability.
Carriage trials were carried out in 2009 and 2013 on Sukhoi Su-30MKI.
In May 2014, it was fired for the first time in air.
On 18 March 2016, the missile was fired in public during Iron Fist 2016 exercise from a Sukhoi Su-30MKI.
During a series of seven tests in September 2017, Astra was tested twice with an indigenous seeker.
During user trials in 2019, Astra hit a target at a distance of 90 km (56 mi).The flight trials on the indigenous built HAL Tejas are expected to begin in the first half of 2021.
==
Operators ==
IndiaIndian Air Force
Indian Navy


==
Gallery ==
==
See also ==
AIM-120
AMRAAM
Derby (missile)
MICA (
missile)
PL-12
R-Darter
Meteor
PL-15


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Globalsecurity
Bharat Rakshak
A dago dazzler is an elaborately decorated document used to identify its bearer, usually an academic, as someone with an official association with an institution, usually a university or college, with the purpose of impressing low-level bureaucrats, usually of a foreign nation, so that they will allow the bearer to gain access to archived material or to perform some other action.

The document is given more than the usual amount of decoration—often with colored ribbons and shiny seals—solely for the purpose of impressing bureaucrats.
The term, used by academics and sometimes by government officials, is meant to disparage the bureaucrats, who are usually located in another country.
The first word (dago) is an ethnic slur for Italians (and sometimes Spaniards and Latin Americans), but dago dazzlers have been used in other countries, including China.

Dago dazzlers were created as early as the late 19th century in the United States, but examples have been referred to in recent decades.
Published references nowadays are often accompanied by a statement by the writer that the word "dago" in the term is an ethnic slur.

==
History ==


===
19th to early 20th century ===
In 1898, when United States Department of Agriculture scientist David Fairchild left the United States for a plant-collecting expedition in Europe and Asia, he was equipped with letters of introduction and enormous certificates of identification.
"
The papers," Fairchild recalled, "were wonderful creations, hand-printed on parchment, bedecked with ribbons, and emblazoned with the gold seal of the Department of Agriculture.
Nothing the Department of State ever produced could compare with them, and they soon became affectionately known as 'Dago Dazzlers.
'"A.
Lawrence Lowell, president of Harvard University, in 1920 gave a minor university official, Reginald Coggeshall, a dago dazzler "with a great gold seal of the University", according to the recipient.
In August 1929, an associate of Lincoln Kirstein had "what she called her 'Dago Dazzler'.
Bearing the gold stamp of Harvard, this official looking piece of paper identified its bearer as a worthy and accredited scholar of art history who should be permitted to see any and all artworks, whether they were sequestered in private houses, or locked in minor chapels.
"
In that situation, the bearer presented her document to a doorman at a private villa in Venice, and the villa's owner soon let her and her two companions inside to inspect frescos.
In 1940, Thomas Barbour, an official at Harvard's Museum of Comparative Zoology, sent biologist Archie Carr, then planning an expedition to Mexico, a dago dazzler, in this case a letter on Harvard stationery that he hoped would facilitate Carr's collecting activities in Mexico.
He wrote facetiously: "I send you herewith a dago dazzler which may help."
"
Dazzlers" are any official looking document on impressive stationery, [...]
In effect, a dazzler legitimizes a scholar's efforts by association.
The term is still in use today.

The dazzler was meant to help with "bureaucrats or border guards who could impede the collection and export of scientific specimens".
In 1937, Lawrence Griswold described dago dazzlers in Tombs, Travel and Trouble, his book of anecdotes about his travels in Latin America and Southeast Asia:
"When posed with an obdurate official whose ignorance is his best armor, the Dago Dazzler is called into play.
With great dignity, the tube is brought forth and opened in the presence of the official.
The Dazzler is then withdrawn carefully and unrolled slowly with impressive reverence.
When the officer, who has been watching all this with increasing apprehension, finally sees the iridescent and beribboned prodigy, awe overcomes him.
Sometimes he faints.
"In
his book Panamexico,also published in 1937, Carveth Wells mentioned that the Geographic Society of Chicago issued him a dago dazzler.

===
Mid to late 20th century ===
Fernando Belaúnde Terry, president of Peru from 1963 to 1968 and again from 1980 to 1985, at some point gave Everett Ellin, an art expert, a dago dazzler to help Ellin with bureaucrats in that country.
Ellin later described the document this way:
[H]e gave me a proclamation with his seal and a red sash on it that said that the president endorsed this, and that it'd been taken up with the legislature and had the full blessings of the country; and it was good for the nation; and anybody who sees this, I ask to be very cooperative with these people.
And we took this document with us whenever we called on people, and we would bring it out.
[
Laughs.]Belaúnde himself "called it a 'dago dazzler' [...] which I thought was a very vulgar—because I couldn't think of calling a Latino a dago,
but—
but he called it a 'dago dazzler.'
And, boy, it opened every door.
[
Laughs.]
And that's how we got everywhere.
If we ever needed anything—if we needed a helicopter to go to some remote village, the army sent a helicopter, and we were taken care of.
Journalists have also been known to use dago dazzlers.
The National Geographic magazine's art department created "dazzlers" for use by its roving correspondents, including one which seemed to help get a photographer past customs officials in India in one incident in the early 1970s, when a clerk:
studies Steve's passport and Geographic ID card.
he studies another document Steve has slipped before him —
a letter addressed 'To Whom
It Might Concern', explaining in ornate calligraphy the benevolent purposes of our mission, embossed with the seal of the National Geographic Society, and adorned with a blob of sealing wax holding a blue-and-white ribbon.
This masterwork of pomposity, contrived by the magazine's art staff and designed to overwhelm the most paranoid official, is known in-house as a 'dazzler'.
it is the ultimate weapon in the stalled staffer's arsenal.
An anonymous writer for The Weekly Standard in 2004 recalled use of a dago dazzler at some point in the past when the writer was a student.
In this case, the document was part of correspondence between university officials, not taken with the individual on a trip abroad.
The writer
was enrolled in the junior-year-abroad program of a school that shall remain nameless.
But before our year-long scholarly pub-crawl across Europe could begin, a bureaucratic correspondence had to be carried on between the American university and its European counterpart.
We noticed that, instead of using our university's usual, tasteful red-on-buff official stationery, these letters went out sporting a gaudy, saw-toothed gold seal, with red and blue ribbons affixed.
One day a secretary, pointing to the decoration, whispered to us, "We call this the dago dazzler.
"The
document, according to the writer, was "calculated to impress the rubes".

== See also ==
Letter of credence


==
References ==
A weapon, arm or armament is any implement or device that can be used with the intent to inflict damage or harm.
Weapons are used to increase the efficacy and efficiency of activities such as hunting, crime, law enforcement, self-defense, and warfare.
In broader context, weapons may be construed to include anything used to gain a tactical, strategic, material or mental advantage over an adversary or enemy target.

While ordinary objects – sticks, rocks, bottles, chairs, vehicles – can be used as weapons, many are expressly designed for the purpose; these range from simple implements such as clubs, axes and swords, to complicated modern firearms, tanks, intercontinental ballistic missiles, biological weapons, and cyberweapons.
Something that has been re-purposed, converted, or enhanced to become a weapon of war is termed weaponized, such as a weaponized virus or weaponized laser.

==
History ==
The use of weapons is a major driver of cultural evolution and human history up to today, since weapons are a type of tool which is used to dominate and subdue autonomous agents such as animals and by that allow for an expansion of the cultural niche, while simultaneously other weapon users (i.e., agents such as humans, groups, cultures) are able to adapt to weapons of enemies by learning, triggering a continuous process of competitive technological, skill and cognitive improvement (arms race).

===
Prehistoric ===
The use of objects as weapons has been observed among chimpanzees, leading to speculation that early hominids used weapons as early as five million years ago.
However, this can not be confirmed using physical evidence because wooden clubs, spears, and unshaped stones would have left an ambiguous record.
The earliest unambiguous weapons to be found are the Schöningen spears, eight wooden throwing spears dating back more than 300,000 years.
At the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, numerous human skeletons dating to 10,000 years ago may present evidence of traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including obsidian projectiles embedded in the bones that might have been caused from arrows and clubs during conflict between two hunter-gatherer groups.
But the evidence interpretation of warfare at Nataruk has been challenged.

===
Ancient history ===
The earliest ancient weapons were evolutionary improvements of late neolithic implements, but significant improvements in materials and crafting techniques led to a series of revolutions in military technology.

The development of metal tools began with copper during the Copper Age (about 3,300 BC) and was followed by the Bronze Age, leading to the creation of the Bronze Age sword and similar weapons.

During the Bronze Age, the first defensive structures and fortifications appeared as well, indicating an increased need for security.
Weapons designed to breach fortifications followed soon after, such as the battering ram, which was in use by 2500 BC.The development of iron-working around 1300 BC in Greece had an important impact on the development of ancient weapons.
It was not the introduction of early Iron Age swords, however, as they were not superior to their bronze predecessors,
but rather the domestication of the horse and widespread use of spoked wheels by c. 2000 BC.
This led to the creation of the light, horse-drawn chariot, whose improved mobility proved important during this era.
Spoke-wheeled chariot usage peaked around 1300 BC and then declined, ceasing to be militarily relevant by the 4th century BC.Cavalry developed once horses were bred to support the weight of a human.
The horse extended the range and increased the speed of attacks.

In addition to land based weaponry, warships, such as the trireme, were in use by the 7th century BC.

=== Post-classical history ===
European warfare during the Post-classical history was dominated by elite groups of knights supported by massed infantry (both in combat and ranged roles).
They were involved in mobile combat and sieges which involved various siege weapons and tactics.
Knights on horseback developed tactics for charging with lances providing an impact on the enemy formations and then drawing more practical weapons (such as swords) once they entered into the melee.
By contrast, infantry, in the age before structured formations, relied on cheap, sturdy weapons such as spears and billhooks in close combat and bows from a distance.
As armies became more professional, their equipment was standardized and infantry transitioned to pikes.
Pikes are normally seven to eight feet in length, and used in conjunction with smaller side-arms (short sword).

In Eastern and Middle Eastern warfare, similar tactics were developed independent of European influences.

The introduction of gunpowder from the Asia at the end of this period revolutionized warfare.
Formations of musketeers, protected by pikemen came to dominate open battles, and the cannon replaced the trebuchet as the dominant siege weapon.

===
Modern history ===


====
Early modern ====
The European Renaissance marked the beginning of the implementation of firearms in western warfare.
Guns and rockets were introduced to the battlefield.

Firearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants such as gunpowder, rather than from a counter-weight or spring.
This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user.
Therefore even early firearms such as the arquebus were much more powerful than human-powered weapons.
Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th century to 19th century, with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant.
During the U.S. Civil War new applications of firearms including the machine gun and ironclad warship emerged that would still be recognizable and useful military weapons today, particularly in limited conflicts.
In the 19th century warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel-powered steam engines.

Since the mid-18th century North American French-Indian war through the beginning of the 20th century, human-powered weapons were reduced from the primary weaponry of the battlefield yielding to gunpowder-based weaponry.
Sometimes referred to as the "Age of Rifles", this period was characterized by the development of firearms for infantry and cannons for support, as well as the beginnings of mechanized weapons such as the machine gun.

Of particular note, Howitzers were able to destroy masonry fortresses and other fortifications, and this single invention caused a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), establishing tactics and doctrine that are still in use today.
See Technology during World War I for a detailed discussion.

====
Industrial age ====
An important feature of industrial age warfare was technological escalation – innovations were rapidly matched through replication or countered by another innovation.
The technological escalation during World War I (WW I) was profound, including the wide introduction of aircraft into warfare, and naval warfare with the introduction of aircraft carriers.

====
World War
I ====
World War
I marked the entry of fully industrialized warfare as well as weapons of mass destruction (e.g., chemical and biological weapons), and new weapons were developed quickly to meet wartime needs.
Above all, it promised to the military commanders the independence from the horse and the resurgence in maneuver warfare through extensive use of motor vehicles.
The changes that these military technologies underwent before and during the Second World War were evolutionary, but defined the development for the rest of the century.

====
Interwar ====
This period of innovation in weapon design continued in the inter-war period (between WW I and WW II) with continuous evolution of weapon systems by all major industrial powers.

The major armament firms were the Schneider-Creusot (based in France), the Škoda Works (Czechoslovakia), and Vickers (Great Britain).
The 1920s were committed to disarmament and outlawing of war and poison gas, but rearmament picked up rapidly in the 1930s.
The munitions makers responded nimbly to the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape.
The main purchasers of munitions from the big three companies were Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey—and, to a lesser extent, in Poland, Finland, the Baltic States, and the Soviet Union,


=====
Criminalizing poison gas =====
Realistic critics understood that war could not really be outlawed, but its worst excesses might be banned.
Poison gas became the focus of a worldwide crusade in the 1920s.

Poison gas did not win battles, and the generals did not want it.
The soldiers hated it far more intensely than bullets or explosive shells.
By 1918, chemical shells made up 35 per cent of French ammunition supplies, 25 per cent of British, and 20 per cent of the American stock.
The “Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare” ["Geneva Protocol"] was issued in 1925, and was accepted as policy by all major countries.
In 1937 poison gas was manufactured in large quantities, but not used except against nations that lacked modern weapons or gas masks.

====
World War II ====
Many modern military weapons, particularly ground-based ones, are relatively minor improvements of weapon systems developed during World War II.
See military technology during World War II for a detailed discussion.

World War II
however, perhaps marked the most frantic period of weapons development in the history of humanity.
Massive numbers of new designs and concepts were fielded, and all existing technologies were improved between 1939 and 1945.
The most powerful weapon invented during this period was the atomic bomb, however many other weapons influenced the world, such as jet planes and radar, but were overshadowed by the visibility of nuclear weapons and long-range rockets.

====
Nuclear weapons ====
Since the realization of mutually assured destruction (MAD), the nuclear option of all-out war is no longer considered a survivable scenario.

During the Cold War in the years following World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race.
Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments.
Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the Earth x100 fold, then a new tactic had to be developed.

With this realization, armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than total war.

== Types ==


===
By user ===
– what person or unit uses the weaponPersonal weapons (or small arms) – designed to be used by a single person.

Light weapons – 'man-portable' weapons that may require a small team to operate.

Heavy weapons – artillery and similar weapons larger than light weapons (see SALW).

Hunting weapon – used by hunters for sport or getting food.

Crew served weapons – larger than personal weapons, requiring two or more people to operate correctly.

Fortification weapons – mounted in a permanent installation, or used primarily within a fortification.

Mountain weapons – for use by mountain forces or those operating in difficult terrain.

Vehicle weapons – to be mounted on any type of combat vehicle.

Railway weapons – designed to be mounted on railway cars, including armored trains.

Aircraft weapons – carried on and used by some type of aircraft, helicopter, or other aerial vehicle.

Naval weapons – mounted on ships and submarines.

Space weapons – are designed to be used in or launched from space.

Autonomous weapons – are capable of accomplishing a mission with limited or no human intervention.

===
By function ===
– the construction of the weapon and principle of operationAntimatter weapons (theoretical) would combine matter and antimatter to cause a powerful explosion.

Archery weapons operate by using a tensioned string and bent solid to launch a projectile.

Artillery are firearms capable of launching heavy projectiles over long distances.

Biological weapons spread biological agents, causing disease or infection.

Chemical weapons, poisoning and causing reactions.

Energy weapons rely on concentrating forms of energy to attack, such as lasers or sonic attack.

Explosive weapons use a physical explosion to create blast concussion or spread shrapnel.

Firearms use a chemical charge to launch projectiles.

Improvised weapons are common objects, reused as weapons, such as crowbars and kitchen knives.

Incendiary weapons cause damage by fire.

Non-lethal weapons are designed to subdue without killing.

Magnetic weapons use magnetic fields to propel projectiles, or to focus particle beams.

Melee weapons operate as physical extensions of the user's body and directly impact a close target.

Blade weapons, designed to pierce through flesh and cause bleeding.

Blunt instruments, designed to break bones, concuss or produce crush injuries.

Missiles are rockets which are guided to their target after launch.
(
Also a general term for projectile weapons).

Loitering munitions, designed to loiter over a battlefield, striking once a target is located.

Nuclear weapons use radioactive materials to create nuclear fission and/or nuclear fusion detonations.

Primitive weapons make little or no use of technological or industrial elements.

Ranged weapons (unlike melee weapons), target a distant object or person.

Rockets use chemical propellant to accelerate a projectile
Suicide weapons exploit the willingness of their operator not surviving the attack.

===
By target ===
– the type of target the weapon is designed to attackAnti-aircraft weapons target missiles and aerial vehicles in flight.

Anti-fortification weapons are designed to target enemy installations.

Anti-personnel weapons are designed to attack people, either individually or in numbers.

Anti-radiation weapons target sources of electronic radiation, particularly radar emitters.

Anti-satellite weapons target orbiting satellites.

Anti-ship weapons target ships and vessels on water.

Anti-submarine weapons target submarines and other underwater targets.

Anti-tank weapons are designed to defeat armored targets.

Area denial weapons target territory, making it unsafe or unsuitable for enemy use or travel.

Hunting weapons are weapons used to hunt game animals.

Infantry support weapons are designed to attack various threats to infantry units.

==
Manufacture of weapons ==
The arms industry is a global industry that involves the sales and manufacture of weaponry.
It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities.
Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms-industry to supply their own military forces - and some also have a substantial trade in weapons for use by its citizens, for self-defence, hunting or sporting purposes.

Contracts to supply a given country's military are awarded by governments, making arms contracts of substantial political importance.
The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development a "military-industrial complex", where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked.

According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–14 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009, and the arms sales of the world’s 100 largest private arms-producing and military services companies totalled  $420 billion in 2018.

==
Legislation ==
The production, possession, trade and use of many weapons are controlled.
This may be at a local or central government level, or international treaty.
Examples of such controls include:


===
Gun laws ===
All countries have laws and policies regulating aspects such as the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification and use of small arms by civilians.

Countries which regulate access to firearms will typically restrict access to certain categories of firearms and then restrict the categories of persons who may be granted a license for access to such firearms.
There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting (a.k.a.
target shooting), self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, with different sets of requirements, permissions, and responsibilities.

===
Arms control laws ===
International treaties and agreements place restrictions upon the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation and usage of weapons from small arms and heavy weapons to weapons of mass destruction.
Arms control is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy which seeks to impose such limitations upon consenting participants, although it may also comprise efforts by a nation or group of nations to enforce limitations upon a non-consenting country.

===
Arms trafficking laws ===
Arms trafficking is the trafficking of contraband weapons and ammunition.
What constitutes legal trade in firearms varies widely, depending on local and national laws.

==
Lifecycle problems ==
There are a number of issue around the potential ongoing risks from deployed weapons, the safe storage of weapons, and their eventual disposal when no longer effective or safe.

Ocean dumping of unused weapons and bombs, including ordinary bombs, UXO, landmines and chemical weapons has been common practice by many nations, and often caused hazards.

Unexploded ordnance (UXO) are bombs, land mines and naval mines and similar that did not explode when they were employed and still pose a risk for many years or decades.

Demining or mine clearance from areas of past conflict is a difficult process, but every year, landmines kill 15,000 to 20,000 people and severely maim countless more.

Nuclear terrorism was a serious concern after the fall of the Soviet Union, with the prospect of "loose nukes" being available.
While this risk may have receded, similar situation may arise in the future.

==
In science fiction ==

Strange and exotic weapons are a recurring feature or theme in science fiction.
In some cases, weapons first introduced in science fiction have now been made a reality.
Other science fiction weapons remain purely fictional, and are often beyond the realms of known physical possibility.

At its most prosaic, science fiction features an endless variety of sidearms, mostly variations on real weapons such as guns and swords.
Among the best-known of these are the phaser used in the Star Trek television series, films and novels and the lightsaber and blaster featured in the Star Wars movies, comics, novels and TV series.

In addition to adding action and entertainment value, weaponry in science fiction sometimes become themes when they touch on deeper concerns, often motivated by contemporary issues.
One example is science fiction that deals with weapons of mass destruction.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The dictionary definition of weapon at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Weapon at Wikiquote
 Media related to Weapons at Wikimedia Commons
The term assault weapon is used in the United States to define some types of firearms.
The definition varies among regulating jurisdictions but usually includes semi-automatic firearms with a detachable magazine, a pistol grip and sometimes other features such as a vertical forward grip, flash suppressor or barrel shroud.
Some firearms are specified by name.
At the time that the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban passed in 1994, the U.S. Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use."
The origin of the term has been attributed to legislators, gun control groups, firearm manufacturers, and the media.
It is often used interchangeably (but incorrectly) with the term "assault rifle", which may more specifically refer to selective-fire military rifles that can fire in automatic or burst mode.
After the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, many news organizations ran stories about assault weapons, explaining their varying definitions and presenting varying opinions about whether they should be banned again at the federal level.

== Definitions and usage ==
Drawing from federal and state law definitions, the term assault weapon refers primarily to semi-automatic rifles, pistols, and shotguns that are able to accept detachable magazines and possess one or more other features.
Some jurisdictions define revolving cylinder shotguns as assault weapons.
Legislative definitions do not include fully automatic weapons, which are regulated separately as Title II weapons under federal law.
A key defining law was the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994.

At that time, the United States Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use.
"Common attributes used in legislative definitions of assault weapons include:

Semi-automatic firearm capable of accepting a detachable magazine;
Folding or telescoping (collapsible) stock, which reduces the overall length of the firearm;
A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the weapon;
Bayonet lug, which allows the mounting of a bayonet;
Threaded barrel, which can accept muzzle devices such as a flash hider, suppressor, compensator or muzzle brake;
Grenade launcher;
Barrel shroud.
Dictionary definitions vary from legal definitions.

Dictionary.com defines "assault weapon" as "any of various automatic and semiautomatic military firearms utilizing an intermediate-power cartridge, designed for individual use".
Merriam-Webster's online definition is "any of various automatic or semiautomatic firearms; especially: assault rifle".
===
History of terminology ===
The origin of the term is not clearly known and is the subject of much debate.
In the past, the names of certain military weapons used the phrase, such as the Rifleman's Assault Weapon, a grenade launcher developed in 1977 for use with the M16 assault rifle, or the Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon, a rocket launcher introduced in 1984.One of the earliest uses of the term, or a similar term, in its current meaning was in a bill introduced by Art Agnos in the California State Assembly in April 1985 to ban semi-automatic "assault firearms" capable of using detachable magazines of 20 rounds or more.
Speaking to the Assembly Public Safety Committee, Agnos said, "The only use for assault weapons is to shoot people."
The measure did not pass when it came up for a vote.
In 2013, The Washington Post, looking into the history of the term, wrote of the term: "
Many attribute its popularization to a 1988 paper written by gun-control activist and Violence Policy Center founder Josh Sugarmann and the later reaction to the Cleveland School massacre in Stockton, California, in January 1989.
"
Sugarmann had written:

Assault weapons—just like armor-piercing bullets, machine guns, and plastic firearms—are a new topic.
The weapons' menacing looks, coupled with the public's confusion over fully automatic machine guns versus semi-automatic assault weapons—anything that looks like a machine gun is assumed to be a machine gun—can only increase the chance of public support for restrictions on these weapons.
In addition, few people can envision a practical use for these weapons.

Other researchers have found evidence to suggest that the firearms industry itself may have introduced the term "assault weapon" to build interest in new product lines.
Phillip Peterson, the author of Gun Digest Buyer’s Guide to Assault Weapons
(2008) wrote:
The popularly held idea that the term 'assault weapon' originated with anti-gun activists is wrong.
The term was first adopted by manufacturers, wholesalers, importers and dealers in the American firearms industry to stimulate sales of certain firearms that did not have an appearance that was familiar to many firearms owners.
The manufacturers and gun writers of the day needed a catchy name to identify this new type of gun.

Meanwhile many gun rights activists have put forward that the term originated from the media or gun control activists.
Conservative writer Rich Lowry said that assault weapon is a "manufactured term".
Joseph P. Tartaro of the Second Amendment Foundation (SAF) wrote in 1994: "
One of the key elements of the anti-gun strategy to gull the public into supporting bans on the so-called 'assault weapons' is to foster confusion.
As stated previously, the public does not know the difference between a full automatic and a semi-automatic firearm."

Robert Crook, executive director of the Coalition of Connecticut Sportsmen, said "the term 'assault weapon,' as used by the media, is a media invention."
===
Differing state law definitions ===
Seven states have assault weapon bans with different definitions and characteristics.

California defines assault weapons by name, by "series" (AK or AR-15), and by characteristic.

A shotgun with a revolving cylinder is also defined as an assault weapon.

Connecticut defines assault weapons as selective-fire firearms (including assault rifles capable of fully automatic or burst fire); semi-automatic firearms specified by name; and semi-automatic firearms with specific characteristics.

Hawaii defines and bans assault pistols.

Maryland defines and bans assault pistols.
It regulates 45 other assault weapons listed by make or model including copies, regardless of manufacturer.

Massachusetts defines assault weapons as semi-automatic firearms with the same definition provisions from the expired federal ban of 1994.

New York had an assault weapons ban prior to 2013, but on January 16 of that year it passed the SAFE Act, which created a stricter definition of assault weapons and banned them immediately.
The NY SAFE Act defines assault weapons as semi-automatic pistols and rifles with detachable magazines and one military-style feature, and semi-automatic shotguns with one military-style feature.
In Illinois, proposed legislation in 2013 would have defined the term "semi-automatic assault weapon" as any semi-automatic firearm able to accept a detachable magazine, but it was never brought to a vote.
The Illinois State Rifle Association said most of the state's firearms owners owned one or more guns that would have been banned under the proposal.
The NRA said the proposal would have restricted about 75 percent of handguns and 50 percent of long guns in circulation.
As municipalities, Chicago and Cook County bans certain firearms defined as assault weapons and have no provision for legal possession of firearms owned before their laws were passed.

Minnesota also defines certain firearms as assault weapons and regulates their sales.

===
Distinction from assault rifles ===
The term "assault rifle" is sometimes used interchangeably with the term "assault weapon".
According to the Associated Press Stylebook, "although the terms are often used interchangeably, some make the distinction that assault rifle is a military weapon with a selector switch for firing in either fully automatic or semi-automatic mode from
a detachable, 10- to 30-round magazine.
"
Civilian ownership of machine guns, including selective-fire rifles, has been tightly regulated since 1934 under the National Firearms Act and since 1986 under the Firearm Owners Protection Act.

===
Cosmetic features ===
Gun control advocates and gun rights advocates have referred to at least some of the features outlined in assault weapons bans as "cosmetic".
The NRA Institute for Legislative Action and the Violence Policy Center both used the term in 2004 when the federal ban expired.
In May 2012, the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence said, "the inclusion in the list of features that were purely cosmetic in nature created a loophole that allowed manufacturers to successfully circumvent the law by making minor modifications to the weapons they already produced."
Some reporters used the term in stories after the 2012 shootings in Aurora, Colorado and at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Assault weapons, also sometimes called "black guns" or "black rifles", are no more powerful than many other semi-automatic rifles legally used for hunting throughout the United States; they do not shoot faster or have greater range.
Two scholars have written: "
One problem inherent in the study of [assault weapons (AW)] is that the classifications of AW are based on cosmetic features of firearms...
For instance, the Colt AR-15 series of semi-automatic rifles—the civilian version of the fully automatic M-16 rifle issued to U.S. soldiers—was subject to the 1994 AW restrictions, but the Ruger Mini-14 rifle was not banned.
Yet, the Mini-14 is the same caliber, has a similar barrel length, the same semi-automatic action, and can use magazines that hold 30 rounds of ammunition.
The only real meaningful difference between the two firearms is cosmetic:
The AR-15 rifle looks more dangerous.
"The
National Shooting Sports Foundation, a firearms industry trade group, states that the term assault weapon has been misapplied to many semi-automatic firearms because of their appearance and not their use in crime.

== Political and legislative issues ==
Prominent gun-control groups that support restrictions on ownership of firearms include the Brady Campaign and the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence.
Prominent opponents of assault-weapons bans include the National Rifle Association and Gun Owners of America.
In 2002, the NRA's Wayne LaPierre and Jim Baker said "assault weapons" is a pejorative term.
The National Shooting Sports Foundation considers it a politically driven catchphrase aimed to conflate non-automatic weapons with full-automatic assault rifles.
As of 2012, there are an estimated 2.5–3.7 million rifles from just the AR-15 family of rifles in civilian use in the United States; the total number of assault weapons in the United States among all types is not known, and can not be known because of the different definitions in different jurisdictions.

===
Defunct U.S. Federal Assault Weapons Ban ===
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994, more commonly known as the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, expired in 2004.

It banned the manufacture or importation of certain semi-automatic firearms that it defined as "semiautomatic assault weapons", commonly known as assault weapons.

Any firearms so defined that were already possessed at the time the law took effect were grandfathered in, and could be legally owned or transferred.

Another aspect of the law banned the manufacture or importation of magazines that could hold more than ten rounds of ammunition, with existing magazines grandfathered in as legal.
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 defined certain firearms as assault weapons based on the features they possessed.

This included semi-automatic rifles with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a flash suppressor or threaded barrel, a bayonet mount, or a muzzle-mounted grenade launcher.

It included semi-automatic pistols with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip, a threaded barrel, a barrel shroud, or an unloaded weight of 50 ounces or more.
Additionally defined as assault weapons were semi-automatic shotguns with a rotating cylinder, or with at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a detachable magazine, or a fixed magazine that can hold more than five rounds.
The ban also prohibited 19 specifically named models of firearms, as well as copies of those guns.

These included the AK-47, Uzi, Galil, AR-15, FN FAL, MAC-10, Steyr AUG, TEC-9, and Armsel Striker.

===
Failed Assault Weapons Ban of 2013
bill ===
On December 16, 2012, two days after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Senator Dianne Feinstein said she would introduce a new assault weapons ban on the first day of Congress.
Five days later, on December 21, Wayne LaPierre, chief executive of the National Rifle Association, held a news conference repeating the NRA's opposition to additional gun laws.
Feinstein and Senator Richard Blumenthal held a separate news conference in response.
There, Feinstein said that it seemed to her "prudent" to register grandfathered assault weapons under the National Firearms Act (NFA).
A two-page bill summary on the senator's web site also mentioned registering grandfathered assault weapons under the NFA, but the text of the bill introduced to the Senate did not include that provision.

On January 24, 2013, Feinstein introduced S. 150, the "Assault Weapons Ban of 2013".
The bill was similar to the 1994 ban, but differed in that it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the 1994 ban.
On April 17, 2013, it failed on a Senate vote of 60 to 40.

== See also ==
Military-style semi-automatic, New Zealand legal classification
Semi-automatic firearm


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Quotations related to Assault weapon at Wikiquote
Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST)
(Bengali: মিলিটারি
ইনস্টিটিউট
অফ সায়েন্স অ্যান্ড
টেকনোলজি) is under National University, Bangladesh in Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
It is an institute under the Ministry of Defence (Bangladesh) which is run by Military of Bangladesh and is affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals.
Though a military institution, both military and civil students study in MIST.

==
History ==
MIST came into existence on 19 April 1998 and academic programs were launched in January 1999.
The initial batches included only selected military students.
However, feeling the necessity of spreading quality engineering education, the authority decided to admit civil students (both male and female) and from 2002, civilian students were admitted in different departments through passing a rigorous admission test.

The maiden department of the institute is the Civil Engineering department, which started functioning in 1999.
In 2000, Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) department was established.
Mechanical Engineering (ME) department and Electrical, Electronic & Communication Engineering (EECE) department were established in the year 2003.
MIST started its Masters program in different disciplines from 2012 and MPhil/PhD from year 2014.In
the beginning MIST was affiliated with the University of Dhaka (DU).

==
Campus ==
MIST is located at Mirpur Cantonment, on the northwest edge of Dhaka City.
Students' hall and teachers' quarters are at the last end of the campus.
The academic buildings of MIST are on 50 acres (200,000 m2) of land.
This area is confined, with officers' mess, four tower buildings (two of them are completed, known as Faculty Tower-1 and Faculty Tower-2; as of December 2019, the other two are in construction), cafeteria, library, two fields for the civil students, medical center, physical center and administrative buildings.
Halls for students and teachers are situated outside the campus.
Recently more land was issued for the campus for residential accommodation.

==
Aim of MIST ==
The aim of MIST is to conduct undergraduate, post graduate/Masters (M.Sc.
Engg./ M. Engg.)
and Ph.D. program on various disciplines of engineering.
==
Student's dress ==
Civil students are to wear dress with displayed identity card as per 'Dress Code' prescribed by MIST authority.
Military students put on uniform as per Dress Regulation of respective services.

==
Affiliation ==
MIST was previously affiliated with the University of Dhaka.
However, at present all academic programs of MIST are affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP).
All examinations are conducted as per the schedule approved by BUP.
It also approves the results and awards certificates to the qualified students.

==
Procedure of admission ==
The undergraduate admission process at MIST has several steps.
First, students are screened based on their grade point average (GPA) in HSC or equivalent examinations.
Every year, 10,000 candidates are short-listed from approximately 20,000-20,500 applicants to sit for the admission test.
Besides the admission test, SSC and HSC results are taken into consideration while evaluating candidates.
Students who have passed in minimum five subjects in GCE O-Level and three subjects (mathematics, physics and chemistry) in A-Level, obtaining minimum C-grades in all subjects are also eligible for the admission test.
Foreign students may be admitted against a reserved quota of 3% of overall vacancies available (6% of civil seats).
Vacancies will be offered to countries through Armed Forces Division (AFD), Prime Minister's Office, of the Government of Bangladesh.
Admission to Ph.D. and M.Phil
programs requires a master's degree from relevant branch from a recognized university.
Admission to a Master's program requires a bachelor's degree in engineering from a recognized institution.
Admission is based on written admission test & interview/viva voce on the relevant departments.
Admission is highly competitive in postgraduate programs as only few aspirants are selected every year from a large pool of applicants.

==
Academics ==


===
Faculties and departments ===
Academic activities are undertaken by 12 departments under four faculties.
Twelve departments offer undergraduate programs.

===
Postgraduate programs ===
Eight departments of MIST offer postgraduate courses(M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D) and other three departments of Science and Engineering Faculty offer M.Phil.

Civil Engineering [Structure/Transportation/Environment/Water Resource/Geotechnical Engineering] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Electrical, Electronics & Communication Engineering [Power/Electronics/Communication] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Computer Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Mechanical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Aeronautical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Nuclear Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Biomedical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.)
===
Diploma courses ===
Certificate Course on
GIS and Remote Sensing
Diploma courses in surveying & mapping
Diploma & Certificate courses in CSE.

Professional advance courses.

==
Regulatory bodies ==


===
Council of MIST ===


====
Chairman ====
Honorable Minister, Ministry of Education, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.
====
Vice chairman ====
Chief of Army Staff, Bangladesh Army
Chief of Naval Staff, Bangladesh Navy
Chief of Air Staff,
Bangladesh Air Force


====
Members ====
Principal Staff Officer, Armed Forces Division (AFD)
Secretary, MOD
Vice Chancellor(VC), BUP
Engineer in Chief(E in C), Army Headquarters(AHQ)
Commandant, MIST
Commandant, BMA
Commandant, BNA
Commandant, BAFA
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), Faculty of science, DU
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), BUET
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of the Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Science and Technology


====
Member secretary ====
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Governing Body of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Vice chairman ====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BMA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BNA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BAFA /
Commandant MIST
Director General, Training Directorate, AFD
Director, Military Training, Bangladesh Army
Director, Naval Training,  Bangladesh Navy
Director, Air Training,  Bangladesh Air Force
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Director Administration, MIST
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and Information Technology


===
Member secretary ===
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Academic Council  of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
Commandant, MIST


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BMA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BNA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BAFA
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Heads of all Department, MIST
Colonel Staff, MIST
Controller of Exam, MIST
Representative of Training Directorate, AFD
Representative of Military Training Directorate, AHQ
Representative of Naval Training Directorate, NHQ
Representative of Air Training Directorate, Air HQ
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education


====
Member secretary ====
General Staff Officer Grade-1 (Academic),
MIST


== Number of seats ==
The number of seats for 4-year bachelor's degree in Engineering Programmes (Unit-A) and
5-year bachelor's degree of Architecture Programme (Unit-B) is given below:


==
Teacher's quarters ==
MIST has two Teacher's Quarters for the permanent teachers with families.
They are:
Polash (পলাশ)
Shapla (শাপলা)


== Facilities and services ==


== Halls of residence ==
MIST has dorms for male and female students.
Hostel administration is performed by the provost who is selected from one of the senior teachers of the 11 departments.
The hall organizes many creative works and tournaments.

===
Osmany Hall ===
Osmany Hall is named after the Bangabir General M.A.G. Osmany, the Commander-in-chief of Bangladesh forces during Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Osmany Hall is an 8 stored building with female and male wings, having a capacity of 558 students (male 260 and female 298).
There are 20 staff for each wing.
Osmany Hall is known for the security of the students compared to the other hall in the country.
Students get various modern facilities such as 24-hour electricity, internet service, gym, games and sports facilities.

==
Students organizations ==
MIST
Robotics Club (MISTRC)
<http://mistroboticsclub.com//>
MIST
Literature and Cultural Club (MISTLCC)
MIST
IEEE MIST Student Branch
MIST
Debating Society (MISTDS)
MIST  Photographic Society (MISTPS)
MIST  Film and Drama Society (MISTFDS)
MIST
Sports Club
MIST
Aeronautics and Astronautics Club (MAAC)
MIST  Computer Club <https://computer-club.mist.ac.bd/
>
MIST  Nuclear Engineering Club


==
Laboratory facilities ==
Each department is equipped with modern lab facilities.
The various laboratories available under each dept are given below:


==
Central library ==
MIST library has a resourceful collection of 65,000 books (as of 2018), 1,680 CD-ROMs, and a good number of magazines, periodicals, journals and articles from home and abroad.
The library gives access to online journals through Library Consortium of Bangladesh (LiCoB)[previously
Bangladesh INASP-PERii Consortium (BIPC)].
The central library uses KOHA, Dspace.
VuFind and Drupal (open source software) as a part of the Integrated Library Management System.
It also subscribes a number of Bangla and English newspapers and periodicals.
In addition to that, each dept has its own library enriched with adequate text and reference books.
Start of each semester library issues reference books of that particular semester to students of every department.
There is also a Cyber Center for Internet browsing.

==
MIST journals and magazines ==
MIST has an annual technical journal titled "Galaxy" (ISSN 2073-6444) whose concern is to provide a firm ground for students and faculty members to share their research outcome and knowledge.

"
IMPULSE"-Annual publication from Dept.
of Electrical, Electronic and Communication Engineering.
So far, there are 6 editions of this illustrious magazine.

Osmany Hall Magazine "Prottasha(প্রত্যাশা)
"
"
AEROMIST"-A departmental magazine of Aeronautical Engineering department.
===
Osmany Memorial Gold Medal ===
Awarded to the best student amongst all the MIST Medal holders.

===
MIST Medal ===
Awarded to first position holder in each department with a minimum CGPA of 3.80 out of 4.00.
===
Research Medal ===
Awarded to the student of different departments for the best Research work in their Graduation.

===
Dean's List of Honour ===
All students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 at the end of each academic level for level 1, 2 and 3
All graduating students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 considering results of entire program (level 1 to 4)


===
Scholarships and stipends ===
Chancellor's(BUP) Scholarship
Vice Chancellors (BUP) Scholarship/
Stipend
MIST Scholarship
MIST Stipends
Osmany Memorial Trust Scholarship
Buro Bangladesh Stipend
Chief of Army Staff Scholarship
Chief of Army Staff Stipend
Chief of Naval Staff Scholarship
Chief of Air Staff Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Stipend


==
Achievements ==
Md Mijanur Rahman (AE-1)
Won Runner-Up Trophy in "International Public Speaking Competition-2010" held in England.

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "4th IUT ICT Fest-2012", placed 8th( 5th in institution ranking).

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest Dhaka Regional 2012", achieved 17th position ( 9th in institution ranking).

MIST Lunabotics Team participated in "3rd Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2012" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA.

Mobile Apps "Save Life" developed by the Students (Ishtiak Ahmed & Kazi Munshimun Nabi) of CSE Dept of MIST secured 2nd runner-up position in the Mobile Apps Development Contest by EATL Apps among 188 projects.

MIST Aero Thunder Team participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition(West)-2013" & placed 19th position in world ranking, held in California, USA from 12 to 14 April 2013.

Two Teams from CE Dept.(Team VIVE & Team STORM) participated in "ACI Mortar Workability Competition 2013" held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA on 14 April and
Team VIVE placed 4th among all the universities & 1st contestant from Bangladesh & whole Asia.

Team "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" from Aeronautical Engineering Dept.
participated in 2013 AIAA/
Cessna Aircraft Company/
Raytheon Missile Systems Design/Build/Fly Competition held in Tucson, Arizona, US, from 19 to 21 April 2013 & placed 40 out of 90 team from all over the world (placed 4th in whole ASIA region). "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" is the 1st team from Bangladesh
participate this competition.

MIST Team "BIJOY" became Runners up of the Inter University Design Contest-UAPT jointly organized by Engineering Students Association of Bangladesh(ESAB) & Bangladeshi Systems Change Advocacy Network (B-SCAN) among 82 teams from all over the country on 10 May 2013.

MIST Lunabotics Team "EKUSH" participated in the "4th Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2013" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA & placed 11th in mining Category all over world.
And won 1st position in 'Outreach Project',1st in 'Luna World Wide Award'  2nd in 'System Engineering Paper' & 3rd in 'Team Spirit Award'.

"
MIST Aero Thunder Team GREEN" participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition (WEST)-2014" & placed 17th position among 100 universities all over the world.
And also placed 4th position in payload section & 10th in flight score
"MIST Aero Thunder Team RED" participated in "SAE Aero Design
Competition(East)-2014" & placed 10th position in world ranking, held in USA from 11 to 13 April 2014.
They also placed 5th position in System Engineering Paper & 5th position in Presentation.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Mist computer club website
Mist robotics club
Military science fiction is a subgenre of science fiction that features the use of science fiction technology, mainly weapons, for military purposes and usually principal characters that are members of a military organization involved in military activity, usually during a war; occurring sometimes in outer space or on a different planet or planets.
It exists in literature, comics, film, and video games.

A detailed description of the conflict, the tactics and weapons used for it, and the role of a military service and the individual members of that military organization forms the basis for a typical work of military science fiction.
The stories often use features of actual past or current Earth conflicts, with countries being replaced by planets or galaxies of similar characteristics, battleships replaced by space battleships and certain events changed so that the author can extrapolate what might have occurred.

== Characteristics ==
Traditional military values of bravery, sacrifice, sense of duty, and camaraderie are emphasized, and the action is usually described from the point of view of a soldier.
Typically, the technology is more advanced than that of the present and described in detail.
In some stories, however, technology is fairly static, and weapons that would be familiar to present-day soldiers are used, but other aspects of society have changed.
For example, women may be accepted as equal partners for combat roles.

In many military science fiction stories, technological advances are often basic to plot developments.
Some works draw heavy parallels to human history and the fact that scientific breakthroughs or new doctrine can severely change the outcome of battles and the way war is fought.
Many works explore how progress or changes to the aforementioned affect military doctrine and also how the protagonists and antagonists reflect on and adapt to these changes.
Military science fiction is also part of the "military and popular culture" subject field.
Several subsets of military science fiction overlap with space opera, concentrating on large-scale space battles with futuristic weapons.
At one extreme, the genre is used to speculate about future wars involving space travel, or the effects of such a war on humans; at the other, it consists of the use of military fiction plots with some superficial science fiction trappings.
The term "military space opera" is occasionally used to denote this subgenre, as used for example by critic Sylvia Kelso when describing Lois McMaster Bujold's Vorkosigan Saga.

Another example of military space opera would be the Battlestar Galactica franchise and Robert A. Heinlein's 1959 novel Starship Troopers.

The key distinction of military science fiction from space opera is that the principal characters in a space opera are not military personnel, but civilians or paramilitary.
Military science fiction also does not necessarily always include an outer space or multi-planetary setting like space opera.

==
History ==
Precursors for military science fiction can be found in "future war" stories dating back at least to George Chesney's story "The Battle of Dorking" (1871).
Other works of fiction followed, including H.G. Wells's "The Land Ironclads".
Eventually, as science fiction became an established and separate genre, military science fiction established itself as a subgenre.

One such work is H. Beam Piper's Uller Uprising (1952) (based on the events of the Sepoy Mutiny).
Robert A. Heinlein's Starship Troopers (1959) is another work of military SF, along with Gordon Dickson's Dorsai (1960), and these are thought to be mostly responsible for popularizing this subgenre's popularity among young readers of the time.
The Vietnam War resulted in veterans with combat experience deciding to write science fiction, including Joe Haldeman and David Drake.

Throughout the 1970s, works such as Haldeman's The Forever War and Drake's Hammer's Slammers helped increase the popularity of the genre.
Short stories also were popular, collected in books like Combat SF, edited by Gordon R. Dickson.
This anthology includes one of the first Hammer's Slammers stories as well as one of the BOLO stories by Keith Laumer and one of the Berserker stories by Fred Saberhagen.
This anthology seems to have been the first time SF-stories specifically dealing with war as a subject were collected and marketed as such.
The series of anthologies with the group title
There Will be War edited by Pournelle and John F. Carr (nine volumes from 1983 through 1990)
helped keep the category active, and encouraged new writers to add to it.
A special twist was introduced in Harry Turtledove's Worldwar series depicting an alternate history in which WWII is disrupted by extraterrestrials invading Earth in 1942, forcing humans to stop fighting each other and unite against this common enemy.
Turtledove depicts the tactics and strategy of this new course of the war in great detail, showing how American, British, Soviet and German soldiers and Jewish guerrillas (some of them historical figures) deal with this extraordinary new situation, as well as providing a not unsympathetic detailed point of view of individual invader warriors.
In the war situation posited by Turtledove, the invaders have superior arms, but the gap is not too wide for the humans to bridge.
For example, the invaders have more advanced tanks, but the German Wehrmacht's tank crews facing them - a major theme in the series - are more skilled and far more experienced.

==
Viewpoints ==
A number of authors have presented stories with political messages of varying types as major or minor themes of their works.

David Drake has often written of the horrors and futility of war.
He has said, in the afterwords of several of his Hammer's Slammers books (1979 and later), that one of his reasons for writing is to educate those people who have not experienced war, but who might have to make the decision to start or endorse a war (as policy makers or as voters) about what war is really like, and what the powers and limits of the military as an instrument of policy are.

David Weber has said that:

For me, military science-fiction is science-fiction which is written about a military situation with a fundamental understanding of how military lifestyles and characters differ from civilian lifestyles and characters.
It is science-fiction which attempts to realistically portray the military within a science-fiction context.
It is not 'bug shoots'.
It is about human beings, and members of other species, caught up in warfare and carnage.
It isn't an excuse for simplistic solutions to problems.

== See also ==
List of military science fiction works and authors
Space warfare in fiction
Weapons in science fiction
War novel


=
= References ==
The following is a list of ethnic slurs (ethnophaulisms) that are, or have been, used as insinuations or allegations about members of a given ethnicity, or to refer to them in a derogatory (that is, critical or disrespectful), pejorative (disapproving or contemptuous), or otherwise insulting manner.

Some of the terms listed below (such as "Gringo", "Yank", etc.)
are used by many people all over the world as part of their ordinary speech or thinking without any intention of causing offence.
The connotation of a term and prevalence of its use as a pejorative or neutral descriptor varies over time and by geography.

For the purposes of this list, an ethnic slur is a term designed to insult others on the basis of race, ethnicity, or nationality.
Each term is listed followed by its country or region of usage, a definition, and a reference to that term.

Ethnic slurs may also be produced as a racial epithet by combining a general-purpose insult with the name of ethnicity, such as "dirty Jew", "Russian pig", etc.
Other common insulting modifiers include "dog", "filthy", etc.
Such terms are not included in this list.

==
A ==
==
B ==
==
C ==
== D ==


== E ==
==
F ==
== G ==


== H
==
==
I ==


==
J ==
==
K ==
== L ==
== M ==
==
N ==
==
O ==
==
P ==
==
Q ==


== R ==


==
S
==
==
T ==
==
U ==
==
V ==


==
W ==
== X ==
==
Y ==


==
Z ==
== See also ==
Category:
Sex- and gender-related slurs
Fighting words
Graphic pejoratives in written Chinese
Hate speech
List of anti-cultural, anti-national, and anti-ethnic terms
List of disability-related terms with negative connotations
List of ethnic group names used as insults
List of ethnic slurs by ethnicity
Xenophobia and racism related to the COVID-19 pandemic
List of LGBT slang terms
List of regional nicknames
List of religious slurs
List of terms used for Germans
Lists of pejorative terms for people
Term of disparagement
Wiktionary category:
English pejoratives
wikt:
Appendix:
English terms for outsiders


==
References ==


===
Bibliography ===


==
Further reading ==
Burchfield, Robert. "
Dictionaries and Ethnic Sensibilities".
In The State of the Language, ed.
Leonard Michaels and Christopher Ricks, University of California Press, 1980, pp.
15–23.

Croom, Adam M. "Racial Epithets:
What We Say and Mean by Them".
Dialogue 51 (1):34–45 (2008)
Henderson, Anita.
"
What's in a Slur?"
American Speech, Volume 78, Number 1, Spring 2003, pp.
52–74 in Project MUSE
Kennedy, Randall.
Nigger:
The Strange Career of a Troublesome Word (Pantheon, 2002)
Mencken, H. L. "Designations for Colored Folk".
American Speech, 1944.
19: 161–74.

Wachal, Robert S. "Taboo and Not Taboo:
That Is the Question".
American Speech, 2002.
vol.
77: 195–206.

===
Dictionaries ===
Erin McKean, ed.
The New Oxford American Dictionary, second edition.
(
Oxford University Press, 2005)
Eric Partridge, A Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English (
2002)
John A. Simpson, Oxford English Dictionary Additions Series.
ISBN 0-19-861299-0
Catherine Soanes and Angus Stevenson, ed.
The Concise Oxford English Dictionary.
(
Oxford University Press, 2004)
The Narayanastra (Sanskrit: नारायणास्त्र, romanized: nārāyaṇastra) (or Narainastra)
was the personal weapon of Lord Vishnu in his Narayana form.
This astra ("weapon" in Sanskrit) in turn fires a powerful tirade of millions of deadly missiles simultaneously.
The intensity of the shower rises with increase in resistance.
The only way to defend against the missile is to show total submission before the missiles hit, this in turn will cause this weapon to stop and spare the target.
It is one of the six 'Mantramukta' weapons that cannot be resisted.
Ashwathama, a warrior-hero in the epic Mahabharata unleashes this weapon on the Pandava forces.
Lord Krishna, who is an avatar of Vishnu tells the Pandavas and their warriors to drop their weapons and lie down on the ground, so that they all surrender completely to the power of the weapon.

It was also said that this weapon can be used only once in a war and if one tries to use it twice, then it would devour the user's own army.
When it was used, Ekadasha (Eleven) Rudras appeared in the sky to destroy Pandavas.
Millions of types of weapons like Chakra, Gadha, ultra sharp arrows appeared in rage to destroy them.
Who ever tried to offend were destroyed.
Shri Krishna, who knew how to cool down the Narayanastra, advised Pandavas and their army to immediately drop all types and sorts of weapons from their hands and utterly surrender to the great astra of Lord Vishnu.
Everybody does the same and survives.
When targeted, the Pandava hero
Bhima refuses to surrender, thinking it an act of cowardice, and attacks the downpour of fiery arrows.
The Narayana weapon concentrates its shower on him, and he gets steadily exhausted.
However, he was not killed as Krishna and his brothers restrain him at the right time.
In Mahabharata only Ashwathama possessed the Narayanastra.
In Ramayana, only Lord Rama possessed this weapon.

==
References ==
The Active Denial System (ADS), is a non-lethal, directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, designed for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control.
Informally, the weapon is also called the heat ray since it works by heating the surface of targets, such as the skin of targeted human beings.

Raytheon had marketed a reduced-range version of this technology.
The ADS was deployed in 2010 with the United States military in the Afghanistan War, but was withdrawn without seeing combat.
On August 20, 2010, the Los Angeles Sheriff's Department announced its intent to use this technology to control incarcerated people in the Pitchess Detention Center in Los Angeles, stating its intent to use it in "operational evaluation" in situations such as breaking up prisoner fights.

As of 2014, the ADS was only a vehicle-mounted weapon, though U.S. Marines and police were both working on portable versions.

ADS was developed under the sponsorship of the Department of Defense Non-Lethal Weapons Program with the Air Force Research Laboratory as the lead agency.
There are reports that Russia and China are developing their own versions of the Active Denial System.

==
Mechanism and effects ==
The ADS works by firing a high-powered (100 kW output power) beam of 95 GHz waves at a target, which corresponds to a wavelength of 3.2 mm.
The ADS millimeter wave energy works on a similar principle as a microwave oven, exciting the water and fat molecules in the skin, and instantly heating them via dielectric heating.
One significant difference is that a microwave oven uses the much lower frequency (and longer wavelength) of 2.45 GHz.
The short millimeter waves used in ADS only penetrate the top layers of skin, with most of the energy being absorbed within 0.4 mm (​1⁄64 inch), whereas microwaves will penetrate into human tissue about 17 mm (0.67 inch).The ADS's effect of repelling humans occurs at slightly higher than 44 °C (111 °F), though first-degree burns occur at about 51 °C (124 °F), and second-degree burns occur at about 58 °C (136 °F).
In testing, pea-sized blisters have been observed in less than 0.1% of ADS exposures, indicating that second degree surface burns have been caused by the device.
The radiation burns caused are similar to microwave burns, but only on the skin surface due to the decreased penetration of shorter millimeter waves.
The surface temperature of a target will continue to rise so long as the beam is applied, at a rate dictated by the target's material and distance from the transmitter, along with the beam's frequency and power level set by the operator.
Most human test subjects reached their pain threshold within 3 seconds, and none could endure more than 5 seconds.

A spokesman for the Air Force Research Laboratory described his experience as a test subject for the system: For the first millisecond, it just felt like the skin was warming up.
Then it got warmer and warmer and you felt like it was on fire. ...
As soon as you're away from that beam your skin returns to normal and there is no pain.

Like all focused energy, the beam will irradiate all matter in the targeted area, including everything beyond/behind it that is not shielded, with no possible discrimination between individuals, objects or materials.
Anyone incapable of leaving the target area (e.g., physically handicapped, infants, incapacitated, trapped, etc.)
would continue to receive radiation until the operator turned off the beam.
Reflective materials such as aluminum cooking foil should reflect this radiation and could be used to make clothing that would be protective against this radiation.
Following approximately ten thousand test exposures of volunteers to ADS beams, a Penn State Human Effects Advisory Panel (HEAP) concluded that ADS is a non-lethal weapon that has a high probability of effectiveness with a low probability of injury:
no significant effects for wearers of contact lenses or other eyewear (including night vision goggles)
normal skin applications, such as cosmetics, have little effect on ADSʼs interaction with skin
no age-related differences in response to ADS exposures
no effect on the male reproduction system
damage was the occurrence of pea-sized blisters in less than 0.1% of the exposures (6 of 10,000 exposures).In April 2007, one airman in an ADS test was overdosed and received second-degree burns on both legs, and was treated in a hospital for two days.
There was also one laboratory accident in 1999 that resulted in a small second-degree burn.

===
Safety Studies ===
Many possible long-term effects have been studied, with the conclusion that no long-term effects are likely at the exposure levels studied.
However, overexposures of either operators or targets may cause thermal injury.
According to an official military assessment, "In the event of an overexposure to a power density sufficient to produce thermal injury, there is an extremely low probability that scars derived from such injury might later become cancerous.
Proper wound management further decreases this probability, as well as the probability of hypertrophic scarring or keloid formation."

Cancer:
A mouse cancer study was performed at two energy levels and exposures with a 94 GHz transmitter: a single 10 second, 1 W/cm2 exposure; and repeated 10 second exposures over 2 week period at 333 mW/cm2.
At both energy levels, no increase in skin cancers were observed.
No studies of higher energy levels, or longer exposure times have been performed on millimeter-wave systems.

Cornea damage
: Tests on non-human primate eyes have observed no short-term or long-term damage as the blink reflex protects the eye from damage within 0.25 seconds.

Birth defects:
Millimeter waves only penetrate 0.4 mm (​1⁄64 inch) into the skin, making direct damage to the testes or ovaries impossible.

Blisters and scarring: Pea-sized blistering due to
second degree burns occurred in a very small minority (less than 0.1%) of tested exposures, which have a remote potential for scarring.
ADS operators would be exposed to more than the standard maximum permissible exposure (MPE) limits for RF energy, and military use requires an exception to these exposure limits.
ADS Safety Studies have been independently reviewed by a non-government human effect advisory panel.

==
History ==


===
Development ===
Two Active Denial Systems were developed under a Defense Department "Advanced Concept Technology Demonstration" Program (now known as Joint Concept Technology Demonstration Program) from 2002 to 2007.

Unlike typical weapons development programs in the Defense Department, ACTDs/JCTDs are not focused on optimizing the technology; rather they are focused on rapidly assembling the technology in a configuration suitable for user evaluation.

===
Contracts ===
On September 22, 2004, Raytheon was granted an FCC license to demonstrate the technology to "law enforcement, military and security organizations.
"On October 4, 2004
, the United States Department of Defense published the following contract information:

Communications and Power Industries (CPI), Palto Alto  [sic], Calif.,
is being awarded a $6,377,762 costs-reimbursement, cost-plus fixed-price contract.
The contractor shall design, build, test, and deliver a two to 2.5 megawatt, high efficiency, continuous wave (CW) 95 gigahertz millimeter wave source system.
The contractor shall perform extensive modeling, simulation, experiments, and testing to the maximum capabilities of their facilities (which shall no less than one megawatt peak RF output) that will ascertain the final CW capabilities of the source.
The contractor also shall provide input for the requirements for the government's test stand, which will serve as a full power facility in the future.
At this time, $900,000 of the funds has been obliged.
This work will be complete by January 2009.
Negotiations were completed September 2004.
The Air Force Research Laboratory, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, is the contracting activity (FA9451-04-C-0298).
===
Demonstration ===
The military has made the ADS available to the media for demonstrations on a number of occasions.
A fully operational and mounted version of the system was demonstrated on January 24, 2007, at Moody Air Force Base in Georgia.
A Reuters correspondent who volunteered to be shot with the beam during the demonstration described it as "similar to a blast from a very hot oven – too painful to bear without diving for cover."
An Associated Press reporter who volunteered to be engaged stated "They certainly convinced me that the system could help save the lives of innocent civilians and our young service members" CBS News correspondent did an in-depth story on ADS in March 2008.
A demonstration was conducted for the media on March 9, 2012, at Marine Corps Base Quantico, Virginia.

===
Afghanistan deployment ===
On June 21, 2010, Lt.
Col.
John Dorrian, a spokesman for the NATO forces commander General Stanley McChrystal, confirmed in an e-mail to Wired reporter Noah Shachtman that the ADS was deployed in Afghanistan.

The spokesman added however that the system had not yet been used operationally.
The ADS has been removed from service in Afghanistan as of July 25, 2010.
A former Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense noted that the recall of ADS from Afghanistan was an "opportunity missed" and
"the non-lethality of the ADS system could prove useful in a counterinsurgency operation where avoidance of civilian casualties is essential to mission success."
===
Potential deployment against civilians ===
In September 2020 it was revealed that federal officials had explored the use of the device and the Long Range Acoustic Device to disperse civilians protesting outside the White House in June of that year, but had been advised that the National Guard was not currently in possession of either device.

===
Problems ===
There have been speculations in open literature for why the ADS has not been used in a theater of operations.
Some of the claimed problems expressed have included: (1) that a potential unreliability in certain environmental conditions, because precipitation (rain/snow/fog/mist) commonly dissipates RF energy, which may moderate the ADS's sensation to "warm and comfortable"; (2) that ADS may only work successfully against exposed skin, implying that heavier clothing may reduce its effectiveness and that its tactical usefulness may potentially be limited in striking specific personnel hiding in crowds of civilians, because this 'hiding' situation has not been seen in all recent theaters of operation (was reportedly observed in Somalia and Iraq, but reportedly not in Afghanistan).

What the actual performance of ADS is relative to these concerns is not presently known to be published in open literature.

===
Active Denial System Future ===
Following the development of two prototype systems for the ACTD, interest remains in the technology by the military as a means to minimize collateral damage and increase force protection.

Research continues on technology that will make it smaller, more reliable, and able to be used on the move, for example, in protection of convoys.

==
Concepts for use
==
ADS was developed as a non-lethal weapon.
According to Department of Defense policy, non-lethal weapons "are explicitly designed and primarily employed so as to incapacitate personnel or material, while minimizing fatalities, permanent injury to personnel, and undesired damage to property and the environment.
"
ADS has applications for crowd control and perimeter defense, and filling "the gap between shouting and shooting."
Other crowd control methods – including pepper spray, tear gas, water cannons, slippery foam and rubber bullets – carry implicit dangers of temporary or permanent injury or accidental death, and often leave residue or residual material.
Combinations of acoustic and optical system platforms with ADS can be used to effectively communicate to, warn of escalation of force, introduce optical and auditory deterrents and step function the escalation of transmitted force from relatively benign to ultimately forced dispersal of a crowd, or to deny them from an area or access to an area.
A group of people can theoretically be dispersed or induced to leave an area in a manner unlikely to damage personnel, non-involved civilians (no stray bullets), or to nearby buildings or the environment.

Non-lethal weapons are intended to provide options to U.S. troops, for example, "to stop suspicious vehicles without killing the drivers".
Although the ADS millimeter wave frequency does not affect a car's electronic components, it can be used to deter a driver in an approaching vehicle.
In a broader strategic context, non-lethal weapons such as ADS have the potential to offer "precision, accuracy, and effective duration that can help save military and civilian lives, break the cycle of violence by offering a more graduated response, and even prevent violence from occurring if the opportunity for early or preclusionary engagement arises.
"The
Council on Foreign Relations noted that "wider integration of existing types of nonlethal weapons (NLW) into the U.S. Army and Marine Corps could have helped to reduce the damage done by widespread looting and sabotage after the cessation of major conflict in Iraq.
"In
Afghanistan, the need to minimize civilian casualties has led to restrictive rules of engagement on the use of lethal force by US troops.
A National Public Radio correspondent in Afghanistan "witnessed troops grappling with the dilemma of whether to shoot.
"
Non-lethal weapons such as ADS provide an option for US forces in those situations.

==
Controversy ==
The effects of this radio frequency on humans have been studied by the military for years, and much, but not all of the research has been published openly in peer-reviewed journals.

A news article criticized the sheer amount of time it is taking to field this system, citing the potential it had to avert a great deal of pain and suffering in volatile areas around the world.
While it is claimed not to cause burns under "ordinary use", it is also described as being similar to that of an incandescent light bulb being pressed against the skin, which can cause severe burns in just a few seconds.

The beam can be focused up to 700 meters away, and is said to penetrate thick clothing although not walls.
At 95 GHz, the frequency is much higher than the 2.45 GHz of a microwave oven.
This frequency was chosen because it penetrates less than 1/64 of an inch (0.4 mm), which – in most humans, except for eyelids and babies – avoids the second skin layer (the dermis) where critical structures are found such as nerve endings and blood vessels.

The early methodology of testing, in which volunteers were asked to remove glasses, contact lenses and metallic objects that could cause hot spots, raised concerns as to whether the device would remain true to its purpose of non-lethal temporary incapacitation if used in the field where safety precautions would not be taken.
However, these tests were early in the program and part of a thorough and methodical process to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the technology, which has now involved more than 600 volunteer subjects and some 10,200 exposures.
As safety was demonstrated in each step of the process, restrictions were removed, and now, according to ADS proponents, there are no restrictions or precautions necessary for volunteers experiencing the effect.
Long-term exposure to the beam may cause more serious damage, especially to sensitive tissues, such as those of the eyes.
Two people have received second degree burns after exposure to the device.
In addition, some claim that subjects who have body piercings, jewelry, or tattoos are likely to suffer serious skin damage.
Tattooed people can become ill due to high amounts of toxic substances released from heated/melted tattoo pigment.
Human effects testing on the large-scale version of ADS included more than 13,000 exposures on over 700 volunteers.
Both laboratory research and full-scale test results demonstrated that there is only a 0.1% chance of injury from a System 1 or System 2 exposure.
Critics cite that, although the stated intent of the ADS is to be a non-lethal device designed to temporarily incapacitate, modifications or incorrect use by the operator could turn the ADS into a more damaging weapon that could violate international conventions on warfare (although at this time, ADS has gone through numerous treaty compliance reviews and legal reviews by AF/JAO, and in all cases complies with every treaty and law).Some
have focused on the lower threshold of use which may lead those who use them to become "trigger-happy", especially in dealing with peaceful protesters.
Others have focused on concerns that weapons whose operative principle is that of inflicting pain (though "non-lethal") might be useful for such purposes as torture, as they leave no evidence of use, but undoubtedly have the capacity to inflict horrific pain on a restrained subject.
According to Wired,  the ADS has been rejected for fielding in Iraq due to Pentagon fears that it would be regarded as an instrument of torture.

==
Silent Guardian ==
Defense contractor Raytheon has developed a smaller version of the ADS, the Silent Guardian.
This stripped-down model is primarily marketed for use by law enforcement agencies, the military and other security providers.
The system is operated and aimed with a joystick and aiming screen.
The device can be used for targets over 250 metres (820 ft) away, and the beam has a power of 30 kilowatts.
The Los Angeles County Jail installed the smaller-sized unit, under the name Assault Intervention Device, on the ceiling of the Pitchess Detention Center in 2014.

== See also ==


==
References ==
The following is a list of positions of authority.

== See also ==
List of corporate titles
World War
I (or the First World War, often abbreviated as WWI or WW1) was a global war originating in Europe that lasted from 28 July 1914 to 11 November 1918.
Contemporaneously known as the Great War or "the war to end all wars", it led to the mobilisation of more than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million Europeans, making it one of the largest wars in history.
It also was one of the deadliest conflicts in history, with an estimated 8.5 million combatant deaths and 13 million civilian deaths as a direct result of the war, while resulting genocides and the related 1918 Spanish flu pandemic caused another 17–100 million deaths worldwide, including an estimated 2.64 million Spanish flu deaths in Europe and as many as 675,000 Spanish flu deaths in the United States.
On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb Yugoslav nationalist and member of the Serbian Black Hand military society, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, leading to the July Crisis.
In response, Austria-Hungary issued an ultimatum to Serbia on 23 July.
Serbia's reply failed to satisfy the Austrians, and the two moved to a war footing.
A network of interlocking alliances enlarged the crisis from a bilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe.
By July 1914, the great powers of Europe were divided into two coalitions: the Triple Entente, consisting of France, Russia, and Britain; and the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy.
The Triple Alliance was only defensive in nature, allowing Italy to stay out of the war until April 1915, when it joined the Allied Powers after its relations with Austria-Hungary deteriorated.
Russia felt it necessary to back Serbia, and approved partial mobilisation after Austria-Hungary shelled the Serbian capital of Belgrade, which was a few miles from the border, on 28 July.
Full Russian mobilisation was announced on the evening of 30 July; the following day, Austria-Hungary and Germany did the same, while Germany demanded Russia demobilise within twelve hours.
When Russia failed to comply, Germany declared war on Russia on 1 August in support of Austria-Hungary, the latter following suit on 6 August; France ordered full mobilisation in support of Russia on 2 August.
In the end, World War I would see the continent of Europe split into two major opposing alliances; the Allied Powers, primarily composed of the United Kingdom of Great Britain & Ireland, the United States, France, the Russian Empire, Italy, Japan, Portugal, and the many aforementioned Balkan States such as Serbia and Montenegro; and the Central Powers, primarily composed of the German Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria.

Germany's strategy for a war on two fronts against France and Russia was to rapidly concentrate the bulk of its army in the West to defeat France within 6 weeks, then shift forces to the East before Russia could fully mobilise; this was later known as the Schlieffen Plan.
On 2 August, Germany demanded free passage through Belgium, an essential element in achieving a quick victory over France.
When this was refused, German forces invaded Belgium on 3 August and declared war on France the same day; the Belgian government invoked the 1839 Treaty of London and, in compliance with its obligations under this treaty, Britain declared war on Germany on 4 August.
On 12 August, Britain and France also declared war on Austria-Hungary; on 23 August, Japan sided with Britain, seizing German possessions in China and the Pacific.
In November 1914, the Ottoman Empire entered the war on the side of Austria-Hungary and Germany, opening fronts in the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, and the Sinai Peninsula.
The war was fought in (and drew upon) each power's colonial empire also, spreading the conflict to Africa and across the globe.
The Entente and its allies eventually became known as the Allied Powers, while the grouping of Austria-Hungary, Germany and their allies became known as the Central Powers.

The German advance into France was halted at the Battle of the Marne and by the end of 1914, the Western Front settled into a war of attrition, marked by a long series of trench lines that changed little until 1917 (
the Eastern Front, by contrast, was marked by much greater exchanges of territory).
In 1915, Italy joined the Allied Powers and opened a front in the Alps.
Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in 1915 and Greece joined the Allies in 1917, expanding the war in the Balkans.
The United States initially remained neutral, though even while neutral it became an important supplier of war materiel to the Allies.
Eventually, after the sinking of American merchant ships by German submarines, the declaration by Germany that its navy would resume unrestricted attacks on neutral shipping, and the revelation that Germany was trying to incite Mexico to initiate war against the United States, the U.S. declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917.
Trained American forces did not begin arriving at the front in large numbers until mid-1918, but the American Expeditionary Force ultimately reached some two million troops.
Though Serbia was defeated in 1915, and Romania joined the Allied Powers in 1916, only to be defeated in 1917
, none of the great powers were knocked out of the war until 1918.
The 1917 February Revolution in Russia replaced the Monarchy with the Provisional Government, but continuing discontent with the cost of the war led to the October Revolution, the creation of the Soviet Socialist Republic, and the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk by the new government in March 1918, ending Russia's involvement in the war.
Germany now controlled much of eastern Europe and transferred large numbers of combat troops to the Western Front.
Using new tactics, the German March 1918 Offensive was initially successful.
The Allies fell back and held.
The last of the German reserves were exhausted as 10,000 fresh American troops arrived every day.
The Allies drove the Germans back in their Hundred Days Offensive, a continual series of attacks to which the Germans had no countermove.
One by one, the Central Powers quit: first Bulgaria (September 29), then the Ottoman Empire (October 31) and the Austro-Hungarian empire (November 3).
With its allies defeated, revolution at home, and the military no longer willing to fight, Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated on 9 November and Germany signed an armistice on 11 November 1918, ending the war.

World War
I was a significant turning point in the political, cultural, economic, and social climate of the world.
The war and its immediate aftermath sparked numerous revolutions and uprisings.
The Big Four (Britain, France, the United States, and Italy) imposed their terms on the defeated powers in a series of treaties agreed at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, the most well known being the Treaty of Versailles with Germany.
Ultimately, as a result of the war, the Austro-Hungarian, German, Ottoman, and Russian Empires ceased to exist, and numerous new states were created from their remains.
However, despite the conclusive Allied victory (and the creation of the League of Nations during the peace conference, intended to prevent future wars), a second world war followed just over twenty years later.

==
Names ==
The term "world war" was first used in September 1914 by German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel, who claimed that "there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared 'European War' ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word," citing a wire service report in The Indianapolis Star on 20 September 1914.

Prior to World War II, the events of 1914–1918 were generally known as the Great War or simply the World War.
In October 1914, the Canadian magazine Maclean's wrote, "Some wars name themselves.
This is the Great War."
Contemporary Europeans also referred to it as "the war to end war" or "the war to end all wars" due to their perception of its then-unparalleled scale and devastation.
After World War II began in 1939, the terms became more standard, with British Empire historians, including Canadians, favouring "The First World War" and Americans "World War I".

==
Background ==


===
Political and military alliances ===
For much of the 19th century, the major European powers had tried to maintain a tenuous balance of power among themselves, resulting in a complex network of political and Military alliances.
The biggest challenges to this were Britain's withdrawal into so-called splendid isolation, the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the post-1848 rise of Prussia under Otto von Bismarck.
Victory in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War established Prussian hegemony in Germany, while victory over France in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian War unified the German states into a German Reich under Prussian leadership.
French desire for revenge over the defeat of 1871, known as revanchism, and the recovery of Alsace-Lorraine became a principal object of French policy for the next forty years (see French–German enmity).In 1873, to isolate France and avoid a war on two fronts
, Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany.
Concerned by Russia's victory in the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War and its influence in the Balkans, the League was dissolved in 1878, with Germany and Austria-Hungary subsequently forming the 1879 Dual Alliance; this became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined in 1882.The practical details of these alliances
were limited, since their primary purpose was to ensure cooperation between the three Imperial Powers, and to isolate France.
Attempts by Britain in 1880 to resolve colonial tensions with Russia and diplomatic moves by France led to Bismarck reforming the League in 1881.
When the League finally lapsed in 1887, it was replaced by the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if either were attacked by France or Austria-Hungary.

In 1890, the new German Emperor, Kaiser Wilhelm II, forced Bismarck to retire and was persuaded not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty by the new Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi.
This allowed France to counteract the Triple Alliance with the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894 and the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Britain, while in 1907 Britain and Russia signed the Anglo-Russian Convention.
The agreements did not constitute formal alliances, but by settling long-standing colonial disputes, they made British entry into any future conflict involving France or Russia a possibility.
These interlocking bilateral agreements became known as the Triple Entente.
British backing of France against Germany during the Second Moroccan Crisis in 1911 reinforced the Entente between the two countries (and with Russia as well) and increased Anglo-German estrangement, deepening the divisions that would erupt in 1914.

===
Arms race ===
The creation of the German Reich following victory in the 1871 Franco-Prussian War led to a massive increase in Germany's economic and industrial strength.
Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and Wilhelm II, who became Emperor in 1890, sought to use this to create a Kaiserliche Marine or Imperial German Navy to compete with Britain's Royal Navy for world naval supremacy.
In doing so, he was influenced by US naval strategist Alfred Mahan, who argued possession of a blue-water navy was vital for global power projection; Tirpitz translated his books into German, and Wilhelm made them required reading.
However, it was also driven by Wilhelm's admiration of the Royal Navy and desire to outdo it.
This resulted in the Anglo-German naval arms race.
Yet the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906 gave the Royal Navy a technological advantage over its German rival, which they never lost.
Ultimately, the race diverted huge resources to creating a German navy large enough to antagonise Britain, but not defeat it.
In 1911, Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to the Rüstungswende or ‘armaments turning point', when Germany switched expenditure from the navy to the army.
This was driven by Russia's recovery from the 1905 Revolution, specifically increased investment post-1908 in railways and infrastructure in its western border regions.
Germany and Austria-Hungary relied on faster mobilisation to compensate for fewer numbers; it was concern at the closing of this gap that led to the end of the naval race, rather than a reduction in tension elsewhere.
When Germany expanded its standing army by 170,000 men in 1913, France extended compulsory military service from two to three years; similar measures taken by the Balkan powers and Italy, which led to increased expenditure by the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary.
Absolute figures are hard to calculate, due to differences in categorising expenditure, while they often omit civilian infrastructure projects with a military use, such as railways.
However, from 1908 to 1913, defence spending by the six major European powers increased by over 50% in real terms.

===
Conflicts in the Balkans ===
In October 1908, Austria-Hungary precipitated the Bosnian crisis of 1908–1909 by officially annexing the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878.
This angered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patron, the Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russian Empire.
The Balkans came to be known as the "powder keg of Europe".
The Italo-Turkish War in the 1911–1912 was a significant precursor of the World War I as it sparked nationalism in the Balkan states and paved the way for the Balkan Wars.
In 1912 and 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the fracturing Ottoman Empire.
The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the Ottoman Empire, creating an independent Albanian state while enlarging the territorial holdings of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece.
When Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913, it sparked the 33-day Second Balkan War, by the end of which it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece, and Southern Dobruja to Romania, further destabilising the region.
The Great Powers were able to keep these Balkan conflicts contained, but the next one would spread throughout Europe and beyond.
==
Prelude ==


===
Sarajevo assassination ===
On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, visited the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo.
A group of six assassins (Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip, Muhamed Mehmedbašić, Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, and Vaso Čubrilović) from the Yugoslavist group Mlada Bosna, who had been supplied with arms by the Serbian Black Hand, gathered on the street where the Archduke's motorcade was to pass, with the intention of assassinating him.
The political objective of the assassination was to break off Austria-Hungary's South Slav provinces, which Austria-Hungary had annexed from the Ottoman Empire, so they could be combined into a Yugoslavia.

Čabrinović threw a grenade at the car but missed.
Some nearby were injured by the blast, but Ferdinand's convoy carried on.
The other assassins failed to act as the cars drove past them.

About an hour later, when Ferdinand was returning from a visit at the Sarajevo Hospital with those wounded in the assassination attempt, the convoy took a wrong turn into a street where, by coincidence, Princip stood.
With a pistol, Princip shot and killed Ferdinand and his wife Sophie.
Although they were reportedly not personally close, the Emperor Franz Joseph was profoundly shocked and upset.
The reaction among the people in Austria, however, was mild, almost indifferent.
As historian Zbyněk Zeman later wrote, "the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever.
On Sunday and Monday (28 and 29 June), the crowds in Vienna listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened."
Nevertheless, the political effect of the murder of the heir to the throne was significant, and was described by historian Christopher Clark on the BBC Radio 4 series Month of Madness as a "9/11 effect, a terrorist event charged with historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in Vienna."

===
Expansion of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina ===
The Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged the subsequent anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, in which Bosnian Croats and Bosniaks killed two Bosnian Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings.
Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were also organised outside Sarajevo, in other cities in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia.
Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison.
A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to death.
A predominantly Bosniak special militia known as the Schutzkorps was established and carried out the persecution of Serbs.

===
July Crisis ===
The assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain, called the July Crisis.
Austria-Hungary correctly believed that Serbian officials (especially the officers of the Black Hand) had been involved in the plot to murder the Archduke, and wanted to finally end Serbian interference in Bosnia.
However, the Austrian-Hungarian foreign ministry had no proof of Serbian involvement, and a dossier that it belatedly compiled to make its case against Serbia was riddled with errors.
On 23 July, Austria-Hungary delivered to Serbia the July Ultimatum, a series of ten demands that were made intentionally unacceptable, in an effort to provoke a war with Serbia.
Serbia decreed general mobilisation on 25 July.
Serbia accepted all the terms of the ultimatum except for articles five and six, which demanded that Austrian-Hungarian representatives be allowed to assist in suppressing subversive elements inside Serbia's borders and to participate in the investigation and trial of Serbians linked to the assassination.
Following this, Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Serbia and, the next day, ordered a partial mobilisation.
Finally, on 28 July 1914, a month after the assassination, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.

On 25 July, Russia, in support of Serbia, declared partial mobilisation against Austria-Hungary.
On 30 July, Russia ordered general mobilisation.
German Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg waited until the 31st for an appropriate response, when Germany declared Erklärung des Kriegszustandes, or "Statement on the war status".
Kaiser Wilhelm II asked his cousin, Tsar Nicolas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilisation.
When he refused, Germany issued an ultimatum demanding its mobilisation be stopped, and a commitment not to support Serbia.
Another was sent to France, asking her not to support Russia if it were to come to the defence of Serbia.
On 1 August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilised and declared war on Russia.
This also led to the general mobilisation in Austria-Hungary on 4 August.

The German government issued demands to France that it remain neutral whilst they decided which deployment plan to implement, it being extremely difficult to change the deployment once it was underway.
The modified German Schlieffen Plan, Aufmarsch II West, would deploy 80% of the army in the west, while Aufmarsch I Ost and Aufmarsch II Ost would deploy 60% in the west and 40% in the east.
The French did not respond, but sent a mixed message by ordering their troops to withdraw 10 km (6 mi) from the border to avoid any incidents, and at the same time ordered the mobilisation of their reserves.
Germany responded by mobilising its own reserves and implementing Aufmarsch II West.
The British cabinet decided on 29 July that being a signatory to the 1839 treaty about Belgium did not oblige it to oppose a German invasion of Belgium with military force.
On 1 August, Wilhelm ordered General Helmuth von Moltke the Younger to "march the whole of the ... army to the East" after being informed that Britain would remain neutral if France was not attacked (and, possibly, that her hands might, in any case, be stayed by crisis in Ireland).
Moltke told the Kaiser that attempting to redeploy a million men was unthinkable, and that making it possible for the French to attack the Germans "in the rear" would prove disastrous.
Yet Wilhelm insisted that the German army should not march into Luxembourg until he received a telegram sent by his cousin George V, who made it clear that there had been a misunderstanding.
Eventually the Kaiser told Moltke, "Now you can do what you want."

For years, the French had been aware of intelligence indicating that Germany planned to attack France through Belgium.
General Joseph Joffre, chief of staff of the French military from 1911, inquired about the possibility of moving some French troops into Belgium to pre-empt such a move by Germany, but France's civilian leadership rejected this idea.
Joffre was told that France would not be the first power to violate Belgian neutrality and that any French move into Belgium could come only after the Germans had already invaded.
On 2 August, Germany occupied Luxembourg, and on 3 August declared war on France; on the same day, they sent the Belgian government an ultimatum demanding unimpeded right of way through any part of Belgium, which was refused.
Early on the morning of 4 August, the Germans invaded; King Albert ordered his military to resist and called for assistance under the 1839 Treaty of London.
Britain demanded Germany comply with the Treaty and respect Belgian neutrality; the ultimatum expired on 4 August at midnight Berlin time, 11pm British time.
No reply having been received by then, Britain was at war with Germany.

==
Progress of the war ==


===
Opening hostilities ===


====
Confusion among the Central Powers ====
The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication.
Germany had promised to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed.
Previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but those had never been tested in exercises.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.
Germany, however, envisioned Austria-Hungary directing most of its troops against Russia, while Germany dealt with France.
This confusion forced the Austro-Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.

====
Serbian campaign ====
Austria invaded and fought the Serbian army at the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara beginning on 12 August.
Over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victories of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory.
As a result, Austria had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.
Serbia's defeat of the Austro-Hungarian invasion of 1914 has been called one of the major upset victories of the twentieth century.
The campaign saw the first use of medical evacuation by the Serbian army in autumn of 1915 and anti-aircraft warfare in the spring of 1915 after an Austrian plane was shot down with ground-to-air fire.

====
German Offensive in Belgium and France ====
When the war began, the German Order of Battle placed 80% of the army in the West, with the remainder acting as a screening force in the East.
The plan was to quickly knock France out of the war, then redeploy to the East and do the same to Russia.

The German offensive in the West was officially titled Aufmarsch II West, but is better known as the Schlieffen Plan, after its original creator.
Schlieffen deliberately kept the German left (
i.e. its positions in Alsace-Lorraine) weak to lure the French into attacking there, while the majority were allocated to the German right, so as to sweep through Belgium, encircle Paris and trap the French armies against the Swiss border (the French charged into Alsace-Lorraine on the outbreak of war as envisaged by their Plan XVII, thus actually aiding this strategy).
However, Schlieffen's successor Moltke grew concerned that the French might push too hard on his left flank.
Consequently, as the German Army increased in size in the years leading up to the war, he changed the allocation of forces between the German right and left wings from 85:15 to 70:30.
Ultimately, Moltke's changes meant insufficient forces to achieve decisive success and thus unrealistic goals and timings.
The initial German advance in the West was very successful
: by the end of August the Allied left, which included the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), was in full retreat; French casualties in the first month exceeded 260,000, including 27,000 killed on 22 August during the Battle of the Frontiers.
German planning provided broad strategic instructions, while allowing army commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the front; this worked well in 1866 and 1870 but in 1914, von Kluck used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the German armies as they closed on Paris.
The French and British exploited this gap to halt the German advance east of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne from 5 to 12 September and push the German forces back some 50 km (31 mi).

In 1911, the Russian Stavka had agreed with the French to attack Germany within 15 days of mobilisation; this was unrealistic and the two Russian armies that entered East Prussia on 17 August
did so without many of their support elements.
The Russian Second Army was effectively destroyed at the Battle of Tannenberg on 26–30 August but the Russian advance caused the Germans to re-route their 8th Field Army from France to East Prussia, a factor in Allied victory on the Marne.
By the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the bulk of France's domestic coalfields and had inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itself.
However, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of a decisive outcome, and it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long, two-front war.
This amounted to a strategic defeat; shortly after the Marne, Crown Prince Wilhelm told an American reporter; "We have lost the war.
It will go on for a long time but lost
it is already."

====
Asia and the Pacific ====
New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August 1914.
On 11 September, the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of Neu Pommern (later New Britain), which formed part of German New Guinea.
On 28 October, the German cruiser SMS Emden sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug in the Battle of Penang.
Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies and, after the Siege of Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao on the Chinese Shandong peninsula.
As Vienna refused to withdraw the Austro-Hungarian cruiser SMS Kaiserin Elisabeth from Tsingtao, Japan declared war not only on Germany, but also on Austria-Hungary; the ship participated in the defence of Tsingtao where it was sunk in November 1914.
Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German territories in the Pacific; only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea remained.
====
African campaigns ====
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa.
On 6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland and Kamerun.
On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war.
The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.

====
Indian support for the Allies ====
Germany attempted to use Indian nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage, instigating uprisings in India, and sending a mission that urged Afghanistan to join the war on the side of Central Powers.
However, contrary to British fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw an unprecedented outpouring of loyalty and goodwill towards Britain.
Indian political leaders from the Indian National Congress and other groups were eager to support the British war effort, since they believed that strong support for the war effort would further the cause of Indian Home Rule.
The Indian Army in fact outnumbered the British Army at the beginning of the war; about 1.3 million Indian soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while the central government and the princely states sent large supplies of food, money, and ammunition.
In all, 140,000 men served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the Middle East.
Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded during World War I.
The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant self-government to India after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment and fuelled the campaign for full independence that would be led by Mohandas K. Gandhi and others.

===
Western Front ===


====
Trench warfare begins ====
Military tactics developed before World War I failed to keep pace with advances in technology and had become obsolete.
These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war.
Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances, while artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with machine guns, made crossing open ground extremely difficult.
Commanders on both sides failed to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties.
In time, however, technology began to produce new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the tank.
After the First Battle of the Marne (5–12 September 1914), Allied and German forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the "Race to the Sea".
By the end of 1914, the opposing forces were left confronting each other along an uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from Alsace to Belgium's North Sea coast.
Since the Germans were able to choose where to stand, they normally had the advantage of the high ground; in addition, their trenches tended to be better built, since Anglo-French trenches were initially intended as "temporary," and would only be needed until the breaking of German defences.
Both sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances.
On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front.
Several types of gas soon became widely used by both sides, and though it never proved a decisive, battle-winning weapon, poison gas became one of the most-feared and best-remembered horrors of the war.
Tanks were developed by Britain and France and were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of Flers–Courcelette (part of the Battle of the Somme) on 15 September 1916, with only partial success.
However, their effectiveness would grow as the war progressed; the Allies built tanks in large numbers, whilst the Germans employed only a few of their own design, supplemented by captured Allied tanks.

====
Continuation of trench warfare ====
Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years.
Throughout 1915–17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties than Germany, because of both the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the sides.
Strategically, while the Germans mounted only one major offensive, the Allies made several attempts to break through the German lines.

In February 1916 the Germans attacked French defensive positions at the Battle of Verdun, lasting until December 1916.
The Germans made initial gains, before French counter-attacks returned matters to near their starting point.
Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000 to 975,000 casualties suffered between the two combatants.
Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.

The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive of July to November 1916.
The opening day of the offensive (1 July 1916) was the bloodiest day in the history of the British Army, suffering 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead.
The entire Somme offensive cost the British Army some 420,000 casualties.
The French suffered another estimated 200,000 casualties and the Germans an estimated 500,000.
Gun fire was not the only factor taking lives; the diseases that emerged in the trenches were a major killer on both sides.
The living conditions made it so that countless diseases and infections occurred, such as trench foot, shell shock, blindness/burns from mustard gas, lice, trench fever, "cooties" (body lice) and the 'Spanish flu'.
To maintain morale, wartime censors minimised early reports of widespread influenza illness and mortality in Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States.
Papers were free to report the epidemic's effects in neutral Spain (such as the grave illness of King Alfonso XIII).
This created a false impression of Spain as especially hard hit, thereby giving rise to the pandemic's nickname, "Spanish flu".

Protracted action at Verdun throughout 1916, combined with the bloodletting at the Somme, brought the exhausted French army to the brink of collapse.
Futile attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army Mutinies, after the failure of the costly Nivelle Offensive of April–May 1917.
The concurrent British Battle of Arras was more limited in scope, and more successful, although ultimately of little strategic value.
A smaller part of the Arras offensive, the capture of Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps, became highly significant to that country:
the idea that Canada's national identity was born out of the battle is an opinion widely held in military and general histories of Canada.
The last large-scale offensive of this period was a British attack (with French support) at Passchendaele (July–November 1917).
This offensive opened with great promise for the Allies, before bogging down in the October mud.
Casualties, though disputed, were roughly equal, at some 200,000–400,000 per side.

The years of trench warfare on the Western front achieved no major exchanges of territory and, as a result, are often thought of as static and unchanging.
However, throughout this period, British, French, and German tactics constantly evolved to meet new battlefield challenges.

===
Naval war ===
At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping.
The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping.
Before the beginning of the war, it was widely understood that Britain held the position of strongest, most influential navy in the world.
The publishing of the book The Influence of Sea Power upon History by Alfred Thayer Mahan in 1890 was intended to encourage the United States to increase their naval power.
Instead, this book made it to Germany and inspired its readers to try to over-power the British Royal Navy.
For example, the German detached light cruiser SMS Emden, part of the East Asia Squadron stationed at Qingdao, seized or destroyed 15 merchantmen, as well as sinking a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer.
However, most of the German East-Asia squadron—consisting of the armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, light cruisers Nürnberg and Leipzig and two transport ships—did not have orders to raid shipping and was instead underway to Germany when it met British warships.
The German flotilla and Dresden sank two armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel, but was virtually destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December 1914, with only Dresden and a few auxiliaries escaping, but after the Battle of Más a Tierra these too had been destroyed or interned.

Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany.
The strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of the past two centuries.
Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships.
Since there was limited response to this tactic of the British, Germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.
The Battle of Jutland (German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the Skagerrak") in May/June 1916 developed into the largest naval battle of the war.
It was the only full-scale clash of battleships during the war, and one of the largest in history.
The Kaiserliche Marine's High Seas Fleet, commanded by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer, fought the Royal Navy's Grand Fleet, led by Admiral Sir John Jellicoe.
The engagement was a stand off, as the Germans were outmanoeuvred by the larger British fleet, but managed to escape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than they received.
Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the sea, and the bulk of the German surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of the war.
German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and Britain.
The nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of survival.
The United States launched a protest, and Germany changed its rules of engagement.
After the sinking of the passenger ship RMS Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the "cruiser rules", which demanded warning and movement of crews to "a place of safety" (a standard that lifeboats did not meet).
Finally, in early 1917, Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising the Americans would eventually enter the war.
Germany sought to strangle Allied sea lanes before the United States could transport a large army overseas, but after initial successes eventually failed to do so.
The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by destroyers.
This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, accompanying destroyers could attack a submerged submarine with some hope of success.
Convoys slowed the flow of supplies, since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled.
The solution to the delays was an extensive program of building new freighters.
Troopships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.
The U-boats had sunk more than 5,000 Allied ships, at a cost of 199 submarines.
World War
I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol.

===
Southern theatres ===


====
War in the Balkans ====
Faced with Russia in the east, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia.
After suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade.
A Serbian counter-attack in the Battle of Kolubara succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of 1914.
For the first ten months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves to fight Italy.
German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia.
The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for Austria-Hungary in the fight with Serbia, Russia and Italy.
Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.
Bulgaria declared war on Serbia on 12 October 1915 and joined in the attack by the Austro-Hungarian army under Mackensen's army of 250,000 that was already underway.
Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month, as the Central Powers, now including Bulgaria, sent in 600,000 troops total.
The Serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern Albania.
The Serbs suffered defeat in the Battle of Kosovo.
Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat towards the Adriatic coast in the Battle of Mojkovac in 6–7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians also conquered Montenegro.
The surviving Serbian soldiers were evacuated by ship to Greece.
After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.
In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece to offer assistance and to pressure its government to declare war against the Central Powers.
However, the pro-German King Constantine I dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos before the Allied expeditionary force arrived.
The friction between the King of Greece and the Allies continued to accumulate with the National Schism, which effectively divided Greece between regions still loyal to the king and the new provisional government of Venizelos in Salonica.
After intense negotiations and an armed confrontation in Athens between Allied and royalist forces (an incident known as Noemvriana), the King of Greece resigned and his second son Alexander took his place; Greece officially joined the war on the side of the Allies in June 1917.

The Macedonian front was initially mostly static.
French and Serbian forces retook limited areas of Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916 following the costly Monastir Offensive, which brought stabilisation of the front.
Serbian and French troops finally made a breakthrough in September 1918 in the Vardar Offensive, after most of the German and Austro-Hungarian troops had been withdrawn.
The Bulgarians were defeated at the Battle of Dobro Pole, and by 25 September British and French troops had crossed the border into Bulgaria proper as the Bulgarian army collapsed.
Bulgaria capitulated four days later, on 29 September 1918.
The German high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were far too weak to re-establish a front.
The disappearance of the Macedonian front meant that the road to Budapest and Vienna was now opened to Allied forces.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.

====
Ottoman Empire ====
The Ottomans threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and Britain's communications with India via the Suez Canal.
As the conflict progressed, the Ottoman Empire took advantage of the European powers' preoccupation with the war and conducted large-scale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian Christian populations, known as the Armenian Genocide, Greek Genocide, and Assyrian Genocide.
The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli (1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns (1914).
In Gallipoli, the Ottoman Empire successfully repelled the British, French, and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs).
In Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the defeat of the British defenders in the Siege of Kut by the Ottomans (1915–16), British Imperial forces reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917.
The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian tribesmen, while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.

Further to the west, the Suez Canal was defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 1916; in August, a German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani by the ANZAC Mounted Division and the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division.
Following this victory, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January
1917.Russian armies generally had success in the Caucasus campaign.
Enver Pasha, supreme commander of the Ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of re-conquering central Asia and areas that had been lost to Russia previously.
He was, however, a poor commander.
He launched an offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000 troops, insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in winter.
He lost 86% of his force at the Battle of Sarikamish.

The Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia (modern Iran) in December 1914 in an effort to cut off British and Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku near the Caspian Sea.
Persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under the spheres of British and Russian influence.
The Ottomans and Germans were aided by Kurdish and Azeri forces, together with a large number of major Iranian tribes, such as the Qashqai, Tangistanis, Luristanis, and Khamseh, while the Russians and British had the support of Armenian and Assyrian forces.
The Persian Campaign was to last until 1918 and end in failure for the Ottomans and their allies.
However, the Russian withdrawal from the war in 1917 led to Armenian and Assyrian forces, who had hitherto inflicted a series of defeats upon the forces of the Ottomans and their allies, being cut off from supply lines, outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.

General Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, drove the Turks out of most of the southern Caucasus with a string of victories.
During the 1916 campaign, the Russians defeated the Turks in the Erzurum Offensive, also occupying Trabzon.
In 1917, Russian Grand Duke Nicholas assumed command of the Caucasus front.
Nicholas planned a railway from Russian Georgia to the conquered territories, so that fresh supplies could be brought up for a new offensive in 1917.
However, in March 1917 (February in the pre-revolutionary Russian calendar), the Tsar abdicated in the course of the February Revolution, and the Russian Caucasus Army began to fall apart.

The Arab Revolt, instigated by the Arab bureau of the British Foreign Office, started June 1916 with the Battle of Mecca, led by Sherif Hussein of Mecca, and ended with the Ottoman surrender of Damascus.
Fakhri Pasha, the Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the Siege of Medina before surrendering in January 1919.The
Senussi tribe, along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, incited and armed by the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops.
The British were forced to dispatch 12,000 troops to oppose them in the Senussi Campaign.
Their rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men.
Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000 (325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded).

====
Italian participation ====
Italy had been allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires since 1882 as part of the Triple Alliance.
However, the nation had its own designs on Austro-Hungarian territory in Trentino, the Austrian Littoral, Fiume (Rijeka) and Dalmatia.
Rome had a secret 1902 pact with France, effectively nullifying its part in the Triple Alliance; Italy secretly agreed with France to remain neutral if the latter was attacked by Germany.
At the start of hostilities, Italy refused to commit troops, arguing that the Triple Alliance was defensive and that Austria-Hungary was an aggressor.
The Austro-Hungarian government began negotiations to secure Italian neutrality, offering the French colony of Tunisia in return.
The Allies made a counter-offer in which Italy would receive the Southern Tyrol, Austrian Littoral and territory on the Dalmatian coast after the defeat of Austria-Hungary.
This was formalised by the Treaty of London.
Further encouraged by the Allied invasion of Turkey in April 1915, Italy joined the Triple Entente and declared war on Austria-Hungary on
23 May. Fifteen months later, Italy declared war on Germany.

The Italians had numerical superiority, but this advantage was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which the fighting took place, but also because of the strategies and tactics employed.
Field Marshal Luigi Cadorna, a staunch proponent of the frontal assault, had dreams of breaking into the Slovenian plateau, taking Ljubljana and threatening Vienna.

On the Trentino front, the Austro-Hungarians took advantage of the mountainous terrain, which favoured the defender.
After an initial strategic retreat, the front remained largely unchanged, while Austro-Hungarian Kaiserjäger, Kaiserschützen and Standschützen engaged Italian Alpini in bitter hand-to-hand combat throughout the summer.
In the Alpine and Dolomite fronts, the main battle line led through rock and ice and often to an altitude of over 3000m.
The soldiers were threatened not only by the enemy but especially in winter by the forces of nature and the difficult supply.
The fighting led to the formation of special units with mountain guides and new combat tactics.
The Austro-Hungarians counterattacked in the Altopiano of Asiago, towards Verona and Padua, in the spring of 1916 (Strafexpedition), but made little progress and were defeated by the Italians.
Beginning in 1915, the Italians under Cadorna mounted eleven offensives on the Isonzo front along the Isonzo (Soča) River, northeast of Trieste.
Of these eleven offensives, five were won by Italy, three remained inconclusive, and the other three were repelled by the Austro-Hungarians, who held the higher ground.
In the summer of 1916, after the Battle of Doberdò, the Italians captured the town of Gorizia.
After this victory, the front remained static for over a year, despite several Italian offensives, centred on the Banjšice and Karst Plateau east of Gorizia.

The Central Powers launched a crushing offensive on 26 October 1917, spearheaded by the Germans, and achieved a victory at Caporetto (Kobarid).
The Italian Army was routed and retreated more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) to reorganise.
The new Italian chief of staff, Armando Diaz, ordered the Army to stop their retreat and defend the Monte Grappa summit, where fortified defences were constructed; the Italians repelled the Austro-Hungarian and German Army, and stabilised the front at the Piave River.
Since the Italian Army had suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Caporetto, the Italian Government ordered conscription of the so-called '99 Boys (Ragazzi del '99):
all males born in 1899 and prior, who were 18 years old or older.
In 1918, the Austro-Hungarians failed to break through in a series of battles on the Piave and were finally decisively defeated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto in October.
On 1 November, the Italian Navy destroyed much of the Austro-Hungarian fleet stationed in Pula, preventing it from being handed over to the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs.
On 3 November, the Italians invaded Trieste from the sea.
On the same day, the Armistice of Villa Giusti was signed.
By mid-November 1918, the Italian military occupied the entire former Austrian Littoral and had seized control of the portion of Dalmatia that had been guaranteed to Italy by the London Pact.
By the end of hostilities in November 1918, Admiral Enrico Millo declared himself Italy's Governor of Dalmatia.
Austria-Hungary surrendered on 11 November 1918.

====
Romanian participation ====
Romania had been allied with the Central Powers since 1882.
When the war began, however, it declared its neutrality, arguing that
because Austria-Hungary had itself declared war on Serbia, Romania was under no obligation to join the war.
On 4 August 1916, Romania and the Entente signed the Political Treaty and Military Convention, that established the coordinates of Romania's participation in the war.
In return, it received the Allies' formal sanction for Transylvania, Banat and other territories of Austria-Hungary to be annexed to Romania.
The action had large popular support.
On 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support.
The Romanian offensive was initially successful in Transylvania, but a Central Powers counterattack drove them back.
As a result of the Battle of Bucharest, the Central Powers occupied Bucharest on 6 December 1916.
Fighting in Moldova continued in 1917, but Russian withdrawal from the war in late 1917 as a result of the October Revolution meant that Romania was forced to sign an armistice with the Central Powers on 9 December 1917.

In January 1918, Romanian forces established control over Bessarabia as the Russian Army abandoned the province.
Although a treaty was signed by the Romanian and Bolshevik Russian governments following talks between 5 and 9 March 1918 on the withdrawal of Romanian forces from Bessarabia within two months, on 27 March 1918
Romania formally attached Bessarabia, inhabited by a Romanian majority, to its territory, based on a resolution passed by the local assembly of that territory on its unification with Romania.
Romania officially made peace with the Central Powers by signing the Treaty of Bucharest on 7 May 1918.
Under the treaty, Romania was obliged to end the war with the Central Powers and make small territorial concessions to Austria-Hungary, ceding control of some passes in the Carpathian Mountains, and to grant oil concessions to Germany.
In exchange, the Central Powers recognised the sovereignty of Romania over Bessarabia.
The treaty was renounced in October 1918 by the Alexandru Marghiloman government, and Romania nominally re-entered the war on 10 November 1918 against the Central Powers.
The next day, the Treaty of Bucharest was nullified by the terms of the Armistice of Compiègne.
Total Romanian deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.
===
Eastern Front ===


====
Initial actions ====
Russian plans for the start of the war called for simultaneous invasions of Austrian Galicia and East Prussia.
Although Russia's initial advance into Galicia was largely successful, it was driven back from East Prussia by Hindenburg and Ludendorff at the battles of Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914.
Russia's less developed industrial base and ineffective military leadership were instrumental in the events that unfolded.
By the spring of 1915, the Russians had retreated from Galicia, and, in May, the Central Powers achieved a remarkable breakthrough on Poland's southern frontiers with their Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive.
On 5 August, they captured Warsaw and forced the Russians to withdraw from Poland.

Despite Russia's success in the June 1916 Brusilov Offensive against the Austrians in eastern Galicia, the offensive was undermined by the reluctance of other Russian generals to commit their forces to support the victory.
Allied and Russian forces were revived only briefly by Romania's entry into the war on 27 August, as Romania was rapidly defeated by a Central Powers offensive.
Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia as the Tsar remained at the front.
The increasingly incompetent rule of Empress Alexandra drew protests and resulted in the murder of her favourite, Rasputin, at the end of 1916.

====
Russian Revolution ====
In March 1917, demonstrations in Petrograd culminated in the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and the appointment of a weak Provisional Government, which shared power with the Petrograd Soviet socialists.
This arrangement led to confusion and chaos both at the front and at home.
The army became increasingly ineffective.
Following the Tsar's abdication, Vladimir Lenin—with the help of the German government—was ushered by train from Switzerland into Russia 16 April 1917.
Discontent and the weaknesses of the Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war.
The Revolution of November was followed in December by an armistice and negotiations with Germany.
At first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but when German troops began marching across Ukraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918.
The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.
Despite this enormous German success, the manpower required by the Germans to occupy the captured territory may have contributed to the failure of their Spring Offensive, and secured relatively little food or other materiel for the Central Powers war effort.

With the adoption of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Entente no longer existed.
The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources, and to a lesser extent, to support the "Whites" (as opposed to the "Reds") in the Russian Civil War.
Allied troops landed in Arkhangelsk and in Vladivostok as part of the North Russia Intervention.

====
Czechoslovak Legion ====
The Czechoslovak Legion fought on the side of the Entente.
Its goal was to win support for the independence of Czechoslovakia.
The Legion in Russia was established in September 1914, in December 1917 in France (including volunteers from America) and in April 1918 in Italy.
Czechoslovak Legion troops defeated the Austro-Hungarian army at the Ukrainian village of Zborov, in July 1917.
After this success, the number of Czechoslovak legionaries increased, as well as Czechoslovak military power.
In the Battle of Bakhmach, the Legion defeated the Germans and forced them to make a truce.

In Russia, they were heavily involved in the Russian Civil War, siding with the Whites against the Bolsheviks, at times controlling most of the Trans-Siberian railway and conquering all the major cities of Siberia.
The presence of the Czechoslovak Legion near Yekaterinburg appears to have been one of the motivations for the Bolshevik execution of the Tsar and his family in July 1918.
Legionaries arrived less than a week afterwards and captured the city.
Because Russia's European ports were not safe, the corps was evacuated by a long detour via the port of Vladivostok.
The last transport was the American ship Heffron in September 1920.

===
Central Powers peace overtures ===
On 12 December 1916, after ten brutal months of the Battle of Verdun and a successful offensive against Romania, Germany attempted to negotiate a peace with the Allies.
However, this attempt was rejected out of hand as a "duplicitous war
ruse".
Soon after, the US president, Woodrow Wilson, attempted to intervene as a peacemaker, asking in a note for both sides to state their demands.
Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German offer to be a ploy to create divisions amongst the Allies.
After initial outrage and much deliberation, they took Wilson's note as a separate effort, signalling that the United States was on the verge of entering the war against Germany following the "submarine outrages".
While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer, the Germans chose to rebuff it in favour of "a direct exchange of views".
Learning of the German response, the Allied governments were free to make clear demands in their response of 14 January.
They sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied territories, reparations for France, Russia and Romania, and a recognition of the principle of nationalities.
This included the liberation of Italians, Slavs, Romanians, Czecho-Slovaks, and the creation of a "free and united Poland".
On the question of security, the Allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars, complete with sanctions, as a condition of any peace settlement.
The negotiations failed and the Entente powers rejected the German offer on the grounds that Germany had not put forward any specific proposals.

=== 1917–1918 ===
Events of 1917 proved decisive in ending the war, although their effects were not fully felt until 1918.

====
Developments in 1917 ====
The British naval blockade began to have a serious impact on Germany.
In response, in February 1917, the German General Staff convinced Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the goal of starving Britain out of the war.
German planners estimated that unrestricted submarine warfare would cost Britain a monthly shipping loss of 600,000 tons.
The General Staff acknowledged that the policy would almost certainly bring the United States into the conflict, but calculated that British shipping losses would be so high that they would be forced to sue for peace after five to six months, before American intervention could have an effect.
Tonnage sunk rose above 500,000 tons per month from February to July.
It peaked at 860,000 tons in April.
After July, the newly re-introduced convoy system became effective in reducing the U-boat threat.
Britain was safe from starvation, while German industrial output fell, and the United States joined the war far earlier than Germany had anticipated.

On 3 May 1917, during the Nivelle Offensive, the French 2nd Colonial Division, veterans of the Battle of Verdun, refused orders, arriving drunk and without their weapons.
Their officers lacked the means to punish an entire division, and harsh measures were not immediately implemented.
The French Army Mutinies eventually spread to a further 54 French divisions, and 20,000 men deserted.
However, appeals to patriotism and duty, as well as mass arrests and trials, encouraged the soldiers to return to defend their trenches, although the French soldiers refused to participate in further offensive action.
Robert Nivelle was removed from command by 15 May, replaced by General Philippe Pétain, who suspended bloody large-scale attacks.

The victory of the Central Powers at the Battle of Caporetto led the Allies to convene the Rapallo Conference at which they formed the Supreme War Council to co-ordinate planning.
Previously, British and French armies had operated under separate commands.

In December, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia, thus freeing large numbers of German troops for use in the west.
With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front.
The Central Powers knew that they could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success based on a final quick offensive.
Furthermore, both sides became increasingly fearful of social unrest and revolution in Europe.
Thus, both sides urgently sought a decisive victory.
In 1917, Emperor Charles I of Austria secretly attempted separate peace negotiations with Clemenceau, through his wife's brother Sixtus in Belgium as an intermediary, without the knowledge of Germany.
Italy opposed the proposals.
When the negotiations failed, his attempt was revealed to Germany, resulting in a diplomatic catastrophe.

====
Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918 ====
In March and April 1917, at the First and Second Battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at the Battle of Romani.

At the end of October, the Sinai and Palestine Campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps, XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of Beersheba.
Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the Battle of Mughar Ridge and, early in December, Jerusalem was captured following another Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Jerusalem.
About this time, Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the Eighth Army's commander, replaced by Djevad Pasha, and a few months later the commander of the Ottoman Army in Palestine, Erich von Falkenhayn, was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders.

In early 1918, the front line was extended and the Jordan Valley was occupied, following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks by British Empire forces in March and April 1918.
In March, most of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force's British infantry and Yeomanry cavalry were sent to the Western Front as a consequence of the Spring Offensive.
They were replaced by Indian Army units.
During several months of reorganisation and training of the summer, a number of attacks were carried out on sections of the Ottoman front line.
These pushed the front line north to more advantageous positions for the Entente in preparation for an attack and to acclimatise the newly arrived Indian Army infantry.
It was not until the middle of September that the integrated force was ready for large-scale operations.

The reorganised Egyptian Expeditionary Force, with an additional mounted division, broke Ottoman forces at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918.
In two days the British and Indian infantry, supported by a creeping barrage, broke the Ottoman front line and captured the headquarters of the Eighth Army (Ottoman Empire) at Tulkarm, the continuous trench lines at Tabsor, Arara, and the Seventh Army (Ottoman Empire) headquarters at Nablus.
The Desert Mounted Corps rode through the break in the front line created by the infantry.
During virtually continuous operations by Australian Light Horse, British mounted Yeomanry, Indian Lancers, and New Zealand Mounted Rifle brigades in the Jezreel Valley, they captured Nazareth, Afulah and Beisan, Jenin, along with Haifa on the Mediterranean coast and Daraa east of the Jordan River on the Hejaz railway.
Samakh and Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee were captured on the way northwards to Damascus.
Meanwhile, Chaytor's Force of Australian light horse, New Zealand mounted rifles, Indian, British West Indies and Jewish infantry captured the crossings of the Jordan River, Es Salt, Amman and at Ziza most of the Fourth Army (Ottoman Empire).
The Armistice of Mudros, signed at the end of October, ended hostilities with the Ottoman Empire when fighting was continuing north of Aleppo.

====
15 August 1917:
Peace offer by the Pope ====
On or shortly before 15 August 1917
Pope Benedict XV made a peace proposal suggesting:
No annexations
No indemnities, except to compensate for severe war damage in Belgium and parts of France and of Serbia
A solution to the problems of Alsace-Lorraine, Trentino and Trieste
Restoration of the Kingdom of Poland
Germany to pull out of Belgium and France
Germany's overseas colonies to be returned to Germany
General disarmament
A Supreme Court of arbitration to settle future disputes between nations
The freedom of the seas
Abolish all retaliatory economic conflicts
No point in ordering reparations, because so much damage had been caused to all belligerents


====
Entry of the United States ====
At the outbreak of the war, the United States pursued a policy of non-intervention: avoiding conflict while trying to broker peace.
When the German U-boat U-20 sank the British liner RMS Lusitania on 7 May 1915 with 128 Americans among the dead, President Woodrow Wilson insisted that America is "too proud to fight" but demanded an end to attacks on passenger ships.
Germany complied.
Wilson unsuccessfully tried to mediate a settlement.
However, he also repeatedly warned that the United States would not tolerate unrestricted submarine warfare, in violation of international law.
Former president Theodore Roosevelt denounced German acts as "piracy".
Wilson was narrowly re-elected in 1916 after campaigning with the slogan "
he kept us out of war".

In January 1917, Germany decided to resume unrestricted submarine warfare, in the hopes of starving Britain into surrender.
Germany did this, realising it would mean American entry.
The German Foreign Minister, in the Zimmermann Telegram, invited Mexico to join the war as Germany's ally against the United States.
In return, the Germans would finance Mexico's war and help it recover the territories of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.
The United Kingdom intercepted the message and presented it to the US embassy in the UK.
From there, it made its way to President Wilson who released the Zimmermann note to the public, and Americans saw it as casus belli.
Wilson called on anti-war elements to end all wars, by winning this one and eliminating militarism from the globe.
He argued that the war was so important that the US had to have a voice in the peace conference.
After the sinking of seven US merchant ships by submarines and the publication of the Zimmermann telegram, Wilson called for war on Germany on 2 April 1917, which the US Congress declared 4 days later.

The United States was never formally a member of the Allies but became a self-styled "Associated Power".
The United States had a small army, but, after the passage of the Selective Service Act, it drafted 2.8 million men, and, by summer 1918, was sending 10,000 newly trained soldiers to France every day.
In 1917, the US Congress granted US citizenship to Puerto Ricans to allow them to be drafted to participate in World War I, as part of the Jones–Shafroth Act.
German General Staff assumptions that it would be able to defeat the British and French forces before American troops reinforced them were proven incorrect.
The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the British Grand Fleet, destroyers to Queenstown, Ireland, and submarines to help guard convoys.
Several regiments of US Marines were also dispatched to France.
The British and French wanted American units used to reinforce their troops already on the battle lines and not waste scarce shipping on bringing over supplies.
General John J. Pershing, American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) commander, refused to break up American units to be used as filler material.
As an exception, he did allow African-American combat regiments to be used in French divisions.
The Harlem Hellfighters fought as part of the French 16th Division, and earned a unit Croix de Guerre for their actions at Château-Thierry, Belleau Wood, and Sechault.
AEF doctrine called for the use of frontal assaults, which had long since been discarded by British Empire and French commanders due to the large loss of life that resulted.
A Supreme War Council of Allied forces was created at the Doullens Conference on 5 November 1917.
General Foch was appointed as supreme commander of the Allied forces.
Haig, Petain, and Pershing retained tactical control of their respective armies; Foch assumed a co-ordinating rather than a directing role, and the British, French, and US commands operated largely independently.
General Foch pressed to use the arriving American troops as individual replacements, whereas Pershing still sought to field American units as an independent force.
These units were assigned to the depleted French and British Empire commands on 28 March 1918.

====
German Spring Offensive of 1918 ====
Ludendorff drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael) for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front.
The Spring Offensive sought to divide the British and French forces with a series of feints and advances.
The German leadership hoped to end the war before significant US forces arrived.
The operation commenced on 21 March 1918 with an attack on British forces near Saint-Quentin.
German forces achieved an unprecedented advance of 60 kilometres (37 mi).British and French trenches were penetrated using novel infiltration tactics, also named Hutier tactics after General Oskar von Hutier, by specially trained units called stormtroopers.
Previously, attacks had been characterised by long artillery bombardments and massed assaults.
In the Spring Offensive of 1918, however, Ludendorff used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak points.
They attacked command and logistics areas and bypassed points of serious resistance.
More heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated positions.
This German success relied greatly on the element of surprise.

The front moved to within 120 kilometres (75 mi) of Paris.
Three heavy Krupp railway guns fired 183 shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee.
The initial offensive was so successful that Kaiser Wilhelm II declared 24 March a national holiday.
Many Germans thought victory was near.
After heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted.
Lacking tanks or motorised artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains.
The problems of re-supply were also exacerbated by increasing distances that now stretched over terrain that was shell-torn and often impassable to traffic.
Following Operation Michael, Germany launched Operation Georgette against the northern English Channel ports.
The Allies halted the drive after limited territorial gains by Germany.
The German Army to the south then conducted Operations Blücher and Yorck, pushing broadly towards Paris.
Germany launched Operation Marne (Second Battle of the Marne) on 15 July, in an attempt to encircle Reims.
The resulting counter-attack, which started the Hundred Days Offensive, marked the first successful Allied offensive of the war.
By 20 July, the Germans had retreated across the Marne to their starting lines, having achieved little, and the German Army never regained the initiative.
German casualties between March and April 1918 were 270,000, including many highly trained stormtroopers.

Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home.
Anti-war marches became frequent and morale in the army fell.
Industrial output was half the 1913 levels.

====
New states enter the war ====
In the late spring of 1918, three new states were formed in the South Caucasus: the First Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Georgia, which declared their independence from the Russian Empire.
Two other minor entities were established, the Centrocaspian Dictatorship and South West Caucasian Republic (the former was liquidated by Azerbaijan in the autumn of 1918 and the latter by a joint Armenian-British task force in early 1919).
With the withdrawal of the Russian armies from the Caucasus front in the winter of 1917–18, the three major republics braced for an imminent Ottoman advance, which commenced in the early months of 1918.
Solidarity was briefly maintained when the Transcaucasian Federative Republic was created in the spring of 1918, but this collapsed in May, when the Georgians asked for and received protection from Germany and
the Azerbaijanis concluded a treaty with the Ottoman Empire that was more akin to a military alliance.
Armenia was left to fend for itself and struggled for five months against the threat of a full-fledged occupation by the Ottoman Turks before defeating them at the Battle of Sardarabad.

===
Allied victory:
summer 1918 onwards ===


====
Hundred Days Offensive ====
The Allied counteroffensive, known as the Hundred Days Offensive, began on 8 August 1918, with the Battle of Amiens.
The battle involved over 400 tanks and 120,000 British, Dominion, and French troops, and by the end of its first day
a gap 24 kilometres (15 mi) long had been created in the German lines.
The defenders displayed a marked collapse in morale, causing Ludendorff to refer to this day as the "Black Day of the German army".
After an advance as far as 23 kilometres (14 mi), German resistance stiffened, and the battle was concluded on 12 August.

Rather than continuing the Amiens battle past the point of initial success, as had been done so many times in the past, the Allies shifted attention elsewhere.
Allied leaders had now realised that to continue an attack after resistance had hardened was a waste of lives, and it was better to turn a line than to try to roll over it.
They began to undertake attacks in quick order to take advantage of successful advances on the flanks, then broke them off when each attack lost its initial impetus.
The day after the Offensive began, Ludendorff said: "We cannot win the war any more, but we must not lose it either."
On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it, replying, "I see that we must strike a balance.
We have nearly reached the limit of our powers of resistance.
The war must be ended.
"
On 13 August, at Spa, Hindenburg, Ludendorff, the Chancellor, and Foreign Minister Hintz agreed that the war could not be ended militarily and, on the following day, the German Crown Council decided that victory in the field was now most improbable.
Austria and Hungary warned that they could continue the war only until December, and Ludendorff recommended immediate peace negotiations.
Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Maximilian of Baden: "Our military situation has deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the winter; it is even possible that a catastrophe will come earlier."

=====
Battle of Albert =====
British and Dominion forces launched the next phase of the campaign with the Battle of Albert on 21 August.
The assault was widened by French and then further British forces in the following days.
During the last week of August the Allied pressure along a 110-kilometre (68 mi) front against the enemy was heavy and unrelenting.
From German accounts, "Each day was spent in bloody fighting against an ever and again on-storming enemy, and nights passed without sleep in retirements to new lines.
"Faced
with these advances, on 2 September the German Oberste Heeresleitung ("Supreme Army Command") issued orders to withdraw in the south to the Hindenburg Line.
This ceded without a fight the salient seized the previous April.
According to Ludendorff, "We had to admit the necessity ... to withdraw the entire front from the Scarpe to the Vesle."
In nearly four weeks of fighting beginning on 8 August, over 100,000 German prisoners were taken.
The German High Command realised that the war was lost and made attempts to reach a satisfactory end.
On 10 September Hindenburg urged peace moves to Emperor Charles of Austria, and Germany appealed to the Netherlands for mediation.
On 14 September Austria sent a note to all belligerents and neutrals suggesting a meeting for peace talks on neutral soil, and on 15 September Germany made a peace offer to Belgium.
Both peace offers were rejected.

==== Allied advance to the Hindenburg Line ====
In September the Allies advanced to the Hindenburg Line in the north and centre.
The Germans continued to fight strong rear-guard actions and launched numerous counterattacks, but positions and outposts of the Line continued to fall, with the BEF alone taking 30,441 prisoners in the last week of September.
On 24 September an assault by both the British and French came within 3 kilometres (2 mi) of St. Quentin.
The Germans had now retreated to positions along or behind the Hindenburg Line.
That same day, Supreme Army Command informed the leaders in Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.
The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September.
The following week, co-operating French and American units broke through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge, forcing the Germans off the commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.
On 8 October the line was pierced again by British and Dominion troops at the Battle of Cambrai.
The German army had to shorten its front and use the Dutch frontier as an anchor to fight rear-guard actions as it fell back towards Germany.

When Bulgaria signed a separate armistice on 29 September, Ludendorff, having been under great stress for months, suffered something similar to a breakdown.
It was evident that Germany could no longer mount a successful defence.
The collapse of the Balkans meant that Germany was about to lose its main supplies of oil and food.
Its reserves had been used up, even as US troops kept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.
The Americans supplied more than 80% of Allied oil during the war, and there was no shortage.

====
German Revolution 1918–1919 ====
News of Germany's impending military defeat spread throughout the German armed forces.
The threat of mutiny was rife.
Admiral Reinhard Scheer and Ludendorff decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "valour" of the German Navy.

In northern Germany, the German Revolution of 1918–1919 began at the end of October 1918.
Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for a last, large-scale operation in a war they believed to be as good as lost, initiating the uprising.
The sailors' revolt, which then ensued in the naval ports of Wilhelmshaven and Kiel, spread across the whole country within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on 9 November 1918, shortly thereafter to the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II, and to German surrender.

====
New German government surrenders ====
With the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the Kaiser leading to his abdication and fleeing of the country, Germany moved towards surrender.
Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge of a new government on 3 October as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate with the Allies.
Negotiations with President Wilson began immediately, in the hope that he would offer better terms than the British and French.
Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control over the German military.
There was no resistance when the Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann
on 9 November declared Germany to be a republic.
The Kaiser, kings and other hereditary rulers all were removed from power and Wilhelm fled to exile in the Netherlands.
It was the end of Imperial Germany, a new Germany had been born as the Weimar Republic.

====
Armistices and capitulations ====
The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly.
Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918.
German Emperor Wilhelm II in his telegram to Bulgarian Tsar Ferdinand
I described situation: "
Disgraceful!
62,000 Serbs decided the war!".
On the same day, the German Supreme Army Command informed Kaiser Wilhelm II and the Imperial Chancellor Count Georg von Hertling, that the military situation facing Germany was hopeless .

On 24 October, the Italians began a push that rapidly recovered territory lost after the Battle of Caporetto.
This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, which marked the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting force.
The offensive also triggered the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
During the last week of October, declarations of independence were made in Budapest, Prague, and Zagreb.
On 29 October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice, but the Italians continued advancing, reaching Trento, Udine, and Trieste.
On 3 November, Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an armistice (Armistice of Villa Giusti).
The terms, arranged by telegraph with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted.
The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November.
Austria and Hungary signed separate armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg Monarchy.
In the following days the Italian Army occupied Innsbruck and all Tyrol with over 20,000 soldiers.
On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, signing the Armistice of Mudros.
On 11 November, at 5:00 am, an armistice with Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at Compiègne.
At 11 am on 11 November 1918—"the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month"—a ceasefire came into effect.
During the six hours between the signing of the armistice and its taking effect, opposing armies on the Western Front began to withdraw from their positions, but fighting continued along many areas of the front, as commanders wanted to capture territory before the war ended.
The occupation of the Rhineland took place following the Armistice.
The occupying armies consisted of American, Belgian, British and French forces.

In November 1918, the Allies had ample supplies of men and materiel to invade Germany.
Yet at the time of the armistice, no Allied force had crossed the German frontier, the Western Front was still some 720 kilometres (450 mi) from Berlin, and the Kaiser's armies had retreated from the battlefield in good order.
These factors enabled Hindenburg and other senior German leaders to spread the story that their armies had not really been defeated.
This resulted in the stab-in-the-back legend, which attributed Germany's defeat not to its inability to continue fighting (even though up to a million soldiers were suffering from the 1918 flu pandemic and unfit to fight), but to the public's failure to respond to its "patriotic calling" and the supposed intentional sabotage of the war effort, particularly by Jews, Socialists, and Bolsheviks.

The Allies had much more potential wealth they could spend on the war.
One estimate (using 1913 US dollars) is that the Allies spent $58 billion on the war and the Central Powers only $25 billion.
Among the Allies, the UK spent $21 billion and the US$17 billion; among the Central Powers Germany spent $20 billion.

==
Aftermath ==
In the aftermath of the war, four empires disappeared: the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian.
Numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones were created.
Four dynasties, together with their ancillary aristocracies, fell as a result of the war: the Romanovs, the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburgs, and the Ottomans.
Belgium and Serbia were badly damaged, as was France, with 1.4 million soldiers dead, not counting other casualties.
Germany and Russia were similarly affected.

===
Formal end of the war ===
A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until the signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June 1919.
The United States Senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it, and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921 by President Warren G. Harding.
For the United Kingdom and the British Empire, the state of war ceased under the provisions of the Termination of the Present War (Definition)
Act 1918 with respect to:

Germany on 10 January 1920.

Austria on 16 July 1920.

Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.

Hungary on 26 July 1921.

Turkey on 6 August 1924.After
the Treaty of Versailles, treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire were signed.
However, the negotiation of the treaty with the Ottoman Empire was followed by strife, and a final peace treaty between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the Republic of Turkey was not signed until 24 July 1923, at Lausanne.

Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles Treaty was signed in 1919, which was when many of the troops serving abroad finally returned home; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of 11 November 1918.
Legally, the formal peace treaties were not complete until the last, the Treaty of Lausanne, was signed.
Under its terms, the Allied forces left Constantinople on 23 August 1923.

===
Peace treaties and national boundaries ===
After the war, there grew a certain amount of academic focus on the causes of war and on the elements that could make peace flourish.
In part, these led to the institutionalization of peace and conflict studies, security studies and International Relations (IR) in general.
The Paris Peace Conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war.
The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany and, building on Wilson's 14th point, brought into being the League of Nations on 28 June 1919.The
Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by" their aggression.
In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231.
This article became known as the War Guilt clause as the majority of Germans
felt humiliated and resentful.
Overall the Germans felt they had been unjustly dealt with by what they called the "diktat of Versailles".
German historian Hagen Schulze said the Treaty placed Germany "under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, economically ruined, and politically humiliated."
Belgian historian Laurence Van Ypersele emphasises the central role played by memory of the war and the Versailles Treaty in German politics in the 1920s and 1930s:
Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic.
The legend of the "stab in the back" and the wish to revise the "Versailles diktat", and the belief in an international threat aimed at the elimination of the German nation persisted at the heart of German politics.
Even a man of peace such as [Gustav] Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt.
As for the Nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanise the German nation into a spirit of revenge.
Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.

Meanwhile, new nations liberated from German rule viewed the treaty as recognition of wrongs committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbours.
The Peace Conference required all the defeated powers to pay reparations for all the damage done to civilians.
However, owing to economic difficulties and Germany being the only defeated power with an intact economy, the burden fell largely on Germany.

Austria-Hungary was partitioned into several successor states, including Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines.
Transylvania was shifted from Hungary to Greater Romania.
The details were contained in the Treaty of Saint-Germain and the Treaty of Trianon.
As a result of the Treaty of Trianon, 3.3 million Hungarians came under foreign rule.
Although the Hungarians made up approximately 54% of the population of the pre-war Kingdom of Hungary (according to the 1910 census), only 32% of its territory was left to Hungary.
Between 1920 and 1924, 354,000 Hungarians fled former Hungarian territories attached to Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.
The Russian Empire, which had withdrawn from the war in 1917 after the October Revolution, lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland were carved from it.
Romania took control of Bessarabia in April 1918.

The Ottoman Empire disintegrated, with much of its Levant territory awarded to various Allied powers as protectorates.
The Turkish core in Anatolia was reorganised as the Republic of Turkey.
The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920.
This treaty was never ratified by the Sultan and was rejected by the Turkish National Movement, leading to the victorious Turkish War of Independence and the much less stringent 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.

===
National identities ===
After 123 years, Poland re-emerged as an independent country.
The Kingdom of Serbia and its dynasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per capita, became the backbone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later renamed Yugoslavia.
Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation.
Russia became the Soviet Union and lost Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia, which became independent countries.
The Ottoman Empire was soon replaced by Turkey and several other countries in the Middle East.

In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism.
In Australia and New Zealand the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those nations' "Baptism of Fire".
It was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the first times that Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown.
Anzac Day, commemorating the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), celebrates this defining moment.
After the Battle of Vimy Ridge, where the Canadian divisions fought together for the first time as a single corps, Canadians began to refer to their country as a nation "forged from fire".
Having succeeded on the same battleground where the "mother countries" had previously faltered, they were for the first time respected internationally for their own accomplishments.
Canada entered the war as a Dominion of the British Empire and remained so, although it emerged with a greater measure of independence.
When Britain declared war in 1914, the dominions were automatically at war; at the conclusion, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were individual signatories of the Treaty of Versailles.
Lobbying by Chaim Weizmann and fear that American Jews would encourage the United States to support Germany culminated in the British government's Balfour Declaration of 1917, endorsing creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.
A total of more than 1,172,000 Jewish soldiers served in the Allied and Central Power forces in World War I, including 275,000 in Austria-Hungary and 450,000 in Tsarist Russia.
The establishment of the modern state of Israel and the roots of the continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict are partially found in the unstable power dynamics of the Middle East that resulted from World War I. Before the end of the war, the Ottoman Empire had maintained a modest level of peace and stability throughout the Middle East.
With the fall of the Ottoman government, power vacuums developed and conflicting claims to land and nationhood began to emerge.
The political boundaries drawn by the victors of World War
I were quickly imposed, sometimes after only cursory consultation with the local population.
These continue to be problematic in the 21st-century struggles for national identity.
While the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War
I was pivotal in contributing to the modern political situation of the Middle East, including the Arab-Israeli conflict, the end of Ottoman rule also spawned lesser known disputes over water and other natural resources.
The prestige of Germany and German things in Latin America remained high after the war but did not recover to its pre-war levels.
Indeed, in Chile the war bought an end to a period of intense scientific and cultural influence writer Eduardo de la Barra scorningly called "the German bewitchment" (Spanish: el embrujamiento alemán).

===
Health effects ===
Of the 60 million European military personnel who were mobilised from 1914 to 1918, 8 million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were seriously injured.
Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population,
Austria-Hungary lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.
France mobilised 7.8 million men, of which 1.4 million died and 3.2 million were injured.

In Germany, civilian deaths were 474,000 higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food shortages and malnutrition that weakened resistance to disease.
By the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately 100,000 people in Lebanon.
Between 5 and 10 million people died in the Russian famine of 1921.
By 1922, there were between 4.5 million and 7 million homeless children in Russia as a result of nearly a decade of devastation from World War I, the Russian Civil War, and the subsequent famine of 1920–1922.
Numerous anti-Soviet Russians fled the country after the Revolution; by the 1930s, the northern Chinese city of Harbin had 100,000 Russians.
Thousands more emigrated to France, England, and the United States.

The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, Lloyd George, "You have assured us that you cannot get better terms.
I much regret it, and hope even now that some way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the tremendous sacrifices made by the British Empire and her Allies."
Australia received £5,571,720 war reparations, but the direct cost of the war to Australia had been £376,993,052, and, by the mid-1930s, repatriation pensions, war gratuities, interest and sinking fund charges were £831,280,947.
Of about 416,000 Australians who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.
Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions.
In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus killed 200,000 in Serbia.
From 1918 to 1922, Russia had about 25 million infections and 3 million deaths from epidemic typhus.
In 1923, 13 million Russians contracted malaria, a sharp increase from the pre-war years.
In addition, a major influenza epidemic spread around the world.
Overall, the Spanish flu killed at least 17 million to 50 million people, including an estimated 2.64 million Europeans and as many as 675,000 Americans.
Moreover, between 1915 and 1926, an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica spread around the world affecting nearly five million people.
The social disruption and widespread violence of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War sparked more than 2,000 pogroms in the former Russian Empire, mostly in Ukraine.
An estimated 60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities.
In the aftermath of World War I, Greece fought against Turkish nationalists led by Mustafa Kemal, a war that eventually resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the Treaty of Lausanne.
According to various sources, several hundred thousand Greeks died during this period, which was tied in with the Greek Genocide.

==
Technology ==


===
Ground warfare ===
World War
I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and 19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties.
By the end of 1917, however, the major armies, now numbering millions of men, had modernised and were making use of telephone, wireless communication, armoured cars, tanks, and aircraft.
Infantry formations were reorganised, so that 100-man companies were no longer the main unit of manoeuvre; instead, squads of 10 or so men, under the command of a junior NCO, were favoured.

Artillery also underwent a revolution.
In 1914, cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets.
By 1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably aircraft and the often overlooked field telephone.
Counter-battery missions became commonplace, also, and sound detection was used to locate enemy batteries.

Germany was far ahead of the Allies in using heavy indirect fire.
The German Army employed 150 mm (6 in) and 210 mm (8 in) howitzers in 1914, when typical French and British guns were only 75 mm (3 in) and 105 mm (4 in).
The British had a 6-inch (152 mm) howitzer, but it was so heavy
it had to be hauled to the field in pieces and assembled.
The Germans also fielded Austrian 305 mm (12 in) and 420 mm (17 in) guns and, even at the beginning of the war, had inventories of various calibres of Minenwerfer, which were ideally suited for trench warfare.

On 27 June 1917 the Germans used the biggest gun in the world, Batterie Pommern, nicknamed "Lange Max".
This gun from Krupp was able to shoot 750 kg shells from Koekelare to Dunkirk, a distance of about 50 km (31 mi).

Much of the combat involved trench warfare, in which hundreds often died for each metre gained.
Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I.
Such battles include Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme, Verdun, and Gallipoli.
The Germans employed the Haber process of nitrogen fixation to provide their forces with a constant supply of gunpowder despite the British naval blockade.
Artillery was responsible for the largest number of casualties and consumed vast quantities of explosives.
The large number of head wounds caused by exploding shells and fragmentation forced the combatant nations to develop the modern steel helmet, led by the French, who introduced the Adrian helmet in 1915.
It was quickly followed by the Brodie helmet, worn by British Imperial and US troops, and in 1916 by the distinctive German Stahlhelm, a design, with improvements, still in use today.

The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing feature of the conflict.
Gases used included chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene.
Relatively few war casualties were caused by gas, as effective countermeasures to gas attacks were quickly created, such as gas masks.
The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bombing (as opposed to tactical bombing) were both outlawed by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectiveness, though they captured the public imagination.
The most powerful land-based weapons were railway guns, weighing dozens of tons apiece.
The German version were nicknamed Big Berthas, even though the namesake was not a railway gun.
Germany developed the Paris Gun, able to bombard Paris from over 100 kilometres (62 mi), though shells were relatively light at 94 kilograms (210 lb).

Trenches, machine guns, air reconnaissance, barbed wire, and modern artillery with fragmentation shells helped bring the battle lines of World War I to a stalemate.
The British and the French sought a solution with the creation of the tank and mechanised warfare.
The British first tanks were used during the Battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916.
Mechanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its worth.
Within a year, the British were fielding tanks by the hundreds, and they showed their potential during the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms teams captured 8,000 enemy soldiers and 100 guns.
Meanwhile, the French introduced the first tanks with a rotating turret, the Renault FT, which became a decisive tool of the victory.
The conflict also saw the introduction of light automatic weapons and submachine guns, such as the Lewis gun, the Browning Automatic Rifle, and the Bergmann MP18.

Another new weapon, the flamethrower, was first used by the German army and later adopted by other forces.
Although not of high tactical value, the flamethrower was a powerful, demoralising weapon that caused terror on the battlefield.

Trench railways evolved to supply the enormous quantities of food, water, and ammunition required to support large numbers of soldiers in areas where conventional transportation systems had been destroyed.
Internal combustion engines and improved traction systems for automobiles and trucks
/lorries eventually rendered trench railways obsolete.

====
Areas taken in major attacks ====
On the Western Front neither side made impressive gains in the first three years of the war with attacks at Verdun, the Somme, Passchendaele, and Cambrai—the exception was Nivelle's Offensive in which the German defence gave ground while mauling the attackers so badly that there were mutinies in the French Army.
In 1918 the Germans smashed through the defence lines in three great attacks:
Michael, on the Lys, and on the Aisne, which displayed the power of their new tactics.
The Allies struck back at Soissons, which showed the Germans that they must return to the defensive, and at Amiens; tanks played a prominent role in both these assaults, as they had the year before at Cambrai.

The areas in the East were larger.
The Germans did well at the First Masurian Lakes driving the invaders from East Prussia, and at Riga, which led the Russians to sue for peace.
The Austro-Hungarians and Germans joined for a great success at Gorlice–Tarnów, which drove the Russians out of Poland.
In a series of attacks along with the Bulgarians they occupied Serbia, Albania, Montenegro and most of Romania.
The Allies successes came later in Palestine, the beginning of the end for the Ottomans, in Macedonia, which drove the Bulgarians out of the war, and at Vittorio Veneto, the final blow for the Austro-Hungarians.
The area occupied in East by the Central powers on 11 November 1918 was 1,042,600 km2 (402,600 sq mi).

===
Naval ===
Germany deployed U-boats (submarines) after the war began.
Alternating between restricted and unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, the Kaiserliche Marine employed them to deprive the British Isles of vital supplies.
The deaths of British merchant sailors and the seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges (1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines (HMS R-1, 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).
To extend their operations, the Germans proposed supply submarines (1916).
Most of these would be forgotten in the interwar period until World War II revived the need.

===
Aviation ===
Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya on 23 October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year.
By 1914, their military utility was obvious.
They were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack.
To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed.
Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.
Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tønder in 1918.

Manned observation balloons, floating high above the trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platforms, reporting enemy movements and directing artillery.
Balloons commonly had a crew of two, equipped with parachutes, so that if there was an enemy air attack the crew could parachute to safety.
At the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with their marginal power output), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who feared they might promote cowardice.
Recognised for their value as observation platforms, balloons were important targets for enemy aircraft.
To defend them against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaircraft guns and patrolled by friendly aircraft; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-to-air rockets were tried.
Thus, the reconnaissance value of blimps and balloons contributed to the development of air-to-air combat between all types of aircraft, and to the trench stalemate, because it was impossible to move large numbers of troops undetected.
The Germans conducted air raids on England during 1915 and 1916 with airships, hoping to damage British morale and cause aircraft to be diverted from the front lines, and indeed the resulting panic led to the diversion of several squadrons of fighters from France.

==
War crimes ==


===
Baralong incidents ===
On 19 August 1915, the German submarine U-27 was sunk by the British Q-ship HMS Baralong.
All German survivors were summarily executed by Baralong's crew on the orders of Lieutenant Godfrey Herbert, the captain of the ship.
The shooting was reported to the media by American citizens who were on board the Nicosia, a British freighter loaded with war supplies, which was stopped by U-27 just minutes before the incident.
On 24 September, Baralong destroyed U-41, which was in the process of sinking the cargo ship Urbino.
According to Karl Goetz, the submarine's commander, Baralong continued to fly the US flag after firing on U-41 and then rammed the lifeboat—carrying the German survivors, sinking it.

===
Torpedoing of HMHS Llandovery Castle ===
The Canadian hospital ship HMHS Llandovery Castle was torpedoed by the German submarine SM U-86 on 27 June 1918 in violation of international law.
Only 24 of the 258 medical personnel, patients, and crew survived.
Survivors reported that the U-boat surfaced and ran down the lifeboats, machine-gunning survivors in the water.
The U-boat captain, Helmut Patzig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but escaped prosecution by going to the Free City of Danzig, beyond the jurisdiction of German courts.

=== Blockade of Germany ===
After the war, the German government claimed that approximately 763,000 German civilians died from starvation and disease during the war because of the Allied blockade.
An academic study done in 1928 put the death toll at 424,000.
Germany protested that the Allies had used starvation as a weapon of war.
Sally Marks argued that the German accounts of a hunger blockade are a "myth," as Germany did not face the starvation level of Belgium and the regions of Poland and northern France that it occupied.
According to the British judge and legal philosopher Patrick Devlin, "The War Orders given by the Admiralty on 26 August [1914] were clear enough.
All food consigned to Germany through neutral ports was to be captured and all food consigned to Rotterdam was to be presumed consigned to Germany."
According to Devlin, this was a serious breach of International Law, equivalent to German minelaying.

===
Chemical weapons in warfare ===
The German army was the first to successfully deploy chemical weapons during the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April – 25 May 1915), after German scientists working under the direction of Fritz Haber at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute developed a method to weaponize chlorine.
The use of chemical weapons was sanctioned by the German High Command in an effort to force Allied soldiers out of their entrenched positions, complementing rather than supplanting more lethal conventional weapons.
In time, chemical weapons were deployed by all major belligerents throughout the war, inflicting approximately 1.3 million casualties, but relatively few fatalities: About 90,000 in total.
For example, there were an estimated 186,000 British chemical weapons casualties during the war (80% of which were the result of exposure to the vesicant sulfur mustard, introduced to the battlefield by the Germans in July 1917, which burns the skin at any point of contact and inflicts more severe lung damage than chlorine or phosgene), and up to one-third of American casualties were caused by them.
The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in World War I.
The use of chemical weapons in warfare was in direct violation of the 1899 Hague Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited their use.

The effect of poison gas was not limited to combatants.
Civilians were at risk from the gases as winds blew the poison gases through their towns, and they rarely received warnings or alerts of potential danger.
In addition to absent warning systems, civilians often did not have access to effective gas masks.
An estimated 100,000–260,000 civilian casualties were caused by chemical weapons during the conflict and tens of thousands more (along with military personnel) died from scarring of the lungs, skin damage, and cerebral damage in the years after the conflict ended.
Many commanders on both sides knew such weapons would cause major harm to civilians but nonetheless continued to use them.
British Field Marshal
Sir Douglas Haig wrote in his diary, "My officers and I were aware that such weapons would cause harm to women and children living in nearby towns, as strong winds were common in the battlefront.
However, because the weapon was to be directed against the enemy, none of us were overly concerned at all.
"The
war damaged chemistry's prestige in European societies, in particular the German variety.
===
Genocide and ethnic cleansing ===


====
Ottoman Empire ====
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.
The Ottomans carried out organised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and manipulated acts of Armenian resistance by portraying them as rebellions to justify further extermination.
In early 1915, a number of Armenians volunteered to join the Russian forces and the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation), which authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915 and 1918.
The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by Ottoman brigands.
While an exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates 1.5 million.
The government of Turkey has consistently denied the genocide, arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting, famine, or disease during World War I; these claims are rejected by most historians.
Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination.
At least 250,000 Assyrian Christians, about half of the population, and 350,000–750,000 Anatolian and Pontic Greeks were killed between 1915 and 1922.

====
Russian Empire ====
Many pogroms accompanied the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War.
60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire (mostly within the Pale of Settlement in present-day Ukraine).
There were an estimated 7–12 million casualties during the Russian Civil War, mostly civilians.

===
Rape of Belgium ===
The German invaders treated any resistance—such as sabotaging rail lines—as illegal and immoral, and shot the offenders and burned buildings in retaliation.
In addition, they tended to suspect that most civilians were potential francs-tireurs (guerrillas) and, accordingly, took and sometimes killed hostages from among the civilian population.
The German army executed over 6,500 French and Belgian civilians between August and November 1914, usually in near-random large-scale shootings of civilians ordered by junior German officers.
The German Army destroyed 15,000–20,000 buildings—most famously the university library at Louvain—and generated a wave of refugees of over a million people.
Over half the German regiments in Belgium were involved in major incidents.
Thousands of workers were shipped to Germany to work in factories.
British propaganda dramatising the Rape of Belgium attracted much attention in the United States, while Berlin said it was both lawful and necessary because of the threat of franc-tireurs like those in France in 1870.
The British and French magnified the reports and disseminated them at home and in the United States, where they played a major role in dissolving support for Germany.

==
Soldiers' experiences ==
The British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service.
Surviving veterans, returning home, often found they could discuss their experiences only amongst themselves.
Grouping together, they formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions".
A small number of personal accounts of American veterans have been collected by the Library of Congress Veterans History Project.
===
Prisoners of war ===
About eight million men surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war.
All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of combatants at the front.
Individual surrenders were uncommon; large units usually surrendered en masse.
At the Siege of Maubeuge about 40,000 French soldiers surrendered, at the battle of Galicia Russians took about 100,000 to 120,000 Austrian captives, at the Brusilov Offensive about 325,000 to 417,000 Germans and Austrians surrendered to Russians, and at the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered.
When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, some 20,000 Russians became prisoners, at the battle near Przasnysz (February–March 1915)
14,000 Germans surrendered to Russians, and at the First Battle of the Marne about 12,000 Germans surrendered to the Allies.
25–31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured, wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status; for Austria-Hungary 32%, for Italy 26%, for France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%.
Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.4 million (not including Russia, which lost 2.5–3.5 million men as prisoners).
From the Central Powers about 3.3 million men became prisoners; most of them surrendered to Russians.
Germany held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.2–2.9 million; while Britain and France held about 720,000.
Most were captured just before the Armistice.
The United States held 48,000.
The most dangerous moment was the act of surrender, when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.
Once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory (and much better than in World War II), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and inspections by neutral nations.
However, conditions were terrible in Russia:
starvation was common for prisoners and civilians alike; about 15–20% of the prisoners in Russia died, and in Central Powers imprisonment 8% of Russians.
In Germany, food was scarce, but only 5% died.

The Ottoman Empire often treated POWs poorly.
Some 11,800 British Empire soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the Siege of Kut in Mesopotamia in April 1916; 4,250 died in captivity.
Although many were in a poor condition when captured, Ottoman officers forced them to march 1,100 kilometres (684 mi) to Anatolia.
A survivor said: "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die."
The survivors were then forced to build a railway through the Taurus Mountains.

In Russia, when the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian army were released in 1917, they re-armed themselves and briefly became a military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.

While the Allied prisoners of the Central Powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to Central Power prisoners of the Allies and Russia, many of whom served as forced labour, e.g., in France until 1920.
They were released only after many approaches by the Red Cross to the Allied Supreme Council.
German prisoners were still being held in Russia as late as 1924.
===
Military attachés and war correspondents ===
Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war.
Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces.

== Support for the war ==
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia.
The Yugoslav Committee, led by Trumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915 but shortly moved its office to London.
In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing within Austria-Hungary.
In the Middle East, Arab nationalism soared in Ottoman territories in response to the rise of Turkish nationalism during the war, with Arab nationalist leaders advocating the creation of a pan-Arab state.
In 1916, the Arab Revolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East in an effort to achieve independence.
In East Africa, Iyasu V of Ethiopia was supporting the Dervish state who were at war with the British in the Somaliland Campaign.
Von Syburg, the German envoy in Addis Ababa, said, "now the time has come for Ethiopia to regain the coast of the Red Sea driving the Italians home, to restore the Empire to its ancient size."
The Ethiopian Empire was on the verge of entering World War I on the side of the Central Powers before Iyasu's overthrow at the Battle of Segale due to Allied pressure on the Ethiopian aristocracy.
Iyasu was accused of converting to Islam.
According to Ethiopian historian Bahru Zewde, the evidence used to prove Iyasu's conversion was a doctored photo of Iyasu wearing a turban provided by the Allies.
Some historians claim the British spy T. E. Lawrence forged the Iyasu photo.
A number of socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.
But European socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as Marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for the war.
Once the war began, Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries' intervention in the war.
Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions.
One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.
The Italian Liberal Party, under the leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and used the Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.
Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini and Leonida Bissolati.
However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.
The Italian Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.
Mussolini, a syndicalist who supported the war on grounds of irredentist claims on Italian-populated regions of Austria-Hungary, formed the pro-interventionist Il Popolo d'Italia and the Fasci Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista ("Revolutionary Fasci for International Action") in October 1914 that later developed into the Fasci di Combattimento in 1919, the origin of fascism.
Mussolini's nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to create Il Popolo d'Italia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.

==
Opposition to the war ==
Once war was declared, many socialists and trade unions backed their governments.
Among the exceptions were the Bolsheviks, the Socialist Party of America, the Italian Socialist Party, and people like Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and their followers in Germany.

Benedict XV, elected to the papacy less than three months into World War I, made the war and its consequences the main focus of his early pontificate.
In stark contrast to his predecessor, five days after his election he spoke of his determination to do what he could to bring peace.
His first encyclical, Ad beatissimi Apostolorum, given 1 November 1914, was concerned with this subject.
Benedict XV found his abilities and unique position as a religious emissary of peace ignored by the belligerent powers.
The 1915 Treaty of London between Italy and the Triple Entente included secret provisions whereby the Allies agreed with Italy to ignore papal peace moves towards the Central Powers.
Consequently, the publication of Benedict's proposed seven-point Peace Note of August 1917 was roundly ignored by all parties except Austria-Hungary.

In Britain in 1914, the Public Schools Officers' Training Corps annual camp was held at Tidworth Pennings, near Salisbury Plain.
Head of the British Army, Lord Kitchener, was to review the cadets, but the imminence of the war prevented him.
General Horace Smith-Dorrien was sent instead.
He surprised the two-or-three thousand cadets by declaring (in the words of Donald Christopher Smith, a Bermudian cadet who was present),

that war should be avoided at almost any cost, that war would solve nothing, that the whole of Europe and more besides would be reduced to ruin, and that the loss of life would be so large that whole populations would be decimated.
In our ignorance I, and many of us, felt almost ashamed of a British General who uttered such depressing and unpatriotic sentiments, but during the next four years, those of us who survived the holocaust—probably not more than one-quarter of us—learned how right the General's prognosis was and how courageous he had been to utter it.

Voicing these sentiments did not hinder Smith-Dorrien's career, or prevent him from doing his duty in World War
I to the best of his abilities.

Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict.
These included Eugene Debs in the United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain.
In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal".
Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors, and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.

A number of nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within states that the nationalists were hostile to.
Although the vast majority of Irish people consented to participate in the war in 1914 and 1915, a minority of advanced Irish nationalists staunchly opposed taking part.
The war began amid the Home Rule crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912, and by July 1914 there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland.
Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.
The UK government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising, though once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.
However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in Ireland, resulting in the Conscription Crisis of 1918.

Other opposition came from conscientious objectors—some socialist, some religious—who refused to fight.
In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.
Some of them, most notably prominent peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service.
Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets.
Even after the war, in Britain many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need apply".

The Central Asian Revolt started in the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of Muslims from military service.
In 1917, a series of French Army Mutinies led to dozens of soldiers being executed and many more imprisoned.

On 1–4 May 1917, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down with the war!"
and "all power to the soviets!"
The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Russian Provisional Government.
In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation.
The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until 23 May when the army gained control of the city.
Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people arrested.
In September 1917, Russian soldiers in France began questioning why they were fighting for the French at all and mutinied.
In Russia, opposition to the war led to soldiers also establishing their own revolutionary committees, which helped foment the October Revolution of 1917, with the call going up for "bread, land, and peace".
The Decree on Peace, written by Vladimir Lenin, was passed on 8 November 1917, following the success of the October Revolution.
The Bolsheviks agreed to a peace treaty with Germany, the peace of Brest-Litovsk, despite its harsh conditions.
The German Revolution of 1918–1919 led to the abdication of the Kaiser and German surrender.

==
Conscription ==
Conscription was common in most European countries.
However, it was controversial in English-speaking countries.
It was especially unpopular among minority ethnic groups—especially the Irish Catholics in Ireland and Australia, and the French Catholics in Canada.

===
Canada ===
In Canada the issue produced a major political crisis that permanently alienated the Francophones.
It opened a political gap between French Canadians, who believed their true loyalty was to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the Anglophone majority, who saw the war as a duty to their British heritage.

===
Australia ===
Australia had a form of conscription at the outbreak of the war, as compulsory military training had been introduced in 1911.
However, the Defence Act 1903 provided that unexempted males could be called upon only for home defence during times of war, not overseas service.
Prime Minister Billy Hughes wished to amend the legislation to require conscripts to serve overseas, and held two non-binding referendums – one in 1916 and one in 1917 – in order to secure public support.
Both were defeated by narrow margins, with farmers, the labour movement, the Catholic Church, and Irish-Australians combining to campaign for the "No" vote.
The issue of conscription caused the 1916 Australian Labor Party split.
Hughes and his supporters were expelled from the party, forming the National Labor Party and then the Nationalist Party.
Despite the referendum results, the Nationalists won a landslide victory at the 1917 federal election.

===
Britain ===
In Britain, conscription resulted in the calling up of nearly every physically fit man in Britain—six of ten million eligible.
Of these, about 750,000 lost their lives.
Most deaths were those of young unmarried men; however, 160,000 wives lost husbands and 300,000 children lost fathers.
Conscription during the First World War began when the British government passed the Military Service Act in 1916.
The act specified that single men aged 18 to 40 years old were liable to be called up for military service unless they were widowed with children or ministers of a religion.
There was a system of Military Service Tribunals to adjudicate upon claims for exemption upon the grounds of performing civilian work of national importance, domestic hardship, health, and conscientious objection.
The law went through several changes before the war ended.
Married men were exempt in the original Act, although this was changed in June 1916.
The age limit was also eventually raised to 51 years old.
Recognition of work of national importance also diminished, and in the last year of the war there was some support for the conscription of clergy.
Conscription lasted until mid-1919.
Due to the political situation in Ireland, conscription was never applied there; only in England, Scotland and Wales.

===
United States ===
In the United States, conscription began in 1917 and was generally well received, with a few pockets of opposition in isolated rural areas.
The administration decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower for when only 73,000 volunteers enlisted out of the initial 1 million target in the first six weeks of the war.
In 1917 10 million men were registered.
This was deemed to be inadequate, so age ranges were increased and exemptions reduced, and so by the end of 1918 this increased to 24 million men that were registered with nearly 3 million inducted into the military services.
The draft was universal and included blacks on the same terms as whites, although they served in different units.
In all 367,710 black Americans were drafted (13% of the total), compared to 2,442,586 white (87%).

Forms of resistance ranged from peaceful protest to violent demonstrations and from humble letter-writing campaigns asking for mercy to radical newspapers demanding reform.
The most common tactics were dodging and desertion, and many communities sheltered and defended their draft dodgers as political heroes.
Many socialists were jailed for "obstructing the recruitment or enlistment service".
The most famous was Eugene Debs, head of the Socialist Party of America, who ran for president in 1920 from his prison cell.
In 1917 a number of radicals and anarchists challenged the new draft law in federal court, arguing that it was a direct violation of the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition against slavery and involuntary servitude.
The Supreme Court unanimously upheld the constitutionality of the draft act in the Selective Draft Law Cases on 7 January 1918.

===
Austria-Hungary ===
Like all the armies of mainland Europe, Austria-Hungary relied on conscription to fill its ranks.
Officer recruitment, however, was voluntary.
The effect of this at the start of the war was that well over a quarter of the rank and file were Slavs, while more than 75% of the officers were ethnic Germans.
This was much resented.
The army has been described as being "run on colonial lines" and the Slav soldiers as "disaffected".
Thus conscription contributed greatly to Austria's disastrous performance on the battlefield.

==
Diplomacy ==
The non-military diplomatic and propaganda interactions among the nations were designed to build support for the cause, or to undermine support for the enemy.
For the most part, wartime diplomacy focused on five issues: propaganda campaigns; defining and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war went on; luring neutral nations (Italy, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria, Romania) into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory; and encouragement by the Allies of nationalistic minority movements inside the Central Powers, especially among Czechs, Poles, and Arabs.
In addition, there were multiple peace proposals coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them progressed very far.

==
Legacy and memory ==
The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and is still underway, more than a century later.

===
Historiography ===
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years.
Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalisation of politics, race, and the male body.
Furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated: Why the war began, why the Allies won, whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates, how the soldiers endured the horrors of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian homefront accepted and endorsed the war effort.
=== Memorials ===
Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns.
Close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission, the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français.
Many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate memorial and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.

In 1915 John McCrae, a Canadian army doctor, wrote the poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the Great War.
Published in Punch on 8 December 1915, it is still recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.

National World War
I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City, Missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World War I.
The Liberty Memorial was dedicated on 1 November 1921, when the supreme Allied commanders spoke to a crowd of more than 100,000 people.
The UK Government has budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018.
The lead body is the Imperial War Museum.
On 3 August 2014, French President Francois Hollande and German President Joachim Gauck
together marked the centenary of Germany's declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in the war.

===
Cultural memory ===
World War
I had a lasting impact on social memory.
It was seen by many in Britain as signalling the end of an era of stability stretching back to the Victorian period, and across Europe many regarded it as a watershed.
Historian Samuel Hynes explained:

A generation of innocent young men, their heads full of high abstractions like Honour, Glory and England, went off to war to make the world safe for democracy.
They were slaughtered in stupid battles planned by stupid generals.
Those who survived were shocked, disillusioned and embittered by their war experiences, and saw that their real enemies were not the Germans, but the old men at home who had lied to them.
They rejected the values of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own generation from the past and from their cultural inheritance.

This has become the most common perception of World War I, perpetuated by the art, cinema, poems, and stories published subsequently.
Films such as All Quiet on the Western Front, Paths of Glory and King & Country have perpetuated the idea, while war-time films including Camrades, Poppies of Flanders, and Shoulder Arms indicate that the most contemporary views of the war were overall far more positive.
Likewise, the art of Paul Nash, John Nash, Christopher Nevinson, and Henry Tonks in Britain painted a negative view of the conflict in keeping with the growing perception, while popular war-time artists such as Muirhead Bone painted more serene and pleasant interpretations subsequently rejected as inaccurate.
Several historians like John Terraine, Niall Ferguson and Gary Sheffield have challenged these interpretations as partial and polemical views:
These beliefs did not become widely shared because they offered the only accurate interpretation of wartime events.
In every respect, the war was much more complicated than they suggest.
In recent years, historians have argued persuasively against almost every popular cliché of World War I.
It has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their greatest impact was socially and geographically limited.
The many emotions other than horror experienced by soldiers in and out of the front line, including comradeship, boredom, and even enjoyment, have been recognised.
The war is not now seen as a 'fight about nothing', but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy.
It has been acknowledged that British generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges, and that it was under their command that the British army played a major part in the defeat of the Germans in 1918: a great forgotten victory.

Though these views have been discounted as "myths", they are common.
They have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the 1950s perceptions of the war as "aimless" following the contrasting Second World War and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the 1960s.
The majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.

===
Social trauma ===
The social trauma caused by unprecedented rates of casualties manifested itself in different ways, which have been the subject of subsequent historical debate.
The optimism of la belle époque was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the Lost Generation.
For years afterwards, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled.
Many soldiers returned with severe trauma, suffering from shell shock (also called neurasthenia, a condition related to posttraumatic stress disorder).
Many more returned home with few after-effects; however, their silence about the war contributed to the conflict's growing mythological status.
Though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception.
Such historians as Dan Todman, Paul Fussell, and Samuel Heyns have all published works since the 1990s arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.
===
Discontent in Germany and Austria ===
The rise of Nazism and fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many post-war changes.
Similarly, the popularity of the stab-in-the-back legend (German: Dolchstoßlegende) was a testament to the psychological state of defeated Germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict.
This conspiracy theory of betrayal became common, and the German populace came to see themselves as victims.
The widespread acceptance of the "stab-in-the-back" theory delegitimised the Weimar government and destabilised the system, opening it to extremes of right and left.
The same occurred in Austria which counterfactually considered himself not being responsible for the outbreak of the war and claimed not to have suffered a military defeat.
Communist and fascist movements around Europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity.
These feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war.
Adolf Hitler was able to gain popularity by using German discontent with the still controversial Treaty of Versailles.
World War II was in part a continuation of the power struggle never fully resolved by World War I.
Furthermore, it was common for Germans in the 1930s to justify acts of aggression due to perceived injustices imposed by the victors of World War I. American historian William Rubinstein
wrote that:

The 'Age of Totalitarianism' included nearly all the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the Jewish Holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the Communist world, other mass killings carried out by Nazi Germany and its allies, and also the Armenian Genocide of 1915.
All these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern Europe as a result of World War I, without which surely neither Communism nor Fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.

===
Economic effects ===
One of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the Dominions of the British Empire.
To harness all the power of their societies, governments created new ministries and powers.
New taxes were levied and laws enacted, all designed to bolster the war effort; many have lasted to the present.
Similarly, the war strained the abilities of some formerly large and bureaucratised governments, such as in Austria-Hungary and Germany.

Gross domestic product (GDP) increased for three Allies (Britain, Italy, and the United States), but decreased in France and Russia, in neutral Netherlands, and in the three main Central Powers.
The shrinkage in GDP in Austria, Russia, France, and the Ottoman Empire ranged between 30% and 40%.
In Austria, for example, most pigs were slaughtered, so at war's end there was no meat.

In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased, surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching that level in Britain.
To pay for purchases in the United States, Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily from Wall Street.
President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916, but allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies.
After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans.
The repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in turn, were supported by American loans to Germany.
This circular system collapsed in 1931 and some loans were never repaid.
Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion of World War I debt in 1934, the last instalment was finally paid in 2015.Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war.
Families were altered by the departure of many men.
With the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers.
At the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war.
This aided the struggle for voting rights for women.
World War
I further compounded the gender imbalance, adding to the phenomenon of surplus women.
The deaths of nearly one million men during the war in Britain increased the gender gap by almost a million: from 670,000 to 1,700,000.
The number of unmarried women seeking economic means grew dramatically.
In addition, demobilisation and economic decline following the war caused high unemployment.
The war increased female employment; however, the return of demobilised men displaced many from the workforce, as did the closure of many of the wartime factories.

In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in early 1918, limited to meat, sugar, and fats (butter and margarine), but not bread.
The new system worked smoothly.
From 1914 to 1918, trade union membership doubled, from a little over four million to a little over eight million.

Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult.
Geologists such as Albert Ernest Kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies.
Kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.
Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt" clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies.
"
It was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with Austria and Hungary.
However neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt."
In 1921, the total reparation sum was placed at 132 billion gold marks.
However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this sum.
The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the "total sum was being maintained."
Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore ... represented the total German reparations" figure that had to be paid.
This figure could be paid in cash or in kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.).
In addition, some of the territory lost—via the treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation figure as were other acts such as helping to restore the Library of Louvain.
By 1929, the Great Depression arrived, causing political chaos throughout the world.
In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point Germany had paid only the equivalent of 20.598 billion gold marks in reparations.
With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled.
David Andelman notes "refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void.
The bonds, the agreement, still exist."
Thus, following the Second World War, at the London Conference in 1953, Germany agreed to resume payment on the money borrowed.
On 3 October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these bonds.
The war contributed to the evolution of the wristwatch from women's jewellery to a practical everyday item, replacing the pocketwatch, which requires a free hand to operate.
Military funding of advancements in radio contributed to the post-war popularity of the medium.

==
See also ==
Lists of World War
I topics
Outline of World War
I


==
Footnotes ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==

Records on the outbreak of World War I from the UK Parliamentary Collections
The Heritage of the Great War / First World War.
Graphic color photos, pictures and music
A multimedia history of World War I
European Newspapers from the start of the First World War and the end of the war
WWI Films on the European Film Gateway
The British Pathé WW1 Film Archive
World War
I British press photograph collection –
A sampling of images distributed by the British government during the war to diplomats overseas, from the UBC Library Digital Collections
Personal accounts of American World War I veterans, Veterans History Project, Library of Congress.

===
Animated maps ===
"Europe plunges into war"
Archived 4 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine
Europe at the end of the war Archived 4 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine


===
Library guides ===
National Library of New Zealand
State Library of New South Wales
US Library of Congress
Indiana University Bloomington
New York University
University of Alberta
California State Library, California History Room.
Collection: California.
State Council of Defense.
California War History Committee.
Records of Californians who served in World War I, 1918–1922.
Military technology is the application of technology for use in warfare.
It comprises the kinds of technology that are distinctly military in nature and not civilian in application, usually because they lack useful or legal civilian applications, or are dangerous to use without appropriate military training.

The line is porous; military inventions have been brought into civilian use throughout history, with sometimes minor modification if any, and civilian innovations have similarly been put to military use.

Military technology is often researched and developed by scientists and engineers specifically for use in battle by the armed forces.
Many new technologies came as a result of the military funding of science.

Armament engineering is the design, development, testing and lifecycle management of military weapons and systems.
It draws on the knowledge of several traditional engineering disciplines, including mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, mechatronics, electro-optics, aerospace engineering, materials engineering, and chemical engineering.

==
History ==
This section is divided into the broad cultural developments that affected military technology.

===
Ancient technology ===
The first use of stone tools may have begun during the Paleolithic Period.
The earliest stone tools are from the site of Lomekwi, Turkana, dating from 3.3 million years ago.
Stone tools diversified through the Pleistocene Period, which ended ~12,000 years ago.

The earliest evidence of warfare between two groups is recorded at the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, where human skeletons with major traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including an embedded obsidian bladelet on a skull, are evidence of inter-group conflict between groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers 10,000 years ago.
Humans entered the Bronze Age as they learned to smelt copper into an alloy with tin to make weapons.
In Asia where copper-tin ores are rare, this development was delayed until trading in bronze began in the third millennium BCE.
In the Middle East and Southern European regions, the Bronze Age follows the Neolithic period, but in other parts of the world, the Copper Age is a transition from Neolithic to the Bronze Age.
Although the Iron Age generally follows the Bronze Age, in some areas the Iron Age intrudes directly on the Neolithic from outside the region, with the exception of Sub-Saharan Africa where it was developed independently.
The first large-scale use of iron weapons began in Asia Minor around the 14th century BCE and in Central Europe around the 11th century BCE followed by the Middle East (about 1000 BCE) and India and China.
The Assyrians are credited with the introduction of horse cavalry in warfare and the extensive use of iron weapons by 1100 BCE.
Assyrians were also the first to use iron-tipped arrows.

=== Post-classical technology ===
The Wujing Zongyao (Essentials of the Military Arts), written by Zeng Gongliang, Ding Du, and others at the order of Emperor Renzong around 1043 during the Song dynasty illustrate the eras focus on advancing intellectual issues and military technology due to the significance of warfare between the Song and the Liao, Jin, and Yuan to their north.

The book covers topics of military strategy, training, and the production and employment of advanced weaponry.

Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbors to the north.
The flamethrower found its origins in Byzantine-era Greece, employing Greek fire (a chemically complex, highly flammable petrol fluid) in a device with a siphon hose by the 7th century.

The earliest reference to Greek Fire in China was made in 917, written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms.

In 919, the siphon projector-pump was used to spread the 'fierce fire oil' that could not be doused with water, as recorded by Lin Yu in his Wuyue Beishi, hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire
(see also Pen Huo Qi).
Lin Yu mentioned also that the 'fierce fire oil' derived ultimately from one of China's maritime contacts in the 'southern seas', Arabia Dashiguo.
In the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919, the naval fleet of the Wenmu King from Wuyue defeated a Huainan army from the Wu state; Wenmu's success was facilitated by the use of 'fire oil' ('huoyou') to burn their fleet, signifying the first Chinese use of gunpowder in a battle.
The Chinese applied the use of double-piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder (with an upstroke and downstroke), lit at the end by a slow-burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame.
This device was featured in description and illustration of  the Wujing Zongyao military manuscript of 1044.
In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976, early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975.
Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy, but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction.

Although the destructive effects of gunpowder were described in the earlier Tang dynasty by a Daoist alchemist, the earliest developments of the gun barrel and the projectile-fire cannon were found in late Song China.
The first art depiction of the Chinese 'fire lance' (a combination of a temporary-fire flamethrower and gun) was from a Buddhist mural painting of Dunhuang, dated circa 950.
These 'fire-lances' were widespread in use by the early 12th century, featuring hollowed bamboo poles as tubes to fire sand particles (to blind and choke), lead pellets, bits of sharp metal and pottery shards, and finally large gunpowder-propelled arrows and rocket weaponry.

Eventually, perishable bamboo was replaced with hollow tubes of cast iron, and so too did the terminology of this new weapon change, from 'fire-spear' huo qiang to 'fire-tube' huo tong.

This ancestor to the gun was complemented by the ancestor to the cannon, what the Chinese referred to since the 13th century as the 'multiple bullets magazine erupter' bai zu lian zhu pao, a tube of bronze or cast iron that was filled with about 100 lead balls.
The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, dating to 1128,
that portrays a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, firing flames and a cannonball.
However, the oldest existent archaeological discovery of a metal barrel handgun is from the Chinese Heilongjiang excavation, dated to 1288.
The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
Written later by Jiao Yu in his Huolongjing (mid-14th century), this manuscript recorded an earlier Song-era cast-iron cannon known as the 'flying-cloud thunderclap eruptor' (fei yun pi-li pao).
The manuscript stated that:
As noted before, the change in terminology for these new weapons during the Song period were gradual.
The early Song cannons were at first termed the same way as the Chinese trebuchet catapult.
A later Ming dynasty scholar known as Mao Yuanyi would explain this use of terminology and true origins of the cannon in his text of the Wubei Zhi, written in 1628:
The 14th-century Huolongjing was also one of the first Chinese texts to carefully describe to the use of explosive land mines, which had been used by the late Song Chinese against the Mongols in 1277, and employed by the Yuan dynasty afterwards.
The innovation of the detonated land mine was accredited to one Luo Qianxia in the campaign of defense against the Mongol invasion by Kublai Khan, Later Chinese texts revealed that the Chinese land mine employed either a rip cord or a motion booby trap of a pin releasing falling weights that rotated a steel flint wheel, which in turn created sparks that ignited the train of fuses for the land mines.

Furthermore, the Song employed the earliest known gunpowder-propelled rockets in warfare during the late 13th century, its earliest form being the archaic Fire Arrow.
When the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng fell to the Jurchens in 1126, it was written by Xia Shaozeng that 20,000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchens in their conquest.

An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ("Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques"), written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng Kongliang and Yang Weide, described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder packets near the head of the arrow.
Going back yet even farther, the Wu Li Xiao Shi (1630, second edition 1664) of Fang Yizhi stated that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song (r. 960–976) in 960.

===
Modern technology ===


====
Armies ====
The Islamic gunpowder empires introduced numerous developed firearms, cannon and small arms.
During the period of Proto-industrialization, newly invented weapons were seen to be used in Mughal India.

Rapid development in military technology had a dramatic impact on armies and navies in the industrialized world in 1740-1914.
For land warfare, cavalry faded in importance, while infantry became transformed by the use of highly accurate more rapidly loading rifles, and the use of smokeless powder.
Machine guns were developed in the 1860s in Europe.
Rocket artillery and the Mysorean rockets, both pioneered by Indian Muslim Tipu Sultan, became more powerful as new high explosives (based on nitroglycerin) arrived during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, and the French introduced much more accurate rapid-fire field artillery.
Logistics and communications support for land warfare dramatically improved with use of railways and telegraphs.
Industrialization provided a base of factories that could be converted to  produce munitions, as well as uniforms, tents, wagons and essential supplies.
Medical facilities were enlarged and reorganized based on improved hospitals and the creation of modern nursing,  typified by Florence Nightingale in Britain during the Crimean War of 1854-56.
====
Naval ====
Naval warfare was transformed by many innovations, most notably the coal-based steam engine, highly accurate long-range naval guns, heavy steel armour for battleships, mines, and the introduction of the torpedo, followed by the torpedo boat and the destroyer.
Coal after 1900 was eventually displaced by more efficient oil, but meanwhile navies with an international scope had to depend on a network of coaling stations to refuel.
The British Empire provided them in abundance, as did the French Empire to a lesser extent.

War colleges developed, as military theory became a specialty; cadets and senior commanders were taught the theories of Jomini, Clausewitz and Mahan, And engaged in tabletop war games.
Around 1900, entirely new innovations such as submarines and airplanes appeared, and were quickly adapted to warfare by 1914.
The British HMS Dreadnought (1906) incorporated so much of the latest technology in weapons, propulsion and armour that it at a stroke made all other battleships obsolescent.

====
Organization and finance ====
New financial tools were developed to fund the rapidly increasing costs of warfare, such as popular bond sales and income taxes, and the funding of permanent research centers.

Many 19th century innovations were largely invented and promoted by lone individuals with small teams of assistants, such as David Bushnell and the submarine, John Ericsson and the battleship, Hiram Maxim and the machine gun, and Alfred Nobel and high explosives.
By 1900 the military began to realize that they needed to rely much more heavily on large-scale research centers, which needed government funding.

They brought in leaders of organized innovation such as Thomas Edison in the U.S. and chemist Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Germany.

==
Postmodern technology ==
The postmodern stage of military technology emerged in the 1940s, and one with recognition thanks to the high priority given during the war to scientific and engineering research and development regarding nuclear weapons, radar, jet engines, proximity fuses, advanced submarines, aircraft carriers, and other weapons.
The high-priority continues into the 21st century.
It involves the military application of advanced scientific research regarding nuclear weapons, jet engines, ballistic and guided missiles, radar, biological warfare, and the use of electronics, computers and software.

===
Space ===
During the Cold War, the world's two great superpowers — the Soviet Union and the United States of America — spent large proportions of their GDP on developing military technologies.

The drive to place objects in orbit stimulated space research and started the Space Race.

In 1957, the USSR launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1.

By the end of the 1960s, both countries regularly deployed satellites.
Spy satellites were used by militaries to take accurate pictures of their rivals' military installations.

As time passed the resolution and accuracy of orbital reconnaissance alarmed both sides of the iron curtain.

Both the United States and the Soviet Union began to develop anti-satellite weapons to blind or destroy each other's satellites.

Laser weapons, kamikaze style satellites, as well as orbital nuclear explosion were researched with varying levels of success.

Spy satellites were, and continue to be, used to monitor the dismantling of military assets in accordance with arms control treaties signed between the two superpowers.
To use spy satellites in such a manner is often referred to in treaties as "national technical means of verification".

The superpowers developed ballistic missiles to enable them to use nuclear weaponry across great distances.
As rocket science developed, the range of missiles increased and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) were created, which could strike virtually any target on Earth in a timeframe measured in minutes rather than hours or days.

In order to cover large distances ballistic missiles are usually launched into sub-orbital spaceflight.

As soon as intercontinental missiles were developed, military planners began programmes and strategies to counter their effectiveness.

===
Mobilization ===
A significant portion of military technology is about transportation, allowing troops and weaponry to be moved from their origins to the front.
Land transport has historically been mainly by foot, land vehicles have usually been used as well, from chariots to tanks.

When conducting a battle over a body of water, ships are used.
There are historically two main categories of ships: those for transporting troops, and those for attacking other ships.

Soon after the invention of aeroplanes, military aviation became a significant component of warfare, though usually as a supplementary role.
The two main types of military aircraft are bombers, which attack land- or sea-based targets, and fighters, which attack other aircraft.

Military vehicles are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces.

List of military vehicles
List of armoured fighting vehicles
List of tanksMilitary aircraft includes any use of aircraft by a country's military, including such areas as transport, training, disaster relief, border patrol, search and rescue, surveillance, surveying, peacekeeping, and (very rarely) aerial warfare.

List of aircraft
List of aircraft weaponsWarships are watercraft for combat and transportation in and on seas and oceans.

Submarines
Complex masting and sail systems found on warships during the Age of Sail
List of historical ship and boat types
List of aircraft carriers
List of submarine classes


===
Defence ===
Fortifications are military constructions and buildings designed for defence in warfare.
They range in size and age from the Great Wall of China to a Sangar.

List of fortifications
List of forts


===
Sensors and communication ===
Sensors and communication systems are used to detect enemies, coordinate movements of armed forces and guide weaponry.
Early systems included flag signaling, telegraph and heliographs.

Laser guidance
Missile guidance
Norden Bombsight
Proximity fuse
Radar
Satellite guidance in guidance weapons


==
Future technology ==
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is an agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of new technologies for use by the military.

DARPA leads the development of military technology in the United States and today, has dozens of ongoing projects; everything from humanoid robots, to bullets that are able to change path before reaching their target.
China has a similar agency.

===
Emerging territory ===
Current militaries continue to invest in new technologies for the future.
Such technologies include cognitive radar , 5g cellular networks, microchips, semiconductors, and large scale analytic engines.
Additionally, many militaries seek to improve current laser technology.
For example, Israeli Defense Forces utilize laser technology to disable small enemy machinery, but seek to move to more large scale capabilities in the coming years.
Militaries across the world continue to perform research on autonomous technologies which allow for increased troop mobility or replacement of live soldiers.
Autonomous vehicles and robots are expected to play a role in future conflicts; this has the potential to decrease loss of life in future warfare.
Observers of transhumanism note high rates of technological terms in military literature, but low rates for explicitly transhuman-related terms.
Today's hybrid style of warfare also calls for investments in information technologies.
Increased reliance on computer systems has incentivized nations to push for increased efforts at managing large scale networks and having access to large scale data.
New strategies of cyber and hybrid warfare includes, network attacks, media analysis, and media/ grass-roots campaigns on medias such as blog posts


====
Cyberspace ====
In 2011, the US Defense Department declared cyberspace a new domain of warfare; since then DARPA has begun a research project known as "Project X" with the goal of creating new technologies that will enable the government to better understand and map the cyber territory.

Ultimately giving the Department of Defense the ability to plan and manage large-scale cyber missions across dynamic network environments.

== See also ==
List of military inventions
List of emerging military technologies
Bellifortis, late medieval treatise on military technology.

Materiel


== References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andrade, Tonio.
The Gunpowder Age: China, military innovation, and the rise of the West in world history (Princeton UP, 2016).

Black, Jeremy.
Tools of War  (2007) covers 50 major inventions.
excerpt
Boot, Max.
War made new: technology, warfare, and the course of history, 1500 to today (Penguin, 2006).

Dupuy, Trevor N.
The evolution of weapons and warfare (1984), 350pp, cover 2000 BC to late 20th century.

Ellis, John.
The Social History of the Machine Gun (1986).

Gabriel, Richard A., and Karen S. Metz.
From Sumer to Rome: The Military capabilities of ancient armies (ABC-CLIO, 1991).

Hacker, Barton (2005).
"
The Machines of War: Western Military Technology 1850–2000".
History & Technology.
21 (3)
: 255–300.
doi:10.1080/07341510500198669.
S2CID 144113139.

Levy, Jack S (1984).
"
The offensive/defensive balance of military technology: A theoretical and historical analysis".
International Studies Quarterly.
28 (2)
: 219–238.
doi:10.2307/2600696.
JSTOR 2600696.

McNeill, William H.
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 (1984).

Parker, Geoffrey.
The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West (1988).

Steele, Brett D. and Tamara Dorland.
Heirs of Archimedes: Science & the Art of War through the Age of Enlightenment (2005)
397 pp.
A military, also known collectively as armed forces, is a heavily armed, highly organized force primarily intended for warfare.
It is typically officially authorized and maintained by a sovereign state, with its members identifiable by their distinct military uniform.
It may consist of one or more military branches such as an army, navy, air force, space force, marines, or coast guard.
The main task of the military is usually defined as defence of the state and its interests against external armed threats.

In broad usage, the terms armed forces and military are often treated as synonymous, although in technical usage a distinction is sometimes made in which a country's armed forces may include both its military and other paramilitary forces.
There are various forms of irregular military forces, not belonging to a recognized state; though they share many attributes with regular military forces, they are less often referred to as simply military.

A nation's military may function as a discrete social subculture, with dedicated infrastructure such as military housing, schools, utilities, logistics, hospitals, legal services, food production, finance, and banking services.
Beyond warfare, the military may be employed in additional sanctioned and non-sanctioned functions within the state, including internal security threats, population control, the promotion of a political agenda, emergency services and reconstruction, protecting corporate economic interests, social ceremonies and national honour guards.
The profession of soldiering as part of a military is older than recorded history itself.
Some of the most enduring images of  classical antiquity portray the power and feats of its military leaders.
The Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC was one of the defining points of Pharaoh Ramses II's reign, and his monuments commemorate it in bas-relief.
A thousand years later, the first emperor of unified China, Qin Shi Huang, was so determined to impress the gods with his military might that he had himself buried with an army of  terracotta soldiers.

The  Romans paid considerable attention to military matters, leaving to posterity many treatises and writings on the subject, as well as many lavishly carved triumphal arches and victory columns.

==
Etymology and definitions ==
The first recorded use of the word military in English, spelled militarie, was in 1582.
It comes from the Latin militaris (from Latin miles, meaning "soldier") through French, but is of uncertain etymology, one suggestion being derived from *mil-it- – going in a body or mass.
As a noun, the military usually refers generally to a country's armed forces, or sometimes, more specifically, to the senior officers who command them.
In general, it refers to the physicality of armed forces, their personnel, equipment, and the physical area which they occupy.

As an adjective, military originally referred only to soldiers and soldiering, but it soon broadened to apply to land forces in general, and anything to do with their profession.
The names of both the Royal Military Academy (1741) and United States Military Academy (1802) reflect this.
However, at about the time of the Napoleonic Wars, 'military' began to be used in reference to armed forces as a whole, such as 'military service', 'military intelligence', and 'military history'.
As such, it now connotes any activity performed by armed force personnel.

==
History ==
Military history is often considered to be the history of all conflicts, not just the history of the state militaries.
It differs somewhat from the history of war, with military history focusing on the people and institutions of war-making, while the history of war focuses on the evolution of war itself in the face of changing technology, governments, and geography.

Military history has a number of facets.
One main facet is to learn from past accomplishments and mistakes, so as to more effectively wage war in the future.
Another is to create a sense of military tradition, which is used to create cohesive military forces.
Still, another may be to learn to prevent wars more effectively.
Human knowledge about the military is largely based on both recorded and oral history of military conflicts (war), their participating armies and navies and, more recently, air forces.

== Organization ==


===
Personnel and units ===
Despite the growing importance of military technology, military activity depends above all on people.
For example, in 2000 the British Army declared: "Man is still the first weapon of war."
====
Rank and role ====
The military organization is characterized by a strict command hierarchy divided by military rank, with ranks normally grouped (in descending order of authority) as officers (e.g. Colonel), non-commissioned officers (e.g. Sergeant), and personnel at the lowest rank (e.g. Private Soldier).
While senior officers make strategic decisions, subordinated military personnel (soldiers, sailors, marines, or airmen) fulfil them.
Although rank titles vary by military branch and country, the rank hierarchy is common to all state armed forces worldwide.

In addition to their rank, personnel occupy one of many trade roles, which are often grouped according to the nature of the role's military tasks on combat operations:
combat roles (e.g. infantry), combat support roles (e.g. combat engineers), and combat service support roles (e.g. logistical support).
====
Recruitment ====
Personnel may be recruited or conscripted, depending on the system chosen by the state.
Most military personnel are males; the minority proportion of female personnel varies internationally
(approximately 3% in India, 10% in the UK, 13% in Sweden, 16% in the US, and 27% in South Africa).
While two-thirds of states now recruit or conscript only adults, as of 2017 50 states still relied partly on children under the age of 18 (usually aged 16 or 17) to staff their armed forces.
Whereas recruits who join as officers tend to be upwardly-mobile, most enlisted personnel have a childhood background of relative socio-economic deprivation.
For example, after the US suspended conscription in 1973, "the military disproportionately attracted African American men, men from lower-status socioeconomic backgrounds, men who had been in nonacademic high school programs, and men whose high school grades tended to be low".
However, a study released in 2020 on the socio-economic backgrounds of U.S. Armed Forces personnel suggests that they are at parity or slightly higher than the civilian population with respect to socio-economic indicators such as parental income, parental wealth and cognitive abilities.
The study found that technological, tactical, operational and doctrinal changes have led to a change in the demand for personnel.
Furthermore, the study suggests that the most disadvantaged socio-economic groups are less likely to meet the requirements of the modern U.S. military.

====
Obligations ====
The obligations of military employment are many.
Full-time military employment normally requires a minimum period of service of several years; between two and six years is typical of armed forces in Australia, the UK and the US, for example, depending on role, branch, and rank.
Some armed forces allow a short discharge window, normally during training, when recruits may leave the armed force as of right.
Alternatively, part-time military employment, known as reserve service, allows a recruit to maintain a civilian job while training under military discipline at weekends; he or she may be called out to deploy on operations to supplement the full-time personnel complement.
After leaving the armed forces, recruits may remain liable for compulsory return to full-time military employment in order to train or deploy on operations.
Military law introduces offences not recognised by civilian courts, such as absence without leave (AWOL), desertion, political acts, malingering, behaving disrespectfully, and disobedience (see, for example, offences against military law in the United Kingdom).
Penalties range from a summary reprimand to imprisonment for several years following a court martial.
Certain fundamental rights are also restricted or suspended, including the freedom of association (e.g. union organizing) and freedom of speech (speaking to the media).
Military personnel in some countries have a right of conscientious objection if they believe an order is immoral or unlawful, or cannot in good conscience carry it out.

Personnel may be posted to bases in their home country or overseas, according to operational need, and may be deployed from those bases on exercises or operations anywhere in the world.
During peacetime, when military personnel are generally stationed in garrisons or other permanent military facilities, they mostly conduct administrative tasks, training and education activities, technology maintenance, and recruitment.

====
Training ====
Initial training conditions recruits for the demands of military life, including preparedness to injure and kill other people, and to face mortal danger without fleeing.
It is a physically and psychologically intensive process which resocializes recruits for the unique nature of military demands.
For example:

Individuality is suppressed (e.g. by shaving the head of new recruits, issuing uniforms, denying privacy, and prohibiting the use of first names);
Daily routine is tightly controlled (e.g. recruits must make their beds, polish boots, and stack their clothes in a certain way, and mistakes are punished);
Continuous stressors deplete psychological resistance to the demands of their instructors (e.g. depriving recruits of sleep, food, or shelter, shouting insults and giving orders intended to humiliate)
Frequent punishments serve to condition group conformity and discourage poor performance;
The disciplined drill instructor is presented as a role model of the ideal soldier.

===
Intelligence ===
The next requirement comes as a fairly basic need for the military to identify possible threats it may be called upon to face.
For this purpose, some of the commanding forces and other military, as well as often civilian personnel participate in identification of these threats.
This is at once an organization, a system and a process collectively called military intelligence (MI).

The difficulty in using military intelligence concepts and military intelligence methods is in the nature of the secrecy of the information they seek, and the clandestine nature that intelligence operatives work in obtaining what may be plans for a conflict escalation, initiation of combat, or an invasion.

An important part of the military intelligence role is the military analysis performed to assess military capability of potential future aggressors, and provide combat modelling that helps to understand factors on which comparison of forces can be made.
This helps to quantify and qualify such statements as: "China and India maintain the largest armed forces in the World" or that "the U.S. Military is considered to be the world's strongest".

Although some groups engaged in combat, such as militants or resistance movements, refer to themselves using military terminology, notably 'Army' or 'Front', none have had the structure of a national military to justify the reference, and usually have had to rely on support of outside national militaries.
They also use these terms to conceal from the MI their true capabilities, and to impress potential ideological recruits.

Having military intelligence representatives participate in the execution of the national defence policy is important, because it becomes the first respondent and commentator on the policy expected strategic goal, compared to the realities of identified threats.
When the intelligence reporting is compared to the policy, it becomes possible for the national leadership to consider allocating resources over and above the officers and their subordinates military pay, and the expense of maintaining military facilities and military support services for them.

===
Economics ===
Defense economics is the financial and monetary efforts made to resource and sustain militaries, and to finance military operations, including war.

The process of allocating resources is conducted by determining a military budget, which is administered by a military finance organization within the military.
Military procurement is then authorized to purchase or contract provision of goods and services to the military, whether in peacetime at a permanent base, or in a combat zone from local population.

===
Capability development ===
Capability development, which is often referred to as the military 'strength', is arguably one of the most complex activities known to humanity; because it requires determining: strategic, operational, and tactical capability requirements to counter the identified threats; strategic, operational, and tactical doctrines by which the acquired capabilities will be used; identifying concepts, methods, and systems involved in executing the doctrines; creating design specifications for the manufacturers who would produce these in adequate quantity and quality for their use in combat; purchase the concepts, methods, and systems; create a forces structure that would use the concepts, methods, and systems most effectively and efficiently; integrate these concepts, methods, and systems into the force structure by providing military education, training, and practice that preferably resembles combat environment of intended use; create military logistics systems to allow continued and uninterrupted performance of military organizations under combat conditions, including provision of health services to the personnel, and maintenance for the equipment; the services to assist recovery of wounded personnel, and repair of damaged equipment; and finally, post-conflict demobilization, and disposal of war stocks surplus to peacetime requirements.

Development of military doctrine is perhaps the more important of all capability development activities, because it determines how military forces were, and are used in conflicts, the concepts and methods used by the command to employ appropriately military skilled, armed and equipped personnel in achievement of the tangible goals and objectives of the war, campaign, battle, engagement, action or a duel.
The line between strategy and tactics is not easily blurred, although deciding which is being discussed had sometimes been a matter of personal judgement by some commentators, and military historians.
The use of forces at the level of organization between strategic and tactical is called operational mobility.

There have been attempts to produce a military strength index
: this is an example taken from a Credit Suisse report in September 2015.
The factors under consideration for that military strength indicator and their total weights were: number of active personnel in the armed forces (5%), tanks (10%), attack helicopters (15%), aircraft (20%), aircraft carriers (25%), and submarines (25%).
It was practically impossible to make an estimation of the actual training of the armed forces.

These were the results:


===
Science ===
Because most of the concepts and methods used by the military, and many of its systems are not found in commercial branches, much of the material is researched, designed, developed, and offered for inclusion in arsenals by military science organizations within the overall structure of the military.
Military scientists are therefore found to interact with all Arms and Services of the armed forces, and at all levels of the military hierarchy of command.

Although concerned with research into military psychology, particularly combat stress and
how it affect troop morale, often the bulk of military science activities is directed at military intelligence technology, military communications, and improving military capability through research.
The design, development, and prototyping of weapons, military support equipment, and military technology in general, is also an area in which much effort is invested – it includes everything from global communication networks and aircraft carriers to paint and food.

===
Logistics ===
Possessing military capability is not sufficient if this capability cannot be deployed for, and employed in combat operations.
To achieve this, military logistics are used for the logistics management and logistics planning of the forces military supply chain management, the consumables, and capital equipment of the troops.

Although mostly concerned with the military transport, as a means of delivery using different modes of transport; from military trucks, to container ships operating from permanent military base, it also involves creating field supply dumps at the rear of the combat zone, and even forward supply points in specific unit's Tactical Area of Responsibility.

These supply points are also used to provide military engineering services, such as the recovery of defective and derelict vehicles and weapons, maintenance of weapons in the field, the repair and field modification of weapons and equipment; and in peacetime, the life-extension programmes undertaken to allow continued use of equipment.
One of the most important role of logistics is the supply of munitions as a primary type of consumable, their storage, and disposal.

==
In combat ==
The primary reason for the existence of the military is to engage in combat, should it be required to do so by the national defence policy, and to win.
This represents an organisational goal of any military, and the primary focus for military thought through military history.
How victory is achieved, and what shape it assumes, is studied by most, if not all, military groups on three levels.

===
Strategic victory ===
Military strategy is the management of forces in wars and military campaigns by a commander-in-chief, employing large military forces, either national and allied as a whole, or the component elements of armies, navies and air forces; such as army groups, naval fleets, and large numbers of aircraft.
Military strategy is a long-term projection of belligerents' policy, with a broad view of outcome implications, including outside the concerns of military command.
Military strategy is more concerned with the supply of war and planning, than management of field forces and combat between them.
The scope of strategic military planning can span weeks, but is more often months or even years.
===
Operational victory ===
Operational mobility is, within warfare and military doctrine, the level of command which coordinates the minute details of tactics with the overarching goals of strategy.
A common synonym is operational art.

The operational level is at a scale bigger than one where line of sight and the time of day are important, and smaller than the strategic level, where production and politics are considerations.
Formations are of the operational level if they are able to conduct operations on their own, and are of sufficient size to be directly handled or have a significant impact at the strategic level.
This concept was pioneered by the German army prior to and during the Second World War.
At this level, planning and duration of activities takes from one week to a month, and are executed by Field Armies and Army Corps and their naval and air equivalents.

===
Tactical victory ===
Military tactics concerns itself with the methods for engaging and defeating the enemy in direct combat.
Military tactics are usually used by units over hours or days, and are focused on the specific, close proximity tasks and objectives of squadrons, companies, battalions, regiments, brigades, and divisions, and their naval and air force equivalents.
One of the oldest military publications is The Art of War, by the Chinese philosopher Sun Tzu.
Written in the 6th century BCE, the 13-chapter book is intended as military instruction, and not as military theory, but has had a huge influence on Asian military doctrine, and from the late 19th century, on European and United States military planning.
It has even been used to formulate business tactics, and can even be applied in social and political areas.

The Classical Greeks and the Romans wrote prolifically on military campaigning.
Among the best-known Roman works are Julius Caesar's commentaries on the Gallic Wars, and the Roman Civil war – written about 50 BC.

Two major works on tactics come from the late Roman period:
Taktike Theoria by Aelianus Tacticus, and De Re Militari ('On military matters') by Vegetius.
Taktike Theoria examined Greek military tactics, and was most influential in the Byzantine world and during the Golden Age of Islam.

De Re Militari formed the basis of European military tactics until the late 17th century.
Perhaps its most enduring maxim is Igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum (let he who desires peace prepare for war).

Due to the changing nature of combat with the introduction of artillery in the European Middle Ages, and infantry firearms in the Renaissance, attempts were made to define and identify those strategies, grand tactics, and tactics that would produce a victory more often than that achieved by the Romans in praying to the gods before the battle.

Later this became known as military science, and later still, would adopt the scientific method approach to the conduct of military operations under the influence of the Industrial Revolution thinking.
In his seminal book On War, the Prussian Major-General and leading expert on modern military strategy, Carl von Clausewitz defined military strategy as 'the employment of battles to gain the end of war'.
According to Clausewitz: 
strategy forms the plan of the War, and to this end it links together the series of acts which are to lead to the final decision, that is to say, it makes the plans for the separate campaigns and regulates the combats to be fought in each.

Hence, Clausewitz placed political aims above military goals, ensuring civilian control of the military.
Military strategy was one of a triumvirate of 'arts' or 'sciences' that governed the conduct of warfare, the others being: military tactics, the execution of plans and manoeuvring of forces in battle, and maintenance of an army.

The meaning of military tactics has changed over time; from the deployment and manoeuvring of entire land armies on the fields of ancient battles, and galley fleets; to modern use of small unit ambushes, encirclements, bombardment attacks, frontal assaults, air assaults, hit-and-run tactics used mainly by guerrilla forces, and, in some cases, suicide attacks on land and at sea.
Evolution of aerial warfare introduced its own air combat tactics.
Often, military deception, in the form of military camouflage or misdirection using decoys, is used to confuse the enemy as a tactic.

A major development in infantry tactics came with the increased use of trench warfare in the 19th and 20th centuries.
This was mainly employed in World War I in the Gallipoli campaign, and the Western Front.
Trench warfare often turned to a stalemate, only broken by a large loss of life, because, in order to attack an enemy entrenchment, soldiers had to run through an exposed 'no man's land' under heavy fire from their opposing entrenched enemy.

==
Technology ==
As with any occupation, since the ancient times, the military has been distinguished from other members of the society by their tools, the military weapons, and military equipment used in combat.
When Stone Age humans first took a sliver of flint to tip the spear, it was the first example of applying technology to improve the weapon.

Since then, the advances made by human societies, and that of weapons, has been irretrievably linked.
Stone weapons gave way to Bronze Age weapons, and later, the Iron Age weapons.
With each technological change, was realized some tangible increase in military capability, such as through greater effectiveness of a sharper edge in defeating leather armour, or improved density of materials used in manufacture of weapons.

On land, the first really significant technological advance in warfare was the development of the ranged weapons, and notably, the sling.
The next significant advance came with the domestication of the horses and mastering of equestrianism.

Arguably, the greatest invention that affected not just the military, but all society, after adoption of fire, was the wheel, and its use in the construction of the chariot.
There were no advances in military technology, until, from the mechanical arm action of a slinger, the Greeks, Egyptians, Romans, Persians, Chinese, etc.,
developed the siege engines.
The bow was manufactured in increasingly larger and more powerful versions, to increase both the weapon range, and armour penetration performance.
These developed into the powerful composite and recurve bows, and crossbows of Ancient China.
These proved particularly useful during the rise of cavalry, as horsemen encased in ever-more sophisticated armour came to dominate the battlefield.

Somewhat earlier, in medieval China, gunpowder had been invented, and was increasingly used by the military in combat.
The use of gunpowder in the early vase-like mortars in Europe, and advanced versions of the long bow and cross bow, which all had armour-piercing arrowheads, that put an end to the dominance of the armoured knight.
After the long bow, which required great skill and strength to use, the next most significant technological advance was the musket, which could be used effectively, with little training.
In time, the successors to muskets and cannon, in the form of rifles and artillery, would become core battlefield technology.

As the speed of technological advances accelerated in civilian applications, so too warfare became more industrialized.
The newly invented machine gun and repeating rifle redefined firepower on the battlefield, and, in part, explains the high casualty rates of the American Civil War.
The next breakthrough was the conversion of artillery parks from the muzzle loading guns, to the quicker loading breech loading guns with recoiling barrel that allowed quicker aimed fire and use of a shield.
The widespread introduction of low smoke (smokeless) propellant powders since the 1880s also allowed for a great improvement of artillery ranges.

The development of breech loading had the greatest effect on naval warfare, for the first time since the Middle Ages, altering the way weapons are mounted on warships, and therefore naval tactics, now divorced from the reliance on sails with the invention of the internal combustion.
A further advance in military naval technology was the design of the submarine, and its weapon, the torpedo.

Main battle tanks, and other heavy equipment such as armoured fighting vehicles, military aircraft, and ships, are characteristic to organized military forces.

During World War I, the need to break the deadlock of trench warfare saw the rapid development of many new technologies, particularly tanks.
Military aviation was extensively used, and bombers became decisive in many battles of World War II, which marked the most frantic period of weapons development in history.
Many new designs, and concepts were used in combat, and all existing technologies of warfare were improved between 1939 and 1945.

During the war, significant advances were made in military communications through increased use of radio, military intelligence through use of the radar, and in military medicine through use of penicillin, while in the air, the guided missile, jet aircraft, and helicopters were seen for the first time.
Perhaps the most infamous of all military technologies was the creation of the atomic bomb, although the exact effects of its radiation were unknown until the early 1950s.
Far greater use of military vehicles had finally eliminated the cavalry from the military force structure.

After World War II, with the onset of the Cold War, the constant technological development of new weapons was institutionalized, as participants engaged in a constant 'arms race' in capability development.
This constant state of weapons development continues into the present, and remains a constant drain on national resources, which some blame on the military-industrial complex.

The most significant technological developments that influenced combat have been the guided missiles, which can be used by all branches of the armed services.
More recently, information technology, and its use in surveillance, including space-based reconnaissance systems, have played an increasing role in military operations.

The impact of information warfare that focuses on attacking command communication systems, and military databases, has been coupled with the new development in military technology, has been the use of robotic systems in intelligence combat, both in hardware and software applications.

Recently, there has also been a particular focus towards the use of renewable fuels for running military vehicles on.
Unlike fossil fuels, renewable fuels can be produced in any country, creating a strategic advantage.
The US military has committed itself to have 50% of its energy consumption come from alternative sources.

==
As part of society ==
For much of military history, the armed forces were considered to be for use by the heads of their societies, until recently, the crowned heads of states.
In a democracy or other political system run in the public interest, it is a public force.

The relationship between the military and the society it serves is a complicated and ever-evolving one.
Much depends on the nature of the society itself, and whether it sees the military as important, as for example in time of threat or war, or a burdensome expense typified by defence cuts in time of peace.

One difficult matter in the relation between military and society is control and transparency.
In some countries, limited information on military operations and budgeting is accessible for the public.
However transparency in the military sector is crucial to fight corruption.
This showed the Government Defence Anti-corruption Index Transparency International UK published in 2013.Militaries often function as societies within societies, by having their own military communities, economies, education, medicine, and other aspects of a functioning civilian society.
Although a 'military' is not limited to nations in of itself as many private military companies (or PMC's) can be used or 'hired' by organizations and figures as security, escort, or other means of protection; where police, agencies, or militaries are absent or not trusted.

===
Ideology and ethics ===
Militarist ideology is the society's social attitude of being best served, or being a beneficiary of a government, or guided by concepts embodied in the military culture, doctrine, system, or leaders.

Either because of the cultural memory, national history, or the potentiality of a military threat, the militarist argument asserts that a civilian population is dependent upon, and thereby subservient to the needs and goals of its military for continued independence.
Militarism is sometimes contrasted with the concepts of comprehensive national power, soft power and hard power.

Most nations have separate military laws which regulate conduct in war and during peacetime.
An early exponent was
Hugo Grotius, whose On the Law of War and Peace (1625) had a major impact of the humanitarian approach to warfare development.
His theme was echoed by Gustavus Adolphus.

Ethics of warfare have developed since 1945, to create constraints on the military treatment of prisoners and civilians, primarily by the Geneva Conventions; but rarely apply to use of the military forces as internal security troops during times of political conflict that results in popular protests and incitement to popular uprising.

International protocols restrict the use, or have even created international bans on some types of weapons, notably weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
International conventions define what constitutes a war crime, and provides for war crimes prosecution.
Individual countries also have elaborate codes of military justice, an example being the United States' Uniform Code of Military Justice that can lead to court martial for military personnel found guilty of war crimes.

Military actions are sometimes argued to be justified by furthering a humanitarian cause, such as disaster relief operations, or in defence of refugees.
The term military humanism is used to refer to such actions.

==
See also ==
Armed forces of the worldList of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel
List of countries by Military Strength Index
List of countries by level of military equipment
List of countries by Global Militarization Index
List of countries without armed forces
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by past military expenditure
List of countries by military expenditure per capita
List of air forces
List of armies
List of navies


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Military Expenditure % of GDP hosted by Lebanese economy forum, extracted from the World Bank public data.

Military at Curlie
The Korean War (South Korean
: Korean: 6.25 전쟁, 한국전쟁; Hanja: 韓國戰爭; RR:
Yugio Jeonjaeng, Hanguk Jeonjaeng; North Korean:
Korean: 조국해방전쟁; Hanja: 祖國解放戰爭; MR: Choguk haebang chŏnjaeng, "Fatherland Liberation War";
25 June 1950 – 27 July 1953) was a war between North Korea (with the support of China and the Soviet Union) and South Korea (with the support of the United Nations, principally from the United States).
The war began on 25 June 1950 when North Korea invaded South Korea following clashes along the border and insurrections in the south.
The war ended unofficially on 27 July 1953 in an armistice.

After the surrender of Japan, at the end of World War II, on 15 August 1945, Korea was divided at the 38th parallel into two zones of occupation.
The Soviets administered the northern-half and the Americans administered the southern-half.
In 1948, as a result of Cold War tensions, the occupation zones became two sovereign states.
A socialist state was established in the north under the totalitarian leadership of Kim Il-sung and a capitalist state in the south under the authoritarian leadership of Syngman Rhee.
Both governments of the two new Korean states claimed to be the sole legitimate government of all of Korea, and neither accepted the border as permanent.

North Korean Korean People's Army (KPA) forces crossed the border and advanced into South Korea on 25 June 1950.
The United Nations Security Council denounced the North Korean move as an invasion, and authorized the formation of the United Nations Command and the dispatch of forces to Korea to repel it.
These UN decisions were taken without participation of the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China, both of which supported North Korea.
Twenty-one countries of the United Nations eventually contributed to the UN force, with the United States providing around 90% of the military personnel.
After the first two months of war, South Korean Army (ROKA) and the US forces rapidly dispatched to Korea were on the point of defeat.
As a result, the ROKA and US troops retreated to a small area behind a defensive line known as the Pusan Perimeter.
In September 1950, an amphibious UN counter-offensive was launched at Incheon, and cut off many KPA troops in South Korea.
Those who escaped envelopment and capture were forced back north.
UN forces invaded North Korea in October 1950 and moved rapidly towards the Yalu River—the border with China—but on 19 October 1950, Chinese forces of the People's Volunteer Army (PVA) crossed the Yalu and entered the war.
The surprise Chinese intervention triggered a retreat of UN forces and Chinese forces were in South Korea by late December.

In these and subsequent battles, Seoul was captured four times, and communist forces were pushed back to positions around the 38th parallel, close to where the war started.
After this the front stabilized and the last two years of fighting became a war of attrition.
The war in the air, however, was never a stalemate.
North Korea was subject to a massive US bombing campaign.
Jet fighters confronted each other in air-to-air combat for the first time in history, and Soviet pilots covertly flew in defense of their communist allies.

The fighting ended on 27 July 1953 when the Korean Armistice Agreement was signed.
The agreement created the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) to separate North and South Korea, and allowed the return of prisoners.
However, no peace treaty was ever signed, and the two Koreas are technically still at war, engaged in a frozen conflict.
In April 2018, the leaders of North and South Korea met at the DMZ and agreed to work toward a treaty to formally end the Korean War.
The Korean War was among the most destructive conflicts of the modern era, with approximately 3 million war fatalities and a larger proportional civilian death toll than World War II or the Vietnam War.
It incurred the destruction of virtually all of Korea's major cities, thousands of massacres by both sides, including the mass killing of tens of thousands of suspected communists by the South Korean government, and the torture and starvation of prisoners of war by the North Korean command.
North Korea became among the most heavily bombed countries in history.

==
Names ==
In South Korea, the war is usually referred to as "625" or the "6–2–5 Upheaval" (6.25 동란 (動亂), yook-i-o dongnan), reflecting the date of its commencement on 25 June.
In North Korea, the war is officially referred to as the "Fatherland Liberation War" (Choguk haebang chǒnjaeng) or alternatively the "Chosǒn [Korean] War" (조선전쟁, Chosǒn chǒnjaeng).In China, the war is officially called the "War to Resist America and Aid Korea" (simplified
Chinese: 抗美援朝战争; traditional Chinese: 抗美援朝戰爭
; pinyin: Kàngměi Yuáncháo Zhànzhēng), although the term "Chaoxian (Korean) War" (simplified Chinese: 朝鲜战争; traditional Chinese: 朝鮮戰爭; pinyin: Cháoxiǎn Zhànzhēng) is also used in unofficial contexts, along with the term "Hán (Korean) War" (simplified Chinese:
韩战;
traditional Chinese:
韓戰; pinyin: Hán Zhàn) more commonly used in regions such as Hong Kong and Macau.

In the US, the war was initially described by President Harry S. Truman as a "police action" as the United States never formally declared war on its opponents and the operation was conducted under the auspices of the United Nations.
It has been sometimes referred to in the English-speaking world as "The Forgotten War" or "The Unknown War" because of the lack of public attention it received both during and after the war, relative to the global scale of World War II, which preceded it, and the subsequent angst of the Vietnam War, which succeeded it.

==
Background ==


===
Imperial Japanese rule (1910–1945) ===
Imperial Japan destroyed the influence of China over Korea in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–95), ushering in the short-lived Korean Empire.
A decade later, after defeating Imperial Russia in the Russo-Japanese War (1904–05), Japan made Korea its protectorate with the Eulsa Treaty in 1905, then annexed it with the Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty in 1910.Many
Korean nationalists fled the country.
The Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea was founded in 1919 in Nationalist China.
It failed to achieve international recognition, failed to unite nationalist groups, and had a fractious relationship with its US-based founding president, Syngman Rhee.
From 1919 to 1925 and beyond, Korean communists led internal and external warfare against the Japanese.
In China, the Nationalist National Revolutionary Army and the communist People's Liberation Army (PLA) helped organize Korean refugees against the Japanese military, which had also occupied parts of China.
The Nationalist-backed Koreans, led by Yi Pom-Sok, fought in the Burma Campaign (December 1941 – August 1945).
The communists, led by Kim Il-sung among others, fought the Japanese in Korea and Manchuria.
At the Cairo Conference in November 1943, China, the United Kingdom and the United States all decided that "in due course Korea shall become free and independent".
===
Korea divided (1945–1949) ===
At the Tehran Conference in November 1943 and the Yalta Conference in February 1945, the Soviet Union promised to join its allies in the Pacific War within three months of the victory in Europe.
Germany officially surrendered on 8 May 1945, and the USSR declared war on Japan and invaded Manchuria on 8 August 1945, three months later.

This was three days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.
By 10 August, the Red Army had begun to occupy the north of Korea.
On the night of 10 August in Washington, US Colonels Dean Rusk and Charles H. Bonesteel III were assigned to divide Korea into Soviet and US occupation zones and proposed the 38th Parallel as the dividing line.
This was incorporated into the US General Order No.
1 which responded to the Japanese surrender on 15 August.
Explaining the choice of the 38th Parallel, Rusk observed, "even though it was further north than could be realistically reached by US forces, in the event of Soviet disagreement ...
we felt it important to include the capital of Korea in the area of responsibility of American troops".
He noted that he was "faced with the scarcity of US forces immediately available, and time and space factors, which would make it difficult to reach very far north, before Soviet troops could enter the area".
As Rusk's comments indicate, the US doubted whether the Soviet government would agree to this.
Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, however, maintained his wartime policy of co-operation, and on 16 August the Red Army halted at the 38th Parallel for three weeks to await the arrival of US forces in the south.
On 8 September 1945, US Lieutenant General John R. Hodge arrived in Incheon to accept the Japanese surrender south of the 38th Parallel.
Appointed as military governor, Hodge directly controlled South Korea as head of the United States Army Military Government in Korea (USAMGIK 1945–48).
He attempted to establish control by restoring Japanese colonial administrators to power, but in the face of Korean protests quickly reversed this decision.
Hodge did keep in governmental positions a large number of Koreans who had directly served and collaborated with the Japanese colonial government.
This presence was particularly pronounced in the Korean National Police Force, who would later suppress widespread rebellions to the ROK.
The USAMGIK refused to recognize the provisional government of the short-lived People's Republic of Korea (PRK) due to its suspected Communist sympathies.

In December 1945, Korea was administered by a US-Soviet Union Joint Commission, as agreed at the Moscow Conference, with the aim of granting independence after a five-year trusteeship.
The idea was not popular among Koreans and riots broke out.
To contain them, the USAMGIK banned strikes on 8 December 1945 and outlawed the PRK Revolutionary Government and the PRK People's Committees on 12 December 1945.
Following further large-scale civilian unrest, the USAMGIK declared martial law.

Citing the inability of the Joint Commission to make progress, the US government decided to hold an election under United Nations auspices with the aim of creating an independent Korea.
The Soviet authorities and the Korean Communists refused to co-operate on the grounds it would not be fair, and many South Korean politicians boycotted it.
A general election was held in the South on 10 May 1948.
North Korea held parliamentary elections three months later on 25 August.
The resultant South Korean government promulgated a national political constitution on 17 July 1948, and elected Syngman Rhee as President on 20 July 1948.
This election is generally considered to have been manipulated by the Rhee regime.
The Republic of Korea (South Korea) was established on 15 August 1948.
In the Soviet Korean Zone of Occupation, the Soviet Union agreed to the establishment a communist government led by Kim Il-sung.
The Soviet Union withdrew its forces from Korea in 1948, and US troops withdrew in 1949.
===
Chinese Civil War (1945–1949) ===
With the end of the war with Japan, the Chinese Civil War resumed in earnest between the Communists and Nationalists.
While the Communists were struggling for supremacy in Manchuria, they were supported by the North Korean government with matériel and manpower.
According to Chinese sources, the North Koreans donated 2,000 railway cars worth of supplies while thousands of Koreans served in the Chinese PLA during the war.
North Korea also provided the Chinese Communists in Manchuria with a safe refuge for non-combatants and communications with the rest of China.
The North Korean contributions to the Chinese Communist victory were not forgotten after the creation of the People's Republic of China (PRC) in 1949.
As a token of gratitude, between 50,000 and 70,000 Korean veterans that served in the PLA were sent back along with their weapons, and they later played a significant role in the initial invasion of South Korea.
China promised to support the North Koreans in the event of a war against South Korea.
After the formation of the PRC, the PRC government named the Western nations, led by the US, as the biggest threat to its national security.
Basing this judgment on China's century of humiliation beginning in the mid-19th century, US support for the Nationalists during the Chinese Civil War, and the ideological struggles between revolutionaries and reactionaries, the PRC Chinese leadership believed that China would become a critical battleground in the US' crusade against Communism.
As a countermeasure and to elevate China's standing among the worldwide Communist movements, the PRC leadership adopted a foreign policy that actively promoted Communist revolutions throughout territories on China's periphery.

===
Communist insurgency in South Korea (1948–1950) ===
By 1948, a large-scale North Korea-backed insurgency had broken out in the southern half of the peninsula.
This was exacerbated by the ongoing undeclared border war between the Koreas, which saw division level engagements and thousands of deaths on both sides.
The ROK in this time was almost entirely trained and focused in counterinsurgency, rather than conventional warfare.
They were equipped and advised by a force of a few hundred American officers, who were largely successful in helping the ROKA to subdue guerrillas and hold its own against North Korean military (Korean People's Army, KPA) forces along the 38th parallel.
Approximately 8,000 South Korean soldiers and police died in the insurgent war and border clashes.
The first socialist uprising occurred without direct North Korean participation, though the guerrillas still professed support for the northern government.
Beginning in April 1948 on the isolated island of Jeju, the campaign saw mass arrests and repression by the South Korean government in the fight against the South Korean Labor Party, resulting in a total of 30,000 violent deaths, among them 14,373 civilians (of whom ~2,000 were killed by rebels and
~12,000 by ROK security forces).
The Yeosu–Suncheon rebellion overlapped with it, as several thousand army defectors waving red flags massacred right-leaning families.
This resulted in another brutal suppression by the government and between 2,976 and 3,392 deaths.
By May 1949, both uprisings had been crushed.

Insurgency reignited in the spring of 1949, when attacks by guerrillas in the mountainous regions (buttressed by army defectors and North Korean agents) increased.
Insurgent activity peaked in late 1949 as the ROKA engaged so-called People's Guerrilla Units.
Organized and armed by the North Korean government, and backed up by 2,400 KPA commandos who had infiltrated through the border, these guerrillas launched a large offensive in September aimed at undermining the South Korean government and preparing the country for the KPA's arrival in force.
This offensive failed.
However, by this point the guerrillas were firmly entrenched in the Taebaek-san region of the North Gyeongsang Province (around Taegu), as well as in the border areas of the Gangwon Province.
While the insurgency was ongoing, the ROKA and KPA engaged in multiple battalion-sized battles along the border, starting in May 1949.
Serious border clashes between South and North continued on 4 August 1949, when thousands of North Korean troops attacked South Korean troops occupying territory north of the 38th Parallel.
The 2nd and 18th ROK Infantry Regiments repulsed initial attacks in Kuksa-bong (above the 38th Parallel) and Ch'ungmu, and at the end of the clashes ROK troops were "completely routed".
Border incidents decreased significantly by the start of 1950.Meanwhile, counterinsurgency efforts in the South Korean interior intensified; persistent operations, paired with worsening weather conditions, eventually denied the guerrillas sanctuary and wore away their fighting strength.
North Korea responded by sending more troops to link up with existing insurgents and build more partisan cadres; the number of North Korean infiltrators had reached 3,000 men in 12 units by the start of 1950, but all of these units were destroyed or scattered by the ROKA.
On 1 October 1949, the ROKA launched a three-pronged assault on the insurgents in South Cholla and Taegu.
By March 1950, the ROKA claimed 5,621 guerrillas killed or captured and 1,066 small arms seized.
This operation crippled the insurgency.
Soon after, the North Koreans made two final attempts to keep the uprising active, sending two battalion-sized units of infiltrators under the commands of Kim Sang-ho and Kim Moo-hyon.
The first battalion was annihilated to a man over the course of several engagements by the ROKA 8th Division.
The second battalion was annihilated by a two-battalion hammer-and-anvil maneuver by units of the ROKA 6th Division, resulting in a loss toll of 584 KPA guerrillas (480 killed, 104 captured) and 69 ROKA troops killed, plus 184 wounded.
By spring of 1950, guerrilla activity had mostly subsided; the border, too, was calm.

===
Prelude to war (1950) ===
By 1949, South Korean and US military actions had reduced the active number of indigenous communist guerrillas in the South from 5,000 to 1,000.
However, Kim Il-sung believed that widespread uprisings had weakened the South Korean military and that a North Korean invasion would be welcomed by much of the South Korean population.
Kim began seeking Stalin's support for an invasion in March 1949, traveling to Moscow to attempt to persuade him.
Stalin initially did not think the time was right for a war in Korea.
PLA forces were still embroiled in the Chinese Civil War, while US forces remained stationed in South Korea.
By spring 1950, he believed that the strategic situation had changed: PLA forces under Mao Zedong had secured final victory in China, US forces had withdrawn from Korea, and the Soviets had detonated their first nuclear bomb, breaking the US atomic monopoly.
As the US had not directly intervened to stop the communist victory in China, Stalin calculated that they would be even less willing to fight in Korea, which had much less strategic significance.
The Soviets had also cracked the codes used by the US to communicate with their embassy in Moscow, and reading these dispatches convinced Stalin that Korea did not have the importance to the US that would warrant a nuclear confrontation.
Stalin began a more aggressive strategy in Asia based on these developments, including promising economic and military aid to China through the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance, and Mutual Assistance.
In April 1950, Stalin gave Kim permission to attack the government in the South under the condition that Mao would agree to send reinforcements if needed.
For Kim, this was the fulfillment of his goal to unite Korea after its division by foreign powers.
Stalin made it clear that Soviet forces would not openly engage in combat, to avoid a direct war with the US.
Kim met with Mao in May 1950.
Mao was concerned the US would intervene but agreed to support the North Korean invasion.
China desperately needed the economic and military aid promised by the Soviets.
However, Mao sent more ethnic Korean PLA veterans to Korea and promised to move an army closer to the Korean border.
Once Mao's commitment was secured, preparations for war accelerated.
Soviet generals with extensive combat experience from the Second World War were sent to North Korea as the Soviet Advisory Group.
These generals completed the plans for the attack by May.
The original plans called for a skirmish to be initiated in the Ongjin Peninsula on the west coast of Korea.
The North Koreans would then launch a counterattack that would capture Seoul and encircle and destroy the ROK.
The final stage would involve destroying South Korean government remnants and capturing the rest of South Korea, including the ports.
On 7 June 1950, Kim Il-sung called for a Korea-wide election on 5–8 August 1950 and a consultative conference in Haeju on 15–17 June 1950.
On 11 June, the North sent three diplomats to the South as a peace overture that Rhee rejected outright.
On 21 June, Kim Il-Sung revised his war plan to involve a general attack across the 38th Parallel, rather than a limited operation in the Ongjin Peninsula.
Kim was concerned that South Korean agents had learned about the plans and that South Korean forces were strengthening their defenses.
Stalin agreed to this change of plan.
While these preparations were underway in the North, there were frequent clashes along the 38th Parallel, especially at Kaesong and Ongjin, many initiated by the South.
The ROK was being trained by the US Korean Military Advisory Group (KMAG).
On the eve of war, KMAG commander General William Lynn Roberts voiced utmost confidence in the ROK and boasted that any North Korean invasion would merely provide "target practice".
For his part, Syngman Rhee repeatedly expressed his desire to conquer the North, including when US diplomat John Foster Dulles visited Korea on 18 June.
Although some South Korean and US intelligence officers predicted an attack from the North, similar predictions had been made before and nothing had happened.
The Central Intelligence Agency noted the southward movement by the KPA, but assessed this as a "defensive measure" and concluded an invasion was "unlikely".
On 23 June, UN observers inspected the border and did not detect that war was imminent.

===
Comparison of forces ===
Throughout 1949 and 1950, the Soviets continued arming North Korea.
After the Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War, ethnic Korean units in the PLA were sent to North Korea.
Chinese involvement was extensive from the beginning, building on previous collaboration between the Chinese and Korean communists during the Chinese Civil War.
In the fall of 1949, two PLA divisions composed mainly of Korean-Chinese troops (the 164th and 166th) entered North Korea, followed by smaller units throughout the rest of 1949; these troops brought with them not only their experience and training, but their weapons and other equipment, changing little but their uniforms.
The reinforcement of the KPA with PLA veterans continued into 1950, with the 156th division and several other units of the former Fourth Field Army arriving (also with their equipment) in February; the PLA 156th Division was reorganized as the KPA 7th Division.
By mid-1950, between 50,000 and 70,000 former PLA troops had entered North Korea, forming a significant part of the KPA's strength on the eve of the war's beginning.
Several generals, such as Lee Kwon-mu, were PLA veterans born to ethnic Koreans in China.
The combat veterans and equipment from China, the tanks, artillery and aircraft supplied by the Soviets, and rigorous training increased North Korea's military superiority over the South, armed by the US military with mostly small arms, but no heavy weaponry such as tanks.
While older histories of the conflict often referred to these ethnic Korean PLA veterans as being sent from northern Korea to fight in the Chinese Civil War before being sent back, recent Chinese archival sources studied by Kim Donggill indicate that this was not the case.
Rather, the soldiers were indigenous to China (part of China's longstanding ethnic Korean community) and were recruited to the PLA in the same way as any other Chinese citizen.
According to the first official census in 1949 the population of North Korea numbered 9,620,000, and by mid-1950 North Korean forces numbered between 150,000 and 200,000 troops, organized into 10 infantry divisions, one tank division, and one air force division, with 210 fighter planes and 280 tanks, who captured scheduled objectives and territory, among them
Kaesong, Chuncheon, Uijeongbu and Ongjin.
Their forces included 274 T-34-85 tanks, 200 artillery pieces, 110 attack bombers, and some 150 Yak fighter planes, and 35 reconnaissance aircraft.
In addition to the invasion force, the North had 114 fighters, 78 bombers, 105 T-34-85 tanks, and some 30,000 soldiers stationed in reserve in North Korea.
Although each navy consisted of only several small warships, the North and South Korean navies fought in the war as sea-borne artillery for their armies.

In contrast, the South Korean population was estimated at 20 million and its army was unprepared and ill-equipped.

As of 25 June 1950 the ROK had 98,000 soldiers (65,000 combat, 33,000 support), no tanks (they had been requested from the US military, but requests were denied), and a 22-plane air force comprising 12 liaison-type and 10 AT-6 advanced-trainer airplanes.
Large US garrisons and air forces were in Japan, but only 200–300 US troops were in Korea.

==
Course of the war ==
At dawn on Sunday, 25 June 1950, the KPA crossed the 38th Parallel behind artillery fire.
The KPA justified its assault with the claim that ROK troops attacked first and that the KPA were aiming to arrest and execute the "bandit traitor Syngman Rhee".
Fighting began on the strategic Ongjin Peninsula in the west.
There were initial South Korean claims that the 17th Regiment captured the city of Haeju, and this sequence of events has led some scholars to argue that the South Koreans fired first.
Whoever fired the first shots in Ongjin, within an hour, KPA forces attacked all along the 38th Parallel.
The KPA had a combined arms force including tanks supported by heavy artillery.
The ROK had no tanks, anti-tank weapons or heavy artillery to stop such an attack.
In addition, the South Koreans committed their forces in a piecemeal fashion and these were routed in a few days.
On 27 June, Rhee evacuated from Seoul with some of the government.
On 28 June, at 2 am, the ROK blew up the Hangang Bridge across the Han River in an attempt to stop the KPA.
The bridge was detonated while 4,000 refugees were crossing it and hundreds were killed.
Destroying the bridge also trapped many ROK units north of the Han River.
In spite of such desperate measures, Seoul fell that same day.
A number of South Korean National Assemblymen remained in Seoul when it fell, and forty-eight subsequently pledged allegiance to the North.
On 28 June, Rhee ordered the massacre of suspected political opponents in his own country.
In five days, the ROK, which had 95,000 men on 25 June, was down to less than 22,000 men.
In early July, when US forces arrived, what was left of the ROK were placed under US operational command of the United Nations Command.

===
Factors in US intervention ===
The Truman administration was unprepared for the invasion.
Korea was not included in the strategic Asian Defense Perimeter outlined by United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson.
Truman himself was at his home in Independence, Missouri.
Military strategists were more concerned with the security of Europe against the Soviet Union than East Asia.
At the same time, the administration was worried that a war in Korea could quickly widen into another world war should the Chinese or Soviets decide to get involved.

While there was initial hesitance by some in the US government to get involved in the war, considerations about Japan played a part in the ultimate decision to engage on behalf of South Korea.
Especially after the fall of China to the Communists, US experts on East Asia saw Japan as the critical counterweight to the Soviet Union and China in the region.
While there was no US policy dealing with South Korea directly as a national interest, its proximity to Japan increased the importance of South Korea.
Said Kim: "
The recognition that the security of Japan required a non-hostile Korea led directly to President Truman's decision to intervene ...
The essential point ... is that the American response to the North Korean attack stemmed from considerations of U.S. policy toward Japan.
"Another
major consideration was the possible Soviet reaction in the event that the US intervened.
The Truman administration was fearful that a war in Korea was a diversionary assault that would escalate to a general war in Europe once the United States committed in Korea.
At the same time, "[t]here was no suggestion from anyone that the United Nations or the United States could back away from [the conflict]".
Yugoslavia—a possible Soviet target because of the Tito-Stalin Split—was vital to the defense of Italy and Greece, and the country was first on the list of the National Security Council's post-North Korea invasion list of "chief danger spots".
Truman believed if aggression went unchecked, a chain reaction would be initiated that would marginalize the UN and encourage Communist aggression elsewhere.
The UN Security Council approved the use of force to help the South Koreans, and the US immediately began using what air and naval forces that were in the area to that end.
The Truman administration still refrained from committing on the ground because some advisers believed the North Koreans could be stopped by air and naval power alone.
The Truman administration was still uncertain if the attack was a ploy by the Soviet Union or just a test of US resolve.
The decision to commit ground troops became viable when a communiqué was received on 27 June indicating the Soviet Union would not move against US forces in Korea.
The Truman administration now believed it could intervene in Korea without undermining its commitments elsewhere.

===
United Nations Security Council Resolutions ===
On 25 June 1950, the United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned the North Korean invasion of South Korea, with UN Security Council Resolution 82.
The Soviet Union, a veto-wielding power, had boycotted the Council meetings since January 1950, protesting that the Taiwanese Republic of China and not the mainland People's Republic of China held a permanent seat in the UN Security Council.
After debating the matter, the Security Council, on 27 June 1950, published Resolution 83 recommending member states provide military assistance to the Republic of Korea.
On 27 June President Truman ordered US air and sea forces to help South Korea.
On 4 July the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister accused the US of starting armed intervention on behalf of South Korea.
The Soviet Union challenged the legitimacy of the war for several reasons.
The ROK intelligence upon which Resolution 83 was based came from US Intelligence; North Korea was not invited as a sitting temporary member of the UN, which violated UN Charter Article 32; and the fighting was beyond the UN Charter's scope, because the initial north–south border fighting was classed as a civil war.
Because the Soviet Union was boycotting the Security Council at the time, legal scholars posited that deciding upon an action of this type required the unanimous vote of all the five permanent members including the Soviet Union.
Within days of the invasion, masses of ROK soldiers—of dubious loyalty to the Syngman Rhee regime—were retreating southwards or defecting en masse to the northern side, the KPA.

===
United States' response (July–August 1950) ===
As soon as word of the attack was received, Acheson informed President Truman that the North Koreans had invaded South Korea.
Truman and Acheson discussed a US invasion response and agreed that the US was obligated to act, paralleling the North Korean invasion with Adolf Hitler's aggressions in the 1930s, with the conclusion being that the mistake of appeasement must not be repeated.
Several US industries were mobilized to supply materials, labor, capital, production facilities, and other services necessary to support the military objectives of the Korean War.
President Truman later explained that he believed fighting the invasion was essential to the US goal of the global containment of communism as outlined in the National Security Council Report 68 (NSC 68) (declassified in 1975):
Communism was acting in Korea, just as Hitler, Mussolini and the Japanese had ten, fifteen, and twenty years earlier.
I felt certain that if South Korea was allowed to fall, Communist leaders would be emboldened to override nations closer to our own shores.
If the Communists were permitted to force their way into the Republic of Korea without opposition from the free world, no small nation would have the courage to resist threat and aggression by stronger Communist neighbors.

In August 1950, the President and the Secretary of State obtained the consent of Congress to appropriate $12 billion for military action in Korea.
Because of the extensive defense cuts and the emphasis placed on building a nuclear bomber force, none of the services were in a position to make a robust response with conventional military strength.
General Omar Bradley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was faced with re-organizing and deploying a US military force that was a shadow of its World War II counterpart.
Acting on Secretary of State Acheson's recommendation, President Truman ordered Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers in Japan General Douglas MacArthur to transfer matériel to the South Korean military while giving air cover to the evacuation of US nationals.
The President disagreed with advisers who recommended unilateral US bombing of the North Korean forces, and ordered the US Seventh Fleet to protect the Republic of China (Taiwan), whose government asked to fight in Korea.
The United States denied Taiwan's request for combat, lest it provoke a PRC retaliation.
Because the United States had sent the Seventh Fleet to "neutralize" the Taiwan Strait, Chinese premier Zhou Enlai criticized both the UN and US initiatives as "armed aggression on Chinese territory".
===
The drive south and Pusan (July–September 1950) ===
The Battle of Osan, the first significant US engagement of the Korean War, involved the 540-soldier Task Force Smith, which was a small forward element of the 24th Infantry Division which had been flown in from Japan.
On 5 July 1950, Task Force Smith attacked the KPA at Osan but without weapons capable of destroying the KPA tanks.
The KPA defeated the US soldiers; the result was 180 American dead, wounded, or taken prisoner.
The KPA progressed southwards, pushing back US forces at Pyongtaek, Chonan, and Chochiwon, forcing the 24th Division's retreat to Taejeon, which the KPA captured in the Battle of Taejon; the 24th Division suffered 3,602 dead and wounded and 2,962 captured, including its commander, Major General William F. Dean.
By August, the KPA steadily pushed back the ROK and the Eighth United States Army southwards.
The impact of the Truman administration's defense budget cutbacks were now keenly felt, as US troops fought a series of costly rearguard actions.
Facing a veteran and well led KPA force, and lacking sufficient anti-tank weapons, artillery or armor, the Americans retreated and the KPA advanced down the Korean Peninsula.
During their advance, the KPA purged South Korea's intelligentsia by killing civil servants and intellectuals.
On 20 August, General MacArthur warned North Korean leader Kim Il-sung that he would be held responsible for the KPA's atrocities.
By September, UN forces were hemmed into a small corner of southeast Korea, near Pusan.
This 230-kilometre (140-mile) perimeter enclosed about 10% of Korea, in a line partially defined by the Nakdong River.

Although Kim's early successes led him to predict he would end the war by the end of August, Chinese leaders were more pessimistic.
To counter a possible US deployment, Zhou Enlai secured a Soviet commitment to have the Soviet Union support Chinese forces with air cover, and deployed 260,000 soldiers along the Korean border, under the command of Gao Gang.
Zhou commanded Chai Chengwen to conduct a topographical survey of Korea, and directed Lei Yingfu, Zhou's military advisor in Korea, to analyze the military situation in Korea.
Lei concluded that MacArthur would most likely attempt a landing at Incheon.
After conferring with Mao that this would be MacArthur's most likely strategy, Zhou briefed Soviet and North Korean advisers of Lei's findings, and issued orders to PLA commanders deployed on the Korean border to prepare for US naval activity in the Korea Strait.
In the resulting Battle of Pusan Perimeter (August–September 1950), the UN forces withstood KPA attacks meant to capture the city at the Naktong Bulge, P'ohang-dong, and Taegu.
The United States Air Force (USAF) interrupted KPA logistics with 40 daily ground support sorties that destroyed 32 bridges, halting most daytime road and rail traffic.
KPA forces were forced to hide in tunnels by day and move only at night.
To deny matériel to the KPA, the USAF destroyed logistics depots, petroleum refineries, and harbors, while the US Navy air forces attacked transport hubs.
Consequently, the over-extended KPA could not be supplied throughout the south.
On 27 August, 67th Fighter Squadron aircraft mistakenly attacked facilities in Chinese territory and the Soviet Union called the UN Security Council's attention to China's complaint about the incident.
The US proposed that a commission of India and Sweden determine what the US should pay in compensation but the Soviets vetoed the US proposal.
Meanwhile, US garrisons in Japan continually dispatched soldiers and matériel to reinforce defenders in the Pusan Perimeter.
Tank battalions deployed to Korea directly from the US mainland from the port of San Francisco to the port of Pusan, the largest Korean port.
By late August, the Pusan Perimeter had some 500 medium tanks battle-ready.
In early September 1950, UN forces outnumbered the KPA 180,000 to 100,000 soldiers.

===
Battle of Inchon (September 1950) ===
Against the rested and re-armed Pusan Perimeter defenders and their reinforcements, the KPA were undermanned and poorly supplied; unlike the UN forces, they lacked naval and air support.
To relieve the Pusan Perimeter, General MacArthur recommended an amphibious landing at Incheon, near Seoul and well over 160 km (100 mi) behind the KPA lines.
On 6 July, he ordered Major General Hobart R. Gay, commander of the US 1st Cavalry Division, to plan the division's amphibious landing at Incheon; on 12–14 July, the 1st Cavalry Division embarked from Yokohama, Japan, to reinforce the 24th Infantry Division inside the Pusan Perimeter.
Soon after the war began, General MacArthur began planning a landing at Incheon, but the Pentagon opposed him.
When authorized, he activated a combined US Army and Marine Corps, and ROK force.
US X Corps, led by Major General Edward Almond, consisted of 40,000 men of the 1st Marine Division, the 7th Infantry Division and around 8,600 ROK soldiers.
By 15 September, the amphibious assault force faced few KPA defenders at Incheon: military intelligence, psychological warfare, guerrilla reconnaissance, and protracted bombardment facilitated a relatively light battle.
However, the bombardment destroyed most of the city of Incheon.

===
Breakout from the Pusan Perimeter ===
On 16 September Eighth Army began its breakout from the Pusan Perimeter.
Task Force Lynch, 3rd Battalion, 7th Cavalry Regiment, and two 70th Tank Battalion units (Charlie Company and the Intelligence–Reconnaissance Platoon) advanced through 171.2 km (106.4 mi) of KPA territory to join the 7th Infantry Division at Osan on 27 September.
X Corps rapidly defeated the KPA defenders around Seoul, thus threatening to trap the main KPA force in Southern Korea.
On 18 September, Stalin dispatched General H. M. Zakharov to North Korea to advise Kim Il-sung to halt his offensive around the Pusan perimeter and to redeploy his forces to defend Seoul.
Chinese commanders were not briefed on North Korean troop numbers or operational plans.
As the overall commander of Chinese forces, Zhou Enlai suggested that the North Koreans should attempt to eliminate the UN forces at Incheon only if they had reserves of at least 100,000 men; otherwise, he advised the North Koreans to withdraw their forces north.
On 25 September, Seoul was recaptured by UN forces.
US air raids caused heavy damage to the KPA, destroying most of its tanks and much of its artillery.
KPA troops in the south, instead of effectively withdrawing north, rapidly disintegrated, leaving Pyongyang vulnerable.
During the general retreat only 25,000 to 30,000 KPA soldiers managed to reach the KPA lines.
On 27 September, Stalin convened an emergency session of the Politburo, in which he condemned the incompetence of the KPA command and held Soviet military advisers responsible for the defeat.
===
UN forces invade North Korea (September–October 1950) ===
On 27 September, MacArthur received the top secret National Security Council Memorandum 81/1 from Truman reminding him that operations north of the 38th Parallel were authorized only if "at the time of such operation there was no entry into North Korea by major Soviet or Chinese Communist forces, no announcements of intended entry, nor a threat to counter our operations militarily".
On 29 September MacArthur restored the government of the Republic of Korea under Syngman Rhee.

On 30 September, US Defense Secretary George Marshall sent an eyes-only message to MacArthur: "We want you to feel unhampered tactically and strategically to proceed north of the 38th parallel."
During October, the South Korean police executed people who were suspected to be sympathetic to North Korea, and similar massacres were carried out until early 1951.

The Joint
Chiefs of Staff on 27 September sent to General MacArthur a comprehensive directive to govern his future actions: the directive stated that the primary goal was the destruction of the KPA, with unification of the Korean Peninsula under Rhee as a secondary objective "if possible"; the Joint Chiefs added that this objective was dependent on whether or not the Chinese and Soviets would intervene, and was subject to changing conditions.

On 30 September, Zhou Enlai warned the US that China was prepared to intervene in Korea if the US crossed the 38th Parallel.
Zhou attempted to advise KPA commanders on how to conduct a general withdrawal by using the same tactics that allowed Chinese communist forces to successfully escape Chiang Kai-shek's Encirclement Campaigns in the 1930s, but by some accounts KPA commanders did not use these tactics effectively.
Historian Bruce Cumings argues, however, that the KPA's rapid withdrawal was strategic, with troops melting into the mountains from where they could launch guerrilla raids on the UN forces spread out on the coasts.
By 1 October 1950, the UN Command repelled the KPA northwards past the 38th Parallel; the ROK advanced after them, into North Korea.
MacArthur made a statement demanding the KPA's unconditional surrender.
Six days later, on 7 October, with UN authorization, the UN Command forces followed the ROK forces northwards.
The X Corps landed at Wonsan (in southeastern North Korea) and Riwon (in northeastern North Korea) on 26 October, but these cities had already been captured by ROK forces.

The Eighth US Army drove up western Korea and captured Pyongyang on 19 October 1950.

The 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team made their first of two combat jumps during the Korean War on 20 October 1950 at Sunchon and Sukchon.

The mission was to cut the road north going to China, preventing North Korean leaders from escaping from Pyongyang; and to rescue US prisoners of war.

At month's end, UN forces held 135,000 KPA prisoners of war.

As they neared the Sino-Korean border, the UN forces in the west were divided from those in the east by 80–161 km (50–100 mi) of mountainous terrain.

In addition to the 135,000 captured, the KPA had also suffered some 200,000 men killed or wounded for a total of 335,000 casualties since the end of June 1950, and had lost 313 tanks (mostly T-34/85 models).

A mere 25,000 KPA regulars retreated across the 38th Parallel, as their military had entirely collapsed.

The UN forces on the peninsula numbered 229,722 combat troops (including 125,126 Americans and 82,786 South Koreans), 119,559 rear area troops, and 36,667 US Air Force personnel.
Taking advantage of the UN Command's strategic momentum against the communists, MacArthur believed it necessary to extend the Korean War into China to destroy depots supplying the North Korean war effort.

Truman disagreed, and ordered caution at the Sino-Korean border.
===
China intervenes (October–December 1950) ===
On 30 June 1950, five days after the outbreak of the war, Zhou Enlai, premier of the PRC and vice-chairman of the Central Military Committee of the CCP (CMCC), decided to send a group of Chinese military intelligence personnel to North Korea to establish better communications with Kim II Sung as well as to collect first-hand materials on the fighting.
One week later, on 7 July, Zhou and Mao chaired a conference discussing military preparations for the Korean Conflict.
Another conference took place on 10 July.
Here it was decided that the Thirteenth Army Corps under the Fourth Field Army of the PLA, one of the best trained and equipped units in China, would be immediately transformed into the Northeastern Border Defense Army (NEBDA) to prepare for "an intervention in the Korean War if necessary".
On 13 July the CMCC formally issued the order to establish the NEBDA, appointing Deng Hua, the commander of the Fifteenth Army Corps and one of the most talented commanders of the Chinese Civil War, to coordinate all preparation efforts.
On 20 August 1950, Premier Zhou Enlai informed the UN that "Korea is China's neighbor...
The Chinese people cannot
but be concerned about a solution of the Korean question".
Thus, through neutral-country diplomats, China warned that in safeguarding Chinese national security, they would intervene against the UN Command in Korea.
President Truman interpreted the communication as "a bald attempt to blackmail the UN", and dismissed it.
Mao ordered that his troops should be ready for action by the end of August.
Stalin, by contrast, was reluctant to escalate the war with a Chinese intervention.
On 1 October 1950, the day that UN troops crossed the 38th Parallel, the Soviet ambassador forwarded a telegram from Stalin to Mao and Zhou requesting that China send five to six divisions into Korea, and Kim Il-sung sent frantic appeals to Mao for Chinese military intervention.
At the same time, Stalin made it clear that Soviet forces themselves would not directly intervene.

In a series of emergency meetings that lasted from 2 to 5 October, Chinese leaders debated whether to send Chinese troops into Korea.
There was considerable resistance among many leaders, including senior military leaders, to confronting the US in Korea.
Mao strongly supported intervention, and Zhou was one of the few Chinese leaders who firmly supported him.
After Lin Biao politely refused Mao's offer to command Chinese forces in Korea (citing his upcoming medical treatment), Mao decided that Peng Dehuai would be the commander of the Chinese forces in Korea after Peng agreed to support Mao's position.
Mao then asked Peng to speak in favor of intervention to the rest of the Chinese leaders.
After Peng made the case that if US troops conquered Korea and reached the Yalu they might cross it and invade China, the Politburo agreed to intervene in Korea.
On 4 August 1950, with a planned invasion of Taiwan aborted due to the heavy US naval presence, Mao reported to the Politburo that he would intervene in Korea when the People's Liberation Army's (PLA)
Taiwan invasion force was reorganized into the PLA North East Frontier Force.
On 8 October 1950, Mao redesignated the PLA North East Frontier Force as the People's Volunteer Army (PVA).To enlist Stalin's support, Zhou and a Chinese delegation arrived in Moscow on 10 October, at which point they flew to Stalin's home on the Black Sea.
There they conferred with the top Soviet leadership, which included Joseph Stalin as well as Vyacheslav Molotov, Lavrentiy Beria and Georgy Malenkov.
Stalin initially agreed to send military equipment and ammunition, but warned Zhou that the Soviet Air Force would need two or three months to prepare any operations.
In a subsequent meeting, Stalin told Zhou that he would only provide China with equipment on a credit basis, and that the Soviet Air Force would only operate over Chinese airspace, and only after an undisclosed period of time.
Stalin did not agree to send either military equipment or air support until March 1951.
Mao did not find Soviet air support especially useful, as the fighting was going to take place on the south side of the Yalu.
Soviet shipments of matériel, when they did arrive, were limited to small quantities of trucks, grenades, machine guns, and the like.
Immediately on his return to Beijing on 18 October 1950, Zhou met with Mao Zedong, Peng Dehuai and Gao Gang, and the group ordered two hundred thousand PVA troops to enter North Korea, which they did on 19 October.
UN aerial reconnaissance had difficulty sighting PVA units in daytime, because their march and bivouac discipline minimized aerial detection.
The PVA marched "dark-to-dark" (19:00–03:00), and aerial camouflage (concealing soldiers, pack animals, and equipment) was deployed by 05:30.
Meanwhile, daylight advance parties scouted for the next bivouac site.
During daylight activity or marching, soldiers were to remain motionless if an aircraft appeared, until it flew away; PVA officers were under order to shoot security violators.
Such battlefield discipline allowed a three-division army to march the 460 km (286 mi) from An-tung, Manchuria, to the combat zone in some 19 days.
Another division night-marched a circuitous mountain route, averaging 29 km (18 mi) daily for 18 days.
Meanwhile, on 15 October 1950, President Truman and General MacArthur met at Wake Island.
This meeting was much publicized because of the General's discourteous refusal to meet the President on the continental United States.
To President Truman, MacArthur speculated there was little risk of Chinese intervention in Korea, and that the PRC's opportunity for aiding the KPA had lapsed.
He believed the PRC had some 300,000 soldiers in Manchuria, and some 100,000–125,000 soldiers at the Yalu River.
He further concluded that, although half of those forces might cross south, "if the Chinese tried to get down to Pyongyang, there would be the greatest slaughter" without air force protection.

After secretly crossing the Yalu River on 19 October, the PVA 13th Army Group launched the First Phase Offensive on 25 October, attacking the advancing UN forces near the Sino-Korean border.
This military decision made solely by China changed the attitude of the Soviet Union.
Twelve days after PVA troops entered the war, Stalin allowed the Soviet Air Force to provide air cover, and supported more aid to China.
After inflicting heavy losses on the ROK II Corps at the Battle of Onjong, the first confrontation between Chinese and US military occurred on 1 November 1950.
Deep in North Korea, thousands of soldiers from the PVA 39th Army encircled and attacked the US 8th Cavalry Regiment with three-prong assaults—from the north, northwest, and west—and overran the defensive position flanks in the Battle of Unsan.
The surprise assault resulted in the UN forces retreating back to the Ch'ongch'on River, while the PVA unexpectedly disappeared into mountain hideouts following victory.
It is unclear why the Chinese did not press the attack and follow up their victory.

The UN Command, however, were unconvinced that the Chinese had openly intervened because of the sudden PVA withdrawal.
On 24 November, the Home-by-Christmas Offensive was launched with the US Eighth Army advancing in northwest Korea, while US X Corps attacked along the Korean east coast.
But the PVA were waiting in ambush with their Second Phase Offensive, which they executed at two sectors: in the East at the Chosin Reservoir and in the Western sector at Ch'ongch'on River.

On 13 November, Mao appointed Zhou Enlai the overall commander and coordinator of the war effort, with Peng as field commander.
On 25 November on the Korean western front, the PVA 13th Army Group attacked and overran the ROK II Corps at the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River, and then inflicted heavy losses on the US 2nd Infantry Division on the UN forces' right flank.
Believing that they could not hold against the PVA the Eighth Army began to retreat from North Korea crossing the 38th Parallel in mid-December.
UN morale hit rock bottom when Lieutenant General Walton Walker, commander of the US Eighth Army, was killed on 23 December 1950 in an automobile accident.

In the east on 27 November the PVA 9th Army Group initiated the Battle of Chosin Reservoir.

Here the UN forces fared comparatively better: like the Eighth Army the surprise attack also forced X Corps to retreat from northeast Korea, but they were in the process able to breakout from the attempted encirclement by the PVA and execute a successful tactical withdrawal.

X Corps managed to establish a defensive perimeter at the port city of Hungnam on 11 December and were able to evacuate by 24 December in order to reinforce the badly depleted US Eighth Army to the south.

During the evacuation, about 193 shiploads of UN forces and matériel (approximately 105,000 soldiers, 98,000 civilians, 17,500 vehicles, and 350,000 tons of supplies) were evacuated to Pusan.

The SS Meredith Victory was noted for evacuating 14,000 refugees, the largest rescue operation by a single ship, even though it was designed to hold 12 passengers.

Before escaping, the UN forces razed most of Hungnam city, with particular attention to the port facilities.

On 16 December 1950, President Truman declared a national state of emergency with Presidential Proclamation
No.
2914
, 3 C.F.R. 99 (1953), which remained in force until 14 September 1978.

The next day, 17 December 1950, Kim Il-sung was deprived of the right of command of KPA by China.
China justified its entry into the war as a response to "American aggression in the guise of the UN".

Later, the Chinese claimed that US bombers had violated PRC national airspace on three separate occasions and attacked Chinese targets before China intervened.

===
Fighting around the 38th Parallel (January–June 1951) ===
A ceasefire presented by the UN to the PRC shortly after the Battle of the Ch'ongch'on River on December 11, 1950 was rejected by the Chinese government which was convinced of the PVA's invincibility after its victory in that battle and the wider Second Phase Offensive, and also wanted demonstrate China's desire for a total victory through the expulsion of the UN forces from Korea.
With Lieutenant General Matthew Ridgway assuming the command of the US Eighth Army on 26 December, the PVA and the KPA launched their Third Phase Offensive (also known as the "Chinese New Year's Offensive") on New Year's Eve of 1950/51.
Utilizing night attacks in which UN fighting positions were encircled and then assaulted by numerically superior troops who had the element of surprise, the attacks were accompanied by loud trumpets and gongs, which fulfilled the double purpose of facilitating tactical communication and mentally disorienting the enemy.
UN forces initially had no familiarity with this tactic, and as a result some soldiers panicked, abandoning their weapons and retreating to the south.
The offensive overwhelmed UN forces, allowing the PVA and KPA to capture Seoul for the second time on 4 January 1951.
Following this, the CPV party committee issued orders regarding tasks during rest and reorganization on 8 January 1951, outlining Chinese war goals.
The orders read: "the central issue is for the whole party and army to overcome difficulties … to improve tactics and skills.
When the next campaign starts … we will annihilate all enemies and liberate all Korea."

In his telegram to Peng on 14 January, Mao stressed the importance of preparing for "the last battle" in the spring in order to "fundamentally resolve the [Korean] issue".

These setbacks prompted General MacArthur to consider using nuclear weapons against the Chinese or North Korean interiors, with the intention that radioactive fallout zones would interrupt the Chinese supply chains.
However, upon the arrival of the charismatic General Ridgway, the esprit de corps of the bloodied Eighth Army immediately began to revive.
UN forces retreated to Suwon in the west, Wonju in the center, and the territory north of Samcheok in the east, where the battlefront stabilized and held.
The PVA had outrun its logistics capability and thus were unable to press on beyond Seoul as food, ammunition, and matériel were carried nightly, on foot and bicycle, from the border at the Yalu River to the three battle lines.
In late January, upon finding that the PVA had abandoned their battle lines, General Ridgway ordered a reconnaissance-in-force, which became Operation Thunderbolt (25 January 1951).
A full-scale advance followed, which fully exploited the UN's air superiority, concluding with the UN forces reaching the Han River and recapturing Wonju.
Following the failure of ceasefire negotiations in January, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution 498 on 1 February, condemning the PRC as an aggressor, and called upon its forces to withdraw from Korea.
In early February, the ROK 11th Division ran the operation to destroy the guerrillas and their sympathizer citizens in Southern Korea.
During the operation, the division and police conducted the Geochang massacre and Sancheong–Hamyang massacre.
In mid-February, the PVA counterattacked with the Fourth Phase Offensive and achieved initial victory at Hoengseong.
But the offensive was soon blunted by US IX Corps at Chipyong-ni in the center.
The US 23rd Regimental Combat Team and the French Battalion fought a short but desperate battle that broke the attack's momentum.
The battle is sometimes known as the "Gettysburg of the Korean War": 5,600 South Korean, US, and French troops were surrounded on all sides by 25,000 PVA.

UN forces had previously retreated in the face of large PVA/KPA forces instead of getting cut off, but this time they stood and fought, and won.

In the last two weeks of February 1951, Operation Thunderbolt was followed by Operation Killer, carried out by the revitalized Eighth Army.
It was a full-scale, battlefront-length attack staged for maximum exploitation of firepower to kill as many KPA and PVA troops as possible.
Operation Killer concluded with US I Corps re-occupying the territory south of the Han River, and IX Corps capturing Hoengseong.
On 7 March 1951, the Eighth Army attacked with Operation Ripper, expelling the PVA and the KPA from Seoul on 14 March 1951.
This was the fourth and final conquest of the city in a year's time, leaving it a ruin; the 1.5 million pre-war population was down to 200,000, and people were suffering from severe food shortages.
On 1 March 1951, Mao sent a cable to Stalin emphasizing the difficulties faced by Chinese forces and the need for air cover, especially over supply lines.
Apparently impressed by the Chinese war effort, Stalin agreed to supply two air force divisions, three anti-aircraft divisions, and six thousand trucks.
PVA troops in Korea continued to suffer severe logistical problems throughout the war.

In late April Peng Dehuai sent his deputy, Hong Xuezhi, to brief Zhou Enlai in Beijing.
What Chinese soldiers feared, Hong said, was not the enemy, but having no food, bullets, or trucks to transport them to the rear when they were wounded.
Zhou attempted to respond to the PVA's logistical concerns by increasing Chinese production and improving supply methods, but these efforts were never sufficient.
At the same time, large-scale air defense training programs were carried out, and the People's Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) began participating in the war from September 1951 onward.
The Fourth Phase Offensive had catastrophically failed, in contrast to the success of the Second Phase Offensive and limited gains of the Third Phase Offensive.
The U.N. forces, after earlier defeats and subsequent retraining, proved much harder to infiltrate by Chinese light infantry than they had been in previous months.
From 31 January to 21 April, the Chinese had suffered 53,000 casualties.
On 11 April 1951, President Truman relieved General MacArthur as Supreme Commander in Korea.

There were several reasons for the dismissal.

MacArthur had crossed the 38th Parallel in the mistaken belief that the Chinese would not enter the war, leading to major allied losses.

He believed that whether to use nuclear weapons should be his decision, not the President's.
MacArthur threatened to destroy China unless it surrendered.
While MacArthur felt total victory was the only honorable outcome, Truman was more pessimistic about his chances once involved in a larger war, and felt a truce and orderly withdrawal from Korea could be a valid solution.
MacArthur was the subject of congressional hearings in May and June 1951, which determined that he had defied the orders of the President and thus had violated the US Constitution.

A popular criticism of MacArthur was that he never spent a night in Korea, and directed the war from the safety of Tokyo.

MacArthur was relieved primarily due to his determination to expand the war into China, which other officials believed would needlessly escalate a limited war and consume too many already overstretched resources.
Despite MacArthur's claims that he was restricted to fighting a limited war when China was fighting all-out, congressional testimony revealed China was using restraint as much as the US was, as they were not using air power against front-line troops, communication lines, ports, naval air forces, or staging bases in Japan, which had been crucial to the survival of UN forces in Korea.
Simply fighting on the peninsula had already tied down significant portions of US airpower; as Air Force chief of staff Hoyt Vandenberg said, 80–85%
the tactical capacity, one-fourth of the strategic portion, and 20% of air defense forces of the USAF were engaged in a single country.
There was also fear that crossing into China would provoke the Soviet Union into entering the war.
General Omar Bradley testified that there were 35 Russian divisions totaling some 500,000 troops in the Far East, and if sent into action with the approximately 85 Russian submarines in the vicinity of Korea, they could overwhelm US forces and cut supply lines, as well as potentially assist China in taking over territory in Southeast Asia.
General Ridgway was appointed Supreme Commander in Korea, and he regrouped the UN forces for successful counterattacks, while General James Van Fleet assumed command of the US Eighth Army.
Further attacks slowly depleted the PVA and KPA forces; Operations Courageous (23–28 March 1951) and Tomahawk (23 March 1951) (a combat jump by the 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team) were a joint ground and airborne infiltration meant to trap PVA forces between Kaesong and Seoul.
UN forces advanced to the Kansas Line, north of the 38th Parallel.
The PVA counterattacked in April 1951, with the Fifth Phase Offensive, with three field armies (approximately 700,000 men).

The first thrust of the offensive fell upon I Corps, which fiercely resisted in the Battle of the Imjin River (22–25 April 1951) and the Battle of Kapyong (22–25 April 1951), blunting the impetus of the offensive, which was halted at the No-name Line north of Seoul.

Casualty ratios were grievously disproportionate; Peng had expected a 1–1 or 2-1 ratio, but instead, Chinese combat casualties from 22 to 29 April totaled between 40,000 and 60,000 compared to only 4,000 for the UN – a casualty ratio between 10–1
and 15–1.

By the time Peng had called off the attack in the western sector on 29 April, the three participating armies had lost a third of their front line combat strength within a week.

Additional casualties were incurred on 30 April.

On 15 May 1951, the PVA commenced the second impulse of the Spring Offensive and attacked the ROK and US X Corps in the east at the Soyang River.

370,000 PVA and 114,000 KPA troops had been mobilized for the second step of the Fifth Phase Offensive, with the bulk attacking in the eastern sector with about a quarter attempting to pin the US I Corps and IX Corps in the western sector.

After initial success, they were halted by 20 May and repulsed over the following days, with western histories generally designating 22 May as the end of the offensive.

At month's end, the Chinese planned the third step of the Fifth Phase Offensive (withdrawal), which they estimated would take 10 to 15 days to complete for their 340,000 remaining men, and set the retreat date for the night of 23 May.
They were caught off guard when the US Eighth Army counterattacked and regained the Kansas Line on the morning of 12 May, 23 hours before the expected withdrawal.

The surprise attack turned the retreat into "the most severe loss since our forces had entered Korea"; from 16 May to 23 May, the PVA had suffered another 45,000 to 60,000 casualties before their remaining men managed to evacuate back north.

Per official Chinese statistics, the Fifth Phase Offensive as a whole had cost the PVA 102,000 men (85,000 killed/wounded, 17,000 captured), with unknown but significant losses for the KPA.The end of the Fifth Phase Offensive preceded the start of the UN May–June 1951 counteroffensive.

During the counteroffensive, the US-led coalition captured land up to about 10 km (6 mi)
north of the 38th Parallel, with most forces stopping at the Kansas Line and a minority going further to the Wyoming Line.

PVA and KPA forces suffered greatly during this offensive, especially in the Chuncheon sector and at Chiam-ni and Hwacheon; in the latter sector alone the PVA/KPA suffered over 73,207 casualties, including 8,749 captured, compared to 2,647 total casualties of the US IX Corps which engaged them.

The UN's Kansas Line halt and subsequent offensive action stand-down began the stalemate that lasted until the armistice of 1953.

The disastrous failure of the Fifth Phase Offensive (which Peng later recalled as one of only four mistakes he made in his military career) "led Chinese leaders to change their goal from driving the UNF out of Korea to merely defending China's security and ending the war through negotiations".
===
Stalemate (July 1951 – July 1953) ===
For the remainder of the war the UN and the PVA/KPA fought but exchanged little territory, as the stalemate held.
Large-scale bombing of North Korea continued, and protracted armistice negotiations began on 10 July 1951 at Kaesong, an ancient capital of North Korea located in PVA/KPA held territory.
On the Chinese side, Zhou Enlai directed peace talks, and Li Kenong and Qiao Guanghua headed the negotiation team.
Combat continued while the belligerents negotiated; the goal of the UN forces was to recapture all of South Korea and to avoid losing territory.
The PVA and the KPA attempted similar operations, and later effected military and psychological operations in order to test the UN Command's resolve to continue the war.
The two sides constantly traded artillery fire along the front, the American-led forces possessing a large firepower advantage over the Chinese-led forces.
For example, in the last three months of 1952 the UN fired 3,553,518 field gun shells and 2,569,941 mortar shells, while the communists fired 377,782 field gun shells and 672,194 mortar shells: an overall 5.83:1 ratio in the UN's favor.
The communist insurgency, reinvigorated by North Korean support and scattered bands of KPA stragglers, also resurged in the south.
In the autumn of 1951 Van Fleet ordered Major General Paik Sun-yup to break the back of guerrilla activity.
From December 1951 to March 1952, ROK security forces claimed to have killed 11,090 partisans and sympathizers and captured 9,916 more.

The principal battles of the stalemate include the Battle of Bloody Ridge (18 August–15 September 1951), the Battle of the Punchbowl (31 August-21 September 1951), the Battle of Heartbreak Ridge (13 September–15 October 1951), the Battle of Old Baldy (26 June–4 August 1952), the Battle of White Horse (6–15 October 1952), the Battle of Triangle Hill (14 October–25 November 1952), the Battle of Hill Eerie (21 March–21 June 1952), the sieges of Outpost Harry (10–18 June 1953), the Battle of the Hook
(28–29 May 1953), the Battle of Pork Chop Hill (23 March–16 July 1953) and the Battle of Kumsong (13–27 July 1953).

PVA troops suffered from deficient military equipment, serious logistical problems, overextended communication and supply lines, and the constant threat of UN bombers.
All of these factors generally led to a rate of Chinese casualties that was far greater than the casualties suffered by UN troops.
The situation became so serious that, in November 1951, Zhou Enlai called a conference in Shenyang to discuss the PVA's logistical problems.
At the meeting it was decided to accelerate the construction of railways and airfields in the area, to increase the number of trucks available to the army, and to improve air defense by any means possible.
These commitments did little to directly address the problems confronting PVA troops.

In the months after the Shenyang conference Peng Dehuai went to Beijing several times to brief Mao and Zhou about the heavy casualties suffered by Chinese troops and the increasing difficulty of keeping the front lines supplied with basic necessities.
Peng was convinced that the war would be protracted, and that neither side would be able to achieve victory in the near future.
On 24 February 1952, the Military Commission, presided over by Zhou, discussed the PVA's logistical problems with members of various government agencies involved in the war effort.
After the government representatives emphasized their inability to meet the demands of the war, Peng, in an angry outburst, shouted: "You have this and that problem...
You should go to the front and see with your own eyes what food and clothing the soldiers have!
Not to speak of the casualties!
For what are they giving their lives?
We have no aircraft.
We have only a few guns.
Transports are not protected.
More and more soldiers are dying of starvation.
Can't you overcome some of your difficulties?
"
The atmosphere became so tense that Zhou was forced to adjourn the conference.
Zhou subsequently called a series of meetings, where it was agreed that the PVA would be divided into three groups, to be dispatched to Korea in shifts; to accelerate the training of Chinese pilots; to provide more anti-aircraft guns to the front lines; to purchase more military equipment and ammunition from the Soviet Union; to provide the army with more food and clothing; and, to transfer the responsibility of logistics to the central government.
With peace negotiations ongoing, the Chinese attempted one final offensive in the final weeks of the year to capture territory:
on 10 June, 30,000 Chinese troops struck two South Korean and one US divisions on a 13 km (8 mi) front, and on 13 July, 80,000 Chinese soldiers struck the east-central Kumsong sector, with the brunt of their attack falling on four South Korean divisions.
In both cases, the Chinese had some success in penetrating South Korean lines, but failed to capitalize, particularly when the US forces present responded with overwhelming firepower.
Chinese casualties in their final major offensive of the war (above normal wastage for the front) were about 72,000, including 25,000 killed in action compared to 14,000 for the UN (the vast majority of these deaths were South Koreans, though 1,611 were Americans).
The communists fired 704,695 field gun shells in June–July compared to 4,711,230 fired by the UN, a ratio of 6.69:1.
June 1953 saw the highest monthly artillery expenditure of the war by both sides.

===
Armistice (July 1953 – November 1954) ===
The on-again, off-again armistice negotiations continued for two years, first at Kaesong, on the border between North and South Korea, and then at the neighboring village of Panmunjom.
A major, problematic negotiation point was prisoner of war (POW) repatriation.
The PVA, KPA and UN Command could not agree on a system of repatriation because many PVA and KPA soldiers refused to be repatriated back to the north, which was unacceptable to the Chinese and North Koreans.
A Neutral Nations Repatriation Commission, under the chairman Indian General K. S. Thimayya, was subsequently set up to handle the matter.
In 1952, the US elected a new president, and on 29 November 1952, the president-elect, Dwight D. Eisenhower, went to Korea to learn what might end the Korean War.
With the United Nations' acceptance of India's proposed Korean War armistice, the KPA, the PVA and the UN Command signed the Korean Armistice Agreement on 27 July 1953.
South Korean president Syngman Rhee refused to sign the agreement.
The war is considered to have ended at this point, even though there was no peace treaty.
North Korea nevertheless claims that it won the Korean War.
Under the Armistice Agreement, the belligerents established the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ), along the frontline which vaguely follows the 38th Parallel.
The DMZ runs northeast of the 38th Parallel; to the south, it travels west.
Kaesong, site of the initial armistice negotiations, originally was in pre-war South Korea, but now is part of North Korea.
The DMZ has since been patrolled by the KPA and the ROK and US still operating as the UN Command.

The Armistice also called upon the governments of South Korea, North Korea, China and the United States to participate in continued peace talks.

After the war, Operation Glory was conducted from July to November 1954, to allow combatant countries to exchange their dead.
The remains of 4,167 US Army and US Marine Corps dead were exchanged for 13,528 KPA and PVA dead, and 546 civilians dead in UN prisoner-of-war camps were delivered to the South Korean government.
After Operation Glory, 416 Korean War unknown soldiers were buried in the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific (The Punchbowl), on the island of Oahu, Hawaii.
Defense Prisoner of War/Missing Personnel Office (DPMO)
records indicate that the PRC and North Korea transmitted 1,394 names, of which 858 were correct.
From 4,167 containers of returned remains, forensic examination identified 4,219 individuals.
Of these, 2,944 were identified as from the US, and all but 416 were identified by name.
From 1996 to 2006, North Korea recovered 220 remains near the Sino-Korean border.
===
Division of Korea (1954–present) ===
The Korean Armistice Agreement provided for monitoring by an international commission.
Since 1953, the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission (NNSC), composed of members from the Swiss and Swedish Armed Forces, has been stationed near the DMZ.

In April 1975, South Vietnam's capital was captured by the People's Army of Vietnam.
Encouraged by the success of Communist revolution in Indochina, Kim Il-sung saw it as an opportunity to invade the South.
Kim visited China in April of that year, and met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai to ask for military aid.
Despite Pyongyang's expectations, however, Beijing refused to help North Korea for another war in Korea.

Since the armistice, there have been numerous incursions and acts of aggression by North Korea.
In 1976, the axe murder incident was widely publicized.
Since 1974, four incursion tunnels leading to Seoul have been uncovered.
In 2010, a North Korean submarine torpedoed and sank the South Korean corvette ROKS Cheonan, resulting in the deaths of 46 sailors.
Again in 2010, North Korea fired artillery shells on Yeonpyeong island, killing two military personnel and two civilians.
After a new wave of UN sanctions, on 11 March 2013, North Korea claimed that the armistice had become invalid.
On 13 March 2013, North Korea confirmed it ended the 1953 Armistice and declared North Korea "is not restrained by the North-South declaration on non-aggression".
On 30 March 2013, North Korea stated that it entered a "state of war" with South Korea and declared that "The long-standing situation of the Korean peninsula being neither at peace nor at war is finally over".
Speaking on 4 April 2013, the US Secretary of Defense, Chuck Hagel, informed the press that Pyongyang "formally informed" the Pentagon that it "ratified" the potential use of a nuclear weapon against South Korea, Japan and the United States of America, including Guam and Hawaii.
Hagel also stated the US would deploy the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense anti-ballistic missile system to Guam, because of a credible and realistic nuclear threat from North Korea.
In 2016, it was revealed that North Korea approached the United States about conducting formal peace talks to formally end the war.
While the White House agreed to secret peace talks, the plan was rejected due to North Korea's refusal to discuss nuclear disarmament as part of the terms of the treaty.
On 27 April 2018, it was announced that North Korea and South Korea agreed to talks to end the ongoing 65-year conflict.
They committed themselves to the complete denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

==
Characteristics ==


===
Casualties ===
Approximately 3 million people died in the Korean War, the majority of whom were civilians, making it perhaps the deadliest conflict of the Cold War-era.
Samuel S. Kim lists the Korean War as the deadliest conflict in East Asia—itself the region most affected by armed conflict related to the Cold War–from 1945 to 1994, with 3 million dead, more than the Vietnam War and Chinese Civil War during the same period.
Although only rough estimates of civilian fatalities are available, scholars from Guenter Lewy to Bruce Cumings have noted that the percentage of civilian casualties in Korea was higher than in World War II or the Vietnam War, with Cumings putting civilian casualties at 2 million and Lewy estimating civilian deaths in the range of 2 million to 3 million.
Cumings states that civilians represent "at least" half of the war's casualties, while Lewy suggests that the civilian portion of the death toll "may have gone as high as 70 percent", compared to Lewy's estimates of 42% in World War II and 30%–46% in the Vietnam War.
Data compiled by the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO) lists just under 1 million "battle deaths" over the course of the Korean War (with a range of 644,696 to 1.5 million) and a mid-value estimate of 3 million total deaths (with a range of 1.5 million to 4.5 million), attributing the difference to excess mortality among civilians from one-sided massacres, starvation, and disease.
Compounding this devastation for Korean civilians, virtually all of the major cities on the entire Korean Peninsula were destroyed as a result of the war.
In both per capita and absolute terms, North Korea was the country most devastated by the war, which resulted in the death of an estimated 12%–15% of the North Korean population (c. 10 million), "a figure close to or surpassing the proportion of Soviet citizens killed in World War II", according to Charles K. Armstrong.
The May 1953 bombing of major North Korean dams threatened several million more North Koreans with starvation, although large-scale famine was averted with emergency aid provided by North Korea's allies.

====
Military ====
According to the data from the US Department of Defense, the US suffered 33,686 battle deaths, along with 2,830 non-battle deaths, during the Korean War.
American combat casualties were over 90 percent of non-Korean UN losses.
U.S. battle deaths were 8,516 up to their first engagement with the Chinese on 1 November 1950.
The first four months of the Korean War, that is, the war prior to the Chinese intervention (which started near the end of October), were by far the bloodiest per day for the US forces as they engaged and destroyed the comparatively well-equipped KPA in intense fighting.
American medical records show that from July to October 1950, the US Army sustained 31 percent of the combat deaths it would ultimately accumulate in the whole 37-month war.
The U.S. spent $30 billion in total on the war.
Some 1,789,000 American soldiers served in the Korean War, accounting for 31 percent of the 5,720,000 Americans who served on active-duty worldwide from June 1950 to July
1953.South Korea reported some 137,899 military deaths and 24,495 missing.
Deaths from the other non-American U.N. militaries totaled 3,730, with another 379 missing.
Data from official Chinese sources reported that the PVA had suffered 114,000 battle deaths, 34,000 non-battle deaths, 340,000 wounded, and 7,600 missing during the war.
7,110 Chinese POWs were repatriated to China.
In 2010, the Chinese government would revise their official tally of war losses to 183,108 dead (114,084 in combat, 70,000 outside of combat) and 25,621 missing.
Overall, 73 percent of Chinese infantry troops served in Korea (25 of 34 armies, or 79 of 109 infantry divisions, were rotated in).
More than 52 percent of the Chinese air force, 55 percent of the tank units, 67 percent of the artillery divisions, and 100 percent of the railroad engineering divisions were sent to Korea as well.
Chinese soldiers who served in Korea faced a greater chance of being killed than those who served in World War II or the Chinese Civil War.
In terms of financial cost, China spent over 10 billion yuan on the war (roughly $3.3 billion), not counting USSR aid which had been donated or forgiven.
This included $1.3 billion in money owed to the Soviet Union by the end of it.
This was a relatively large cost, as China had only 1/25 the national income of the United States.
Spending on the Korean War constituted 34–43 percent of China's annual government budget from 1950 to 1953, depending on the year.
Despite its underdeveloped economy, Chinese military spending was the world's fourth largest globally for most of the war after that of the United States, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom, though by 1953, with the winding down of the Korean War (which ended halfway through the year) and the escalation of the First Indochina War (which reached its peak in 1953–1954), French spending also surpassed Chinese spending by about a third.
According to the South Korean Ministry of National Defense, North Korean military losses totaled 294,151 dead, 91,206 missing, and 229,849 wounded, giving North Korea the highest military deaths of any belligerent in both absolute and relative terms.
The PRIO Battle Deaths Dataset gave a similar figure for North Korean military deaths of 316,579.
Chinese sources reported similar figures for the North Korean military of 290,000 "casualties" and 90,000 captured.
The exact financial cost of the war for North Korea is unknown, but was known to be massive in terms of both direct losses and lost economic activity; the country was devastated both by the cost of the war itself and the American strategic bombing campaign, which among other things destroyed 85 percent of North Korea's buildings and 95 percent of its power generation capacity.
The Chinese and North Koreans estimated that about 390,000 soldiers from the United States, 660,000 soldiers from South Korea and 29,000 other UN soldiers were "eliminated" from the battlefield.
Western sources estimate the PVA suffered about 400,000 killed and 486,000 wounded, while the KPA suffered 215,000 killed and 303,000 wounded.
Cumings cites a much higher figure of 900,000 fatalities among Chinese soldiers.

====
Civilian ====
According to the South Korean Ministry of National Defense, there were over three-quarters of a million confirmed violent civilians deaths during the war, another million civilians were pronounced missing, and millions more ended up as refugees.
In South Korea, some 373,500 civilians were killed, more than 225,600 wounded, and over 387,740 were listed as missing.
During the first communist occupation of Seoul alone, the KPA massacred 128,936 civilians and deported another 84,523 to North Korea.
On the other side of the border, some 406,000 North Korean civilians were reported to have been killed, 1,594,000 were wounded, and 680,000 were missing.
Over 1.5 million North Koreans fled to the South during the war.

===
US unpreparedness for war ==
=
In a postwar analysis of the unpreparedness of US Army forces deployed to Korea during the summer and fall of 1950, Army Major General Floyd L. Parks stated that "Many who never lived to tell the tale had to fight the full range of ground warfare from offensive to delaying action, unit by unit, man by man ...
[T]hat we were able to snatch victory from the jaws of defeat ... does not relieve us from the blame of having placed our own flesh and blood in such a predicament.
"By 1950, US Secretary of Defense Louis A. Johnson had established a policy of faithfully following President Truman's defense economization plans, and had aggressively attempted to implement it even in the face of steadily increasing external threats.
He consequently received much of the blame for the initial setbacks in Korea and the widespread reports of ill-equipped and inadequately trained US military forces in the war's early stages.
As an initial response to the invasion, Truman called for a naval blockade of North Korea, and was shocked to learn that such a blockade could be imposed only "on paper", since the US Navy no longer had the warships with which to carry out his request.
Army officials, desperate for weaponry, recovered Sherman tanks from World War II Pacific battlefields and reconditioned them for shipment to Korea.
Army Ordnance officials at Fort Knox pulled down M26 Pershing tanks from display pedestals around Fort Knox in order to equip the third company of the Army's hastily formed 70th Tank Battalion.
Without adequate numbers of tactical fighter-bomber aircraft, the Air Force took F-51 (P-51) propeller-driven aircraft out of storage or from existing Air National Guard squadrons, and rushed them into front-line service.
A shortage of spare parts and qualified maintenance personnel resulted in improvised repairs and overhauls.
A Navy helicopter pilot aboard an active duty warship recalled fixing damaged rotor blades with masking tape in the absence of spares.
US Army Reserve and Army National Guard infantry soldiers and new inductees (called to duty to fill out understrength infantry divisions) found themselves short of nearly everything needed to repel the North Korean forces: artillery, ammunition, heavy tanks, ground-support aircraft, even effective anti-tank weapons such as the M20 3.5-inch (89 mm)
Super Bazooka.
Some Army combat units sent to Korea were supplied with worn out, 'red-lined' M1 rifles or carbines in immediate need of ordnance depot overhaul or repair.
Only the Marine Corps, whose commanders had stored and maintained their World War II surplus inventories of equipment and weapons, proved ready for deployment, though they still were woefully under-strength, as well as in need of suitable landing craft to practice amphibious operations (Secretary of Defense Louis Johnson had transferred most of the remaining craft to the Navy and reserved them for use in training Army units).Due to public criticism of his handling of the Korean War, Truman decided to ask for Johnson's resignation.
On 19 September 1950, Johnson resigned as Secretary of Defense, and the president quickly replaced him with General George C. Marshall.

===
Armored warfare ===
The initial assault by KPA forces was aided by the use of Soviet T-34-85 tanks.
A KPA tank corps equipped with about 120 T-34s spearheaded the invasion.
These drove against the ROK with few anti-tank weapons adequate to deal with the T-34s.
Additional Soviet armor was added as the offensive progressed.
The KPA tanks had a good deal of early successes against ROK infantry, Task Force Smith and the US M24 Chaffee light tanks that they encountered.
Interdiction by ground attack aircraft was the only means of slowing the advancing KPA armor.
The tide turned in favor of the UN forces in August 1950 when the KPA suffered major tank losses during a series of battles in which the UN forces brought heavier equipment to bear, including M4A3 Sherman medium tanks backed by M26 heavy tanks, and the British Centurion, Churchill and Cromwell tanks.
The Inchon landings on 15 September cut off the KPA supply lines, causing their armored forces and infantry to run out of fuel, ammunition, and other supplies.
As a result of this and the Pusan perimeter breakout
the KPA had to retreat, and many of the T-34s and heavy weapons had to be abandoned.
By the time the KPA withdrew from the South, a total of 239 T-34s and 74 SU-76 self-propelled guns were lost.
After November 1950, KPA armor was rarely encountered.
Following the initial assault by the north, the Korean War saw limited use of tanks and featured no large-scale tank battles.
The mountainous, forested terrain, especially in the eastern central zone, was poor tank country, limiting their mobility.
Through the last two years of the war in Korea, UN tanks served largely as infantry support and mobile artillery pieces.

===
Naval warfare ===
Because neither Korea had a significant navy, the war featured few naval battles.
A skirmish between North Korea and the UN Command occurred on 2 July 1950; the US Navy cruiser USS Juneau, the Royal Navy cruiser HMS Jamaica and the Royal Navy frigate HMS Black Swan fought four North Korean torpedo boats and two mortar gunboats, and sank them.

USS Juneau later sank several ammunition ships that had been present.
The last sea battle of the Korean War occurred days before the Battle of Inchon; the ROK ship PC-703 sank a North Korean mine layer in the Battle of Haeju Island, near Inchon.
Three other supply ships were sunk by PC-703 two days later in the Yellow Sea.
Thereafter, vessels from the UN nations held undisputed control of the sea about Korea.
The gun ships were used in shore bombardment, while the aircraft carriers provided air support to the ground forces.

During most of the war, the UN navies patrolled the west and east coasts of North Korea, sinking supply and ammunition ships and denying the North Koreans the ability to resupply from the sea.
Aside from very occasional gunfire from North Korean shore batteries, the main threat to UN navy ships was from magnetic mines.
During the war, five US Navy ships were lost to mines: two minesweepers, two minesweeper escorts, and one ocean tug.
Mines and gunfire from North Korean coastal artillery damaged another 87 US warships, resulting in slight to moderate damage.

===
Aerial warfare ===
The war was the first in which jet aircraft played the central role in air combat.
Once-formidable fighters such as the P-51 Mustang, F4U Corsair, and Hawker Sea Fury—all piston-engined, propeller-driven, and designed during World War II—relinquished their air-superiority roles to a new generation of faster, jet-powered fighters arriving in the theater.
For the initial months of the war, the P-80 Shooting Star, F9F Panther, Gloster Meteor and other jets under the UN flag dominated the Korean People's Air Force (KPAF) propeller-driven Soviet Yakovlev Yak-9 and
Lavochkin La-9s.
By early August 1950, the KPAF was reduced to only about 20 planes.

The Chinese intervention in late October 1950 bolstered the KPAF with the MiG-15, one of the world's most advanced jet fighters.
The heavily armed MiGs were faster than first-generation UN jets and therefore could reach and destroy US B-29 Superfortress bomber flights despite their fighter escorts.
With increasing B-29 losses, the USAF was forced to switch from a daylight bombing campaign to the safer but less accurate nighttime bombing of targets.

The USAF countered the MiG-15 by sending over three squadrons of its most capable fighter, the F-86 Sabre.
These arrived in December 1950.
The MiG was designed as a bomber interceptor.
It had a very high service ceiling—15,000 m (50,000 ft) and carried very heavy weaponry:
one 37 mm cannon and two 23 mm cannons.
The F-86 had a ceiling of 13,000 m (42,000 ft) and were armed with six .50 caliber (12.7 mm) machine guns, which were range adjusted by radar gunsights.
If coming in at higher altitude the advantage of engaging or not went to the MiG.
Once in a level flight dogfight, both swept-wing designs attained comparable maximum speeds of around 1,100 km/h (660 mph).
The MiG climbed faster, but the Sabre turned and dived better.
In the summer and autumn of 1951, the outnumbered Sabres of the USAF's 4th Fighter Interceptor Wing—only 44 at one point—continued seeking battle in MiG Alley, where the Yalu River marks the Chinese border, against Chinese and North Korean air forces capable of deploying some 500 aircraft.
Following Colonel Harrison Thyng's communication with the Pentagon, the 51st Fighter-Interceptor Wing finally reinforced the beleaguered 4th Wing in December 1951; for the next year-and-a-half stretch of the war, aerial warfare continued.

Unlike the Vietnam War, in which the Soviet Union only officially sent "advisers", the 64th Fighter Aviation Corps saw action in the Korean air war.
Fearful of confronting the US directly, the Soviet Union denied involvement of their personnel in anything other than an advisory role, but air combat quickly resulted in Soviet pilots dropping their code signals and speaking over the wireless in Russian.
This known direct Soviet participation was a casus belli that the UN Command deliberately overlooked, lest the war expand to include the Soviet Union, and potentially escalate into atomic warfare.
After the war, and to the present day, the USAF reports an F-86 Sabre kill ratio in excess of 10:1, with 792 MiG-15s and 108 other aircraft shot down by Sabres, and 78 Sabres lost to enemy fire.
The Soviet Air Force reported some 1,100 air-to-air victories and 335 MiG combat losses, while China's PLAAF reported 231 combat losses, mostly MiG-15s, and 168 other aircraft lost.
The KPAF reported no data, but the UN Command estimates some 200 KPAF aircraft lost in the war's first stage, and 70 additional aircraft after the Chinese intervention.
The USAF disputes Soviet and Chinese claims of 650 and 211 downed F-86s, respectively.
However, one source claims that the USAF has more recently cited 224 losses (c.100 to air combat) out of 674 F-86s deployed to Korea.
Regardless of the actual ratio, American Sabres were very effective at controlling the skies over Korea; since no other UN fighter could contend with the MiG-15, F-86s largely took over air combat once they arrived, relegating other aircraft to performing air-to-ground duties.
Despite being outnumbered (the number of Sabres in theater never exceeded 150 while MiG-15s reached 900 at their peak), North Korean and Chinese aircraft were seldom encountered south of Pyongyang.
UN ground forces, supply lines, and infrastructure were not attacked from the air and although North Korea had 75 airfields capable of supporting MiGs, after 1951 any serious effort to operate from them was abandoned, keeping them based across the Yalu River in the safety of China.
This confined most air-to-air engagements to MiG Alley, giving UN aircraft free rein to conduct strike missions over enemy territory with little fear of interception.
Although jet dogfights are remembered as a prominent part of the Korean War, counter-air missions comprised just 12% of Far East Air Forces sorties, and four times as many sorties were performed for close air support and interdiction.
The war marked a major milestone not only for fixed-wing aircraft, but also for rotorcraft, featuring the first large-scale deployment of helicopters for medical evacuation (medevac).
In 1944–1945, during the Second World War, the YR-4 helicopter saw limited ambulance duty, but in Korea, where rough terrain trumped the jeep as a speedy medevac vehicle, helicopters like the Sikorsky H-19 helped reduce fatal casualties to a dramatic degree when combined with complementary medical innovations such as Mobile Army Surgical Hospitals.
As such, the medical evacuation and care system for the wound was so effective for the UN forces that a wounded soldier who arrived at a MASH unit alive typically had a 97% chance of survival.
The limitations of jet aircraft for close air support highlighted the helicopter's potential in the role, leading to development of the helicopter gunships used in the Vietnam War (1965–75).
===
Bombing of North Korea ===
The initial bombing attack on North Korea was approved on the fourth day of the war, 29 June 1950, by General Douglas MacArthur immediately upon request by the commanding general of the Far East Air Forces, George E. Stratemeyer.
Major bombing began in late July.
U.S. airpower conducted 7,000 close support and interdiction airstrikes that month, which helped slow the North Korean rate of advance to 3 km (2 mi) a day.
On 12 August 1950, the USAF dropped 625 tons of bombs on North Korea; two weeks later, the daily tonnage increased to some 800 tons.
From June through October, official US policy was to pursue precision bombing aimed at communication centers (railroad stations, marshaling yards, main yards, and railways) and industrial facilities deemed vital to war making capacity.
The policy was the result of debates after World War II, in which US policy rejected the mass civilian bombings that had been conducted in the later stages of World War II as unproductive and immoral.
In early July, General Emmett O'Donnell Jr. requested permission to firebomb five North Korean cities.
He proposed that MacArthur announce that the UN would employ the firebombing methods that "brought Japan to its knees".
The announcement would warn the leaders of North Korea "to get women and children and other noncombatants
the hell out".
According to O'Donnell, MacArthur responded, "No, Rosie, I'm not prepared to go that far yet.
My instructions are very explicit; however, I want you to know that I have no compunction
whatever to your bombing bona fide military objectives, with high explosives, in those five industrial centers.
If you miss your target and kill people or destroy other parts of the city, I accept that as a part of war.
"In
September 1950, MacArthur said in his public report to the UN, "The problem of avoiding the killing of innocent civilians and damages to the civilian economy is continually present and given my personal attention.
"In
October 1950, FEAF commander General Stratemeyer requested permission to attack the city of Sinuiju, a provincial capital with an estimated population of 60,000, "over the widest area of the city, without warning, by burning and high explosive".
MacArthur's headquarters responded the following day: "The general policy enunciated from Washington negates such an attack unless the military situation clearly requires it.
Under present circumstances this is not the case.
"Following
the intervention of the Chinese in November, General MacArthur ordered increased bombing on North Korea which included firebombing against the country's arsenals and communications centers and especially against the "Korean end" of all the bridges across the Yalu River.
As with the aerial bombing campaigns over Germany and Japan in World War II, the nominal objective of the USAF was to destroy North Korea's war infrastructure and shatter the country's morale.

On 3 November 1950, General Stratemeyer forwarded to MacArthur the request of Fifth Air Force commander General Earle E. Partridge for clearance to "burn Sinuiju".
As he had done previously in July and October, MacArthur denied the request, explaining that he planned to use the town's facilities after seizing it.
However, at the same meeting, MacArthur agreed for the first time to a firebombing campaign, agreeing to Stratemeyer's request to burn the city of Kanggye and several other towns: "Burn it if you so desire.
Not only that, Strat, but burn and destroy as a lesson to any other of those towns that you consider of military value to the enemy.
"
The same evening, MacArthur's chief of staff told Stratemeyer that the firebombing of Sinuiju had also been approved.
In his diary, Stratemeyer summarized the instructions as follows: "Every installation, facility, and village in North Korea now becomes a military and tactical target."
Stratemeyer sent orders to the Fifth Air Force and Bomber Command to "destroy every means of communications and every installation, factory, city, and village".
On 5 November 1950, General Stratemeyer gave the following order to the commanding general of the Fifth Air Force: "Aircraft under Fifth Air Force control will destroy all other targets including all buildings capable of affording shelter.
"
The same day, twenty-two B-29s attacked Kanggye, destroying 75% of the city.
After MacArthur was removed as UN Supreme Commander in Korea in April 1951, his successors continued this policy and ultimately extended it to all of North Korea.
The U.S. dropped a total of 635,000 tons of bombs, including 32,557 tons of napalm, on Korea, more than during the whole Pacific campaign of World War II.
North Korea ranks alongside Cambodia (500,000 tons), Laos (2 million tons) and South Vietnam (4 million tons) as among the most heavily bombed countries in history, with Laos suffering the most extensive bombardment relative to its size and population.

Almost every substantial building in North Korea was destroyed as a result.
The war's highest-ranking US POW, Major General William F. Dean, reported that the majority of North Korean cities and villages he saw were either rubble or snow-covered wasteland.
North Korean factories, schools, hospitals, and government offices were forced to move underground, and air defenses were "non-existent".
In November 1950, the North Korean leadership instructed their population to build dugouts and mud huts and to dig tunnels, in order to solve the acute housing problem.
US Air Force General Curtis LeMay commented: "We went over there and fought the war and eventually burned down every town in North Korea anyway, some way or another, and some in South Korea, too."
Pyongyang, which saw 75 percent of its area destroyed, was so devastated that bombing was halted as there were no longer any worthy targets.
On 28 November, Bomber Command reported on the campaign's progress: 95 percent of Manpojin was destroyed, along with 90 percent of Hoeryong, Namsi and Koindong, 85 percent of Chosan, 75 percent of both Sakchu and Huichon and 20 percent of Uiju.
According to USAF damage assessments, "Eighteen of twenty-two major cities in North Korea had been at least half obliterated.
"
By the end of the campaign, US bombers had difficulty in finding targets and were reduced to bombing footbridges or jettisoning their bombs into the sea.
General Matthew Ridgway said that except for air power, "the war would have been over in 60 days with all Korea in Communist hands".
UN air forces flew 1,040,708 combat and combat support sorties during the war.
FEAF flew the majority at 710,886 (69.3% of sorties), with the U.S. Navy performing 16.1%, the U.S. Marine Corps 10.3%, and 4.3% by other allied air forces.
As well as conventional bombing, the Communist side claimed that the U.S. used biological weapons.
These claims have been disputed; Conrad Crane asserts that while the US worked towards developing chemical and biological weapons, the US military "possessed neither the ability, nor the will", to use them in combat.

===
US threat of atomic warfare ===
On 5 November 1950, the US Joint Chiefs of Staff issued orders for the retaliatory atomic bombing of Manchurian PRC military bases, if either their armies crossed into Korea or if PRC or KPA bombers attacked Korea from there.
President Truman ordered the transfer of nine Mark 4 nuclear bombs "to the Air Force's Ninth Bomb Group, the designated carrier of the weapons ...
[and] signed an order to use them against Chinese and Korean targets", which he never transmitted.
Many US officials viewed the deployment of nuclear-capable (but not nuclear-armed) B-29 bombers to Britain as helping to resolve the Berlin Blockade of 1948–1949.
Truman and Eisenhower both had military experience and viewed nuclear weapons as potentially usable components of their military.
During Truman's first meeting to discuss the war on 25 June 1950, he ordered plans be prepared for attacking Soviet forces if they entered the war.
By July, Truman approved another B-29 deployment to Britain, this time with bombs (but without their cores), to remind the Soviets of US offensive ability.
Deployment of a similar fleet to Guam was leaked to The New York Times.
As UN forces retreated to Pusan, and the CIA reported that mainland China was building up forces for a possible invasion of Taiwan, the Pentagon believed that Congress and the public would demand using nuclear weapons if the situation in Korea required them.
As PVA forces pushed back the UN forces from the Yalu River, Truman stated during a 30 November 1950 press conference that using nuclear weapons was "always [under] active consideration", with control under the local military commander.
The Indian ambassador, K. Madhava Panikkar, reports "that Truman announced he was thinking of using the atom bomb in Korea.
But the Chinese seemed unmoved by this threat ...
The PRC's propaganda against the US was stepped up.
The 'Aid Korea to resist America' campaign was made the slogan for increased production, greater national integration, and more rigid control over anti-national activities.
One could not help feeling that Truman's threat came in useful to the leaders of the Revolution, to enable them to keep up the tempo of their activities.
"After his statement caused concern in Europe, Truman met on 4 December 1950 with UK prime minister and Commonwealth spokesman Clement Attlee, French Premier René Pleven, and French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman to discuss their worries about atomic warfare and its likely continental expansion.
The US' forgoing atomic warfare was not because of "a disinclination by the Soviet Union and People's Republic of China to escalate [the Korean War]", but because UN allies—notably from the UK, the Commonwealth, and France—were concerned about a geopolitical imbalance rendering NATO defenseless while the US fought China, who then might persuade the Soviet Union to conquer Western Europe.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff advised Truman to tell Attlee that the US would use nuclear weapons only if necessary to protect an evacuation of UN troops, or to prevent a "major military disaster".
On 6 December 1950, after the Chinese intervention repelled the UN armies from northern North Korea, General J. Lawton Collins (Army Chief of Staff), General MacArthur, Admiral C. Turner Joy, General George E. Stratemeyer and staff officers Major General Doyle Hickey, Major General Charles A. Willoughby and Major General Edwin K. Wright met in Tokyo to plan strategy countering the Chinese intervention; they considered three potential atomic warfare scenarios encompassing the next weeks and months of warfare.

In the first scenario: If the PVA continued attacking in full and the UN Command was forbidden to blockade and bomb China, and without Taiwanese reinforcements, and without an increase in US forces until April 1951 (four National Guard divisions were due to arrive), then atomic bombs might be used in North Korea.

In the second scenario: If the PVA continued full attacks and the UN Command blockaded China and had effective aerial reconnaissance and bombing of the Chinese interior, and the Taiwanese soldiers were maximally exploited, and tactical atomic bombing was to hand, then the UN forces could hold positions deep in North Korea.

In the third scenario: if China agreed to not cross the 38th Parallel border, General MacArthur recommended UN acceptance of an armistice disallowing PVA and KPA troops south of the parallel, and requiring PVA and KPA guerrillas to withdraw northwards.
The US Eighth Army would remain to protect the Seoul–Incheon area, while X Corps would retreat to Pusan.
A UN commission should supervise implementation of the armistice.
Both the Pentagon and the State Department were cautious about using nuclear weapons because of the risk of general war with China and the diplomatic ramifications.
Truman and his senior advisors agreed, and never seriously considered using them in early December 1950 despite the poor military situation in Korea.
In 1951, the US escalated closest to atomic warfare in Korea.
Because China deployed new armies to the Sino-Korean frontier, ground crews at the Kadena Air Base, Okinawa, assembled atomic bombs for Korean warfare, "lacking only the essential pit nuclear cores".
In October 1951, the United States effected Operation Hudson Harbor to establish a nuclear weapons capability.
USAF B-29 bombers practiced individual bombing runs from Okinawa to North Korea (using dummy nuclear or conventional bombs), coordinated from Yokota Air Base in east-central Japan.
Hudson Harbor tested "actual functioning of all activities which would be involved in an atomic strike, including weapons assembly and testing, leading, [and] ground control of bomb aiming".
The bombing run data indicated that atomic bombs would be tactically ineffective against massed infantry, because the "timely identification of large masses of enemy troops was extremely rare".
General Matthew Ridgway was authorized to use nuclear weapons if a major air attack originated from outside Korea.
An envoy was sent to Hong Kong to deliver a warning to China.
The message likely caused Chinese leaders to be more cautious about potential US use of nuclear weapons, but whether they learned about the B-29 deployment is unclear and the failure of the two major Chinese offensives that month likely was what caused them to shift to a defensive strategy in Korea.
The B-29s returned to the United States in June.
Despite the greater destructive power that atomic weapons would bring to the war, their effects on determining the war's outcome would have likely been minimal.
Tactically, given the dispersed nature of PVA/KPA forces, the relatively primitive infrastructure for staging and logistics centers, and the small number of bombs available (most would have been conserved for use against the Soviets), atomic attacks would have limited effects against the ability of China to mobilize and move forces.
Strategically, attacking Chinese cities to destroy civilian industry and infrastructure would cause the immediate dispersion of the leadership away from such areas and give propaganda value for the communists to galvanize the support of Chinese civilians.
Since the Soviets were not expected to intervene with their few primitive atomic weapons on China or North Korea's behalf, the threat of a possible nuclear exchange was unimportant in the decision to not deploy atomic bombs; their use offered little operational advantage, and would undesirably lower the "threshold" for using atomic weapons against non-nuclear states in future conflicts.
When Eisenhower succeeded Truman in early 1953 he was similarly cautious about using nuclear weapons in Korea.
The administration prepared contingency plans to use them against China, but like Truman, the new president feared that doing so would result in Soviet attacks on Japan.
The war ended as it began, without US nuclear weapons deployed near battle.

===
War crimes ===


====
Civilian deaths and massacres ====
There were numerous atrocities and massacres of civilians throughout the Korean War committed by both sides, starting in the war's first days.
On 28 June, North Korean troops committed the Seoul National University Hospital massacre.
On the same day, South Korean President Syngman Rhee ordered the Bodo League massacre, beginning mass killings of suspected leftist sympathizers and their families by South Korean officials and right-wing groups.
Estimates of those killed during the Bodo League massacre range from at least 60,000–110,000
(Kim Dong-choon) to 200,000 (Park Myung-lim).
The British protested to their allies about later South Korean mass executions and saved some citizens.
In 2005–2010, a South Korean Truth and Reconciliation Commission investigated atrocities and other human rights violations through much of the 20th century, from the Japanese colonial period through the Korean War and beyond.
It excavated some mass graves from the Bodo League massacres and confirmed the general outlines of those political executions.
Of the Korean War-era massacres the commission was petitioned to investigate, 82% were perpetrated by South Korean forces, with 18% perpetrated by North Korean forces.
The commission also received petitions alleging more than 200 large-scale killings of South Korean civilians by the U.S. military during the war, mostly air attacks.
It confirmed eight representative cases of what it found were wrongful U.S. killings of hundreds of South Korean civilians, including refugees crowded into a cave attacked with napalm bombs, which survivors said killed 360 people, and an air attack that killed 197 refugees gathered in a field in the far south.
It recommended South Korea seek reparations from the United States, but in 2010 a reorganized commission under a new, conservative government held instead that many such U.S. mass killings resulted from "military necessity".
In the most notorious U.S. massacre, investigated separately, not by the commission, American troops killed an estimated 250–300 refugees, mostly women and children, at No Gun Ri in central South Korea (26–29 July 1950).

U.S. commanders, fearing enemy infiltrators among refugee columns, had adopted a policy of stopping civilian groups approaching U.S. lines, including by gunfire.
After years of rejecting survivors’ accounts, the U.S. Army investigated and in 2001 acknowledged the No Gun Ri killings, but claimed they were not ordered and "not a deliberate killing".
South Korean officials, after a parallel investigation, said they believed there were orders to shoot.
The survivors’ representatives denounced what they described as a U.S. "whitewash".
====
Prisoners of war ====


=====
Chinese POWs =====
At Geoje prison camp on Geoje Island, Chinese POWs experienced anti-communist lecturing and missionary work from secret agents from the US and Taiwan in No.
71, 72 and 86 camps.
Pro-Communist POWs experienced torture, cutting off of limbs, or were executed in public.
Being forced to write confession letters and receiving tattoos of an anti-Communism slogan and Flag of the Republic of China were also commonly seen, in case any wanted to go back to mainland China.
Pro-Communist POWs who could not endure the torture formed an underground group to fight the pro-Nationalist POWs secretly by assassination which led to the Geoje uprising.
The rebellion captured Francis Dodd, and was suppressed by the 187th Infantry Regiment.

In the end, 14,235 Chinese POWs went to Taiwan and fewer than 6,000 POWs went back to mainland China.
Those who went to Taiwan are called "righteous men" and experienced brainwashing again and were sent to the army or were arrested; while the survivors who went back to mainland China were welcomed as a "hero" first, but experienced anti-brainwashing, strict interrogation, and house arrest eventually, after the tattoos were discovered.
After 1988, the Taiwanese government allowed POWs to go back to mainland China, and helped remove anti-communist tattoos; while the mainland Chinese government started to allow mainland Chinese prisoners of war to return from Taiwan.

=====
UN Command POWs =====
The United States reported that North Korea mistreated prisoners of war: soldiers were beaten, starved, put to forced labor, marched to death, and summarily executed.
The KPA killed POWs at the battles for Hill 312, Hill 303, the Pusan Perimeter, Daejeon and Sunchon; these massacres were discovered afterwards by the UN forces.
Later, a US Congress war crimes investigation, the United States Senate Subcommittee on Korean War Atrocities of the Permanent Subcommittee of the Investigations of the Committee on Government Operations, reported that "two-thirds of all American prisoners of war in Korea died as a result of war crimes".
Although the Chinese rarely executed prisoners like their North Korean counterparts, mass starvation and diseases swept through the Chinese-run POW camps during the winter of 1950–51.
About 43 percent of US POWs died during this period.
The Chinese defended their actions by stating that all Chinese soldiers during this period were suffering mass starvation and diseases due to logistical difficulties.
The UN POWs said that most of the Chinese camps were located near the easily supplied Sino-Korean border, and that the Chinese withheld food to force the prisoners to accept the communism indoctrination programs.
According to Chinese reports, over a thousand US POWs died by the end of June 1951, while a dozen British POWs died, and all Turkish POW survived.
According to Hastings, wounded US POWs died for lack of medical attention and were fed a diet of corn and millet "devoid of vegetables, almost barren of proteins, minerals, or vitamins" with only 1/3 the calories of their usual diet.
Especially in early 1951, thousands of prisoners lost the will to live and "declined to eat the mess of sorghum and rice they were provided".

The unpreparedness of US POWs to resist heavy communist indoctrination during the Korean War led to the Code of the United States Fighting Force which governs how US military personnel in combat should act when they must "evade capture, resist while a prisoner or escape from the enemy".
North Korea may have detained up to 50,000 South Korean POWs after the ceasefire.
Over 88,000 South Korean soldiers were missing and the KPA claimed they captured 70,000 South Koreans.
However, when ceasefire negotiations began in 1951, the KPA reported they held only 8,000 South Koreans.
The UN Command protested the discrepancies and alleged that the KPA were forcing South Korean POWs to join the KPA.The KPA denied such allegations.
They claimed their POW rosters were small because many POWs were killed in UN air raids and that they had released ROK soldiers at the front.
They insisted only volunteers were allowed to serve in the KPA.
By early 1952, UN negotiators gave up trying to get back the missing South Koreans.
The POW exchange proceeded without access to South Korean POWs not on the PVA/KPA rosters.
North Korea continued to claim that any South Korean POW who stayed in the North did so voluntarily.
However, since 1994, South Korean POWs have been escaping North Korea on their own after decades of captivity.
As of 2010, the South Korean Ministry of Unification reported that 79 ROK POWs escaped the North.
The South Korean government estimates 500 South Korean POWs continue to be detained in North Korea.
The escaped POWs have testified about their treatment and written memoirs about their lives in North Korea.
They report they were not told about the POW exchange procedures, and were assigned to work in mines in the remote northeastern regions near the Chinese and Russian border.
Declassified Soviet Foreign Ministry documents corroborate such testimony.
In 1997, the Geoje POW Camp in South Korea was turned into a memorial.

====
Starvation ====
In December 1950, the South Korean National Defense Corps was founded; the soldiers were 406,000 drafted citizens.

In the winter of 1951, 50,000 to 90,000 South Korean National Defense Corps soldiers starved to death while marching southward under the PVA offensive when their commanding officers embezzled funds earmarked for their food.
This event is called the National Defense Corps Incident.
There is no evidence that Syngman Rhee was personally involved in or benefited from the corruption.

===
Recreation ===
In 1950, Secretary of Defense George C. Marshall and Secretary of the Navy Francis P. Matthews called on the United Service Organizations (USO) which was disbanded by 1947 to provide support for US servicemen.
By the end of the war, more than 113,000 USO volunteers from the US were working at home front and abroad.
Many stars came to Korea to give their performances.
Throughout the Korean War, "comfort stations" were operated by South Korean officials for UN soldiers.

==
Aftermath ==
Postwar recovery was different in the two Koreas.
South Korea stagnated in the first postwar decade.
In 1953, South Korea and the United States signed a Mutual Defense Treaty.
In 1960, the April Revolution occurred and students joined an anti-Syngman Rhee demonstration; 142 were killed by police; in consequence Syngman Rhee resigned and left for exile in the United States.
Park Chung-hee's May 16 coup enabled social stability.

From 1965 to 1973, South Korea dispatched troops to South Vietnam and received $235,560,000 in allowance and military procurement from the United States.
GNP increased fivefold during the Vietnam War.
South Korea industrialized and modernized.
South Korea had one of the world's fastest-growing economies from the early 1960s to the late 1990s.
In 1957 South Korea had a lower per capita GDP than Ghana, and by 2010 it was a developed country and ranked thirteenth in the world
(Ghana was 86th).Following extensive USAF bombing, North Korea "had been virtually destroyed as an industrial society".
After the armistice, Kim Il-Sung requested Soviet economic and industrial assistance.
In September 1953, the Soviet government agreed to "cancel or postpone repayment for all ... outstanding debts", and promised to grant North Korea one billion rubles in monetary aid, industrial equipment and consumer goods.
Eastern European members of the Soviet Bloc also contributed with "logistical support, technical aid, [and] medical supplies".
China canceled North Korea's war debts, provided 800 million yuan, promised trade cooperation, and sent in thousands of troops to rebuild damaged infrastructure.
Contemporary North Korea remains underdeveloped.
North Korea has continued to be a totalitarian dictatorship since the end of the war, with an elaborate cult of personality around the Kim dynasty.
The means of production are owned by the state through state-run enterprises and collectivized farms.
Most services—such as healthcare, education, housing and food production—are subsidized or state-funded.
Estimates based on the most recent North Korean census suggest that 240,000 to 420,000 people died as a result of the 1990s North Korean famine and that there were 600,000 to 850,000 unnatural deaths in North Korea from 1993 to 2008.
A study by South Korean anthropologists of North Korean children who had defected to China found that 18-year-old males were 13 cm (5 in) shorter than South Koreans their age because of malnutrition.

Present day North Korea follows Songun, or "military-first" policy.
It is the country with the highest number of military and paramilitary personnel, with a total of 9,495,000 active, reserve and paramilitary personnel, or approximately 37% of its population.
Its active duty army of 1.21 million is the fourth-largest in the world, after China, the United States and India; consisting of 4.7% of its population.
North Korea possesses nuclear weapons.
A 2014 UN inquiry into abuses of human rights in North Korea concluded that, "the gravity, scale and nature of these violations reveal a state that does not have any parallel in the contemporary world," with Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch holding similar views.
South Korean anti-Americanism after the war was fueled by the presence and behavior of US military personnel (USFK) and US support for Park's authoritarian regime, a fact still evident during the country's democratic transition in the 1980s.
However, anti-Americanism has declined significantly in South Korea in recent years, from 46% favorable in 2003 to 74% favorable in 2011, making South Korea one of the most pro-US countries in the world.
A large number of mixed-race "GI babies" (offspring of US and other UN soldiers and Korean women) were filling up the country's orphanages.
Because Korean traditional society places significant weight on paternal family ties, bloodlines, and purity of race, children of mixed race or those without fathers are not easily accepted in South Korean society.
International adoption of Korean children began in 1954.
The US Immigration Act of 1952 legalized the naturalization of non-blacks and non-whites as US citizens, and made possible the entry of military spouses and children from South Korea after the Korean War.
With the passage of the Immigration Act of 1965, which substantially changed US immigration policy toward non-Europeans, Koreans became one of the fastest-growing Asian groups in the United States.
Mao Zedong's decision to take on the United States in the Korean War was a direct attempt to confront what the Communist bloc viewed as the strongest anti-Communist power in the world, undertaken at a time when the Chinese Communist regime was still consolidating its own power after winning the Chinese Civil War.
Mao supported intervention not to save North Korea, but because he believed that a military conflict with the US was inevitable after the US entered the war, and to appease the Soviet Union to secure military dispensation and achieve Mao's goal of making China a major world military power.
Mao was equally ambitious in improving his own prestige inside the communist international community by demonstrating that his Marxist concerns were international.
In his later years Mao believed that Stalin only gained a positive opinion of him after China's entrance into the Korean War.
Inside mainland China, the war improved the long-term prestige of Mao, Zhou, and Peng, allowing the Chinese Communist Party to increase its legitimacy while weakening anti-Communist dissent.

The Chinese government have encouraged the point of view that the war was initiated by the United States and South Korea, though ComIntern documents have shown that Mao sought approval from Joseph Stalin to enter the war.
In Chinese media, the Chinese war effort is considered as an example of China's engaging the strongest power in the world with an under-equipped army, forcing it to retreat, and fighting it to a military stalemate.
These successes were contrasted with China's historical humiliations by Japan and by Western powers over the previous hundred years, highlighting the abilities of the PLA and the Chinese Communist Party.
The most significant negative long-term consequence of the war for China was that it led the United States to guarantee the safety of Chiang Kai-shek's regime in Taiwan, effectively ensuring that Taiwan would remain outside of PRC control through the present day.
Mao had also discovered the usefulness of large-scale mass movements in the war while implementing them among most of his ruling measures over PRC.
Finally, anti-U.S. sentiments, which were already a significant factor during the Chinese Civil War, was ingrained into Chinese culture during the Communist propaganda campaigns of the Korean War.
The Korean War affected other participant combatants.
Turkey, for example, entered NATO in 1952, and the foundation was laid for bilateral diplomatic and trade relations with South Korea.

== See also ==


===
War memorials ===
Korean War Memorial Wall,map Brampton, Ontario
Korean War Veterans Memorial, Washington,
D.C.
Memorial of the War to Resist US Aggression and Aid Korea, Dandong, Liaoning, China
National War Memorial (New Zealand)
Philadelphia Korean War Memorial
United Nations Memorial Cemetery, Busan, Republic of Korea
Victorious War Museum, Pyongyang, North Korea
War Memorial of Korea Yongsan-dong, Yongsan-gu, Seoul,
South Korea


==
References ==


===
Notes ===


===
Citations ===
===
Bibliography ===


==
External links ==
Records of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea (UNCURK) (1950–1973) at the United Nations Archives


===
Historical ===
Anniversary of the Korean War Armistice: Truman on Acheson's Crucial Role in Going to War Shapell Manuscript Foundation
Korean War resources, Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
North Korea International Documentation Project
Grand Valley State University Veteran's History Project digital collection
The Forgotten War, Remembered – four testimonials in The New York Times
Collection of Books and Research Materials on the Korean War
an online collection of the United States Army Center of Military History
Korean War, US Army Signal Corps
Photograph Collection US Army Heritage and Education Center, Carlisle, Pennsylvania
The Korean War at History.com
Koreanwar-educator.org
The short film Film
No.
927 is available for free download at the Internet Archive


===
Media ===
West Point Atlas of the Korean War
The Korean War
You Never Knew –
slideshows by Life magazine
US Army Korea Media Center official Korean War online image archive
Rare pictures of the Korean War from the U.S. Library of Congress and National Archives
Land of the Morning Calm Canadians in Korea – multimedia project including veteran interviews
Pathé Online newsreel archive featuring films on the war
CBC Digital Archives –
Forgotten Heroes:
Canada and the Korean War


===
Organizations ===
Korea Defense Veterans of America
Korean War Ex-POW Association
Korean War Veterans Association
The Center for the Study of the Korean War


===
Memorials ===
Korean Children's War Memorial
Chinese 50th Anniversary Korean War Memorial
In ancient India, the Brahmastra (Sanskrit: ब्रह्‍मास्‍त्र, IAST: Brahmāstra) and its variants, the Brahmashirsha astra and the Brahmanda astra were supernatural weapons used in the war of Mahabharata and are collectively called Brahma weapons.
The Brahmashirsha astra was a weapon that was said to be able to destroy the world, capable of destroying creation and vanquishing all beings.
It is one of the most destructive, powerful and irresistible weapons mentioned in Hinduism.
These weapons are all created by Lord Brahma, except for brahmanda-astra.

It is termed as a fiery weapon that creates a fierce fireball, blazing up with terrible flames and countless horrendous thunder flashes.
When discharged, all nature including trees, oceans, and animals tremble, and the sky surrounds with flame, glaciers melt and mountains shatter with copious noise all around.

When used, the Brahmastra can destroy every useful resource in a given area and prevent even a single blade of grass from ever growing in that area again.
There will be no rainfall for 12 Brahma years (1 Brahma year = 3,110,400,000,000 Human years) and climate condition will worsen.
The strike of the Brahmastra will eventually destroy everything.

==
Variants ==


===
Brahmashira Astra ===
The Brahmashira Astra (Brahma's head weapon), manifests with four heads of brahma at the front and is four times stronger than the normal brahmastra.
Brahmanda Astra is a weapon that manifests with the fifth head of Brahma at the front.
It is a weapon that was capable of destroying the world.
Arjuna and Ashwatthama almost used the astra against each other near the end of the Kurukshetra War, however both were stopped by Narada and Vyasa to prevent the destruction of the world.

== Uses ==
There are numerous instances within Sanskrit theological scriptures where the Brahmastra is used or its use is threatened, including:

Maharaja Kaushika (who later became Brahmarshi Vishvamitra) used it against Maharishi Vasishta, but the Brahmastra was swallowed by Vasishta's Brahmadanda Astra.

Indrajit used the nagasthira against the army of Rama in the Ramayana.
Lakhsmana was injured by this weapon only.
Only the Sanjeevani herbs brought by Hanuman managed to save the brothers and their army from death.
Also, Indrajit used the Brahmastra against Hanuman, but Hanuman survived because of the boon previously given to him by Lord Brahma.

In the Ramayana, a Brahmastra is used by Shri Rama several times: once against Jayanta when he hurt Sita, against Mareecha in their last encounter, and finally the Brahmastra was used in the last battle with the Asura emperor Ravana.
According to the Ramayana, the weapon was also aimed at Varuna to carve a path out of the sea such that Rama's army could march towards the island of Lanka.
However, as Rama loaded the weapon, Varuna appeared and offered to assist the king in crossing the ocean.
But once invoked, the Brahmastra must be discharged, and hence it was instead aimed towards Dhrumatulya, falling at of modern-day Rajasthan, causing it to become a desert for eons to come.
This incident is mentioned in Yuddha Kanda 22 Sarga, Verse 31.

==
See also ==
Sanskrit Epics
Ramayana
Mahabharata
Puranas
Brahma
Brahmani
Vyuha


== References ==
This is a list of Infantry weapons used by the Canadian Military throughout its history and military arms used by militaries in pre-Confederation conflicts in Canada.

==
Colonial Era to Confederation (1604 - 1867) ==


===
Black powder rifles, carbines and pistols ===


===
Service rifles and carbines ===
==
Confederation to First World War (1867 - 1914) ==


===
Service Pistols ===


===
Service Rifles ===


==
First World War to Second World War (1914 - 1939) ==


===
Service pistols ===


===
Rifles ===


===
Machine Guns ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Second World War to Cold War (1939 - 1946) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Scout Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Carriers and Armoured Tractors ===


===
Tanks ===


====
Combat Tanks ====


====
Training Tanks ====


===
Self-Propelled Artillery and Anti-Aircraft ===


===
Engineering Vehicles ===


===
Artillery ===


====
Field artillery ====


====
Anti-tank guns ====


====
Anti-aircraft guns ====


==
Cold War to Modern (Cold War and peace keeping weapons until 2003) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Unsorted ==


===
Approved private purchase and secondary side-arms ===


===
Grenades, mines and other explosives ===


===
Infantry mortars ===


===
Bayonets and Knives ===


===
Ammunition ===


===
Swords ===
1897 Pattern British Infantry Officer's Sword
1908 and 1912 Pattern British Army Cavalry Swords
1857 Artillery Officer Sword
1827
Navy Officer Sword
1926
Air Force Officer Sword


===
Uniforms, Load Bearing and Protective Equipment ===
Uniforms
See also:
Battledress, Uniforms of the Canadian Forces

Foreign Service Dress 1900-1903
Service Dress 1903-1939
Canadian Pattern and British Pattern
Khaki Drill
Battle Dress 1939-1967
Denison smock Used by the Airborne
Canadian Para Smock
Bush Dress
Combat Dress -1968-2002
CADPAT camouflage Combat Dress 2002–presentLoad bearing equipment
Oliver Pattern Equipment 1898-19??

1903
Pattern Bandolier Equipment
1937
Pattern Web Equipment
1942 Battle Jerkin
1951 Pattern Web Equipment
1964 Pattern Web Equipment
1982 Pattern Web Equipment
Tactical Vest (or just known as Tac Vest).
2003–PresentHead dress
Canadian military fur wedge cap
Glengarry
Tam o'shanter
Field Service Cap
Beret
Balmoral bonnet
Brodie helmet
Mk II
helmet
Mk III helmet
M1 Helmet
CG634Protective equipment
Fragmentation Protection Vest


==
Present day ==
List of equipment of the Canadian Army


==
References ==


==
External links ==
canadiansoldier.com
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to military science:
Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.
It strives to be a scientific system that if properly employed, will greatly enhance the practitioner's ability to prevail in an armed conflict with any adversary.
To this end, it is unconcerned whether that adversary is an opposing military force, guerrillas or other irregulars, or any adversary who knows of or utilizes military science in response.

==
Topics within military science ==
Military organization
Military education and training
Military history
Military geography
Military technology and equipment
Military strategy and doctrine
Intelligence cycle management
Foreign policy analysis
Diplomacy
== Types of military technology ==
Weapon
Armour – protective clothing intended to defend its wearer from intentional harm in combat and military engagements, typically associated with soldiers
Artillery – large caliber weapons firing projectiles one at a time.

Artillery pieces are crew serviced weapons that provide direct or indirect trajectories for the shell
Medieval siege weaponry
Fortifications – military constructions and buildings designed for defense in warfare–
Martial arts – also known as fighting systems, martial arts are bodies of codified practices or traditions of training for unarmed and armed combat, usually without the use of guns and other modern weapons–
Mêlée – hand-to-hand combat or mano-a-mano; weapons commonly used in mêlée include swords, clubs, spears, axes, or fists: almost any tool with which one can hit someone else
Military vehicles – are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces
Armoured fighting vehicle
Armoured personnel carrier
Tank
Military aviation and military aircraft – Military aviation include such areas as transport, bombing, surveillance, and aerial warfare
Military communications – the transmission medium that links military components on the battlefield
Communications
Military engineer
Military robots – autonomous or remote-controlled devices designed for military applications
Unmanned Ground Vehicles
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicles
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles
Military thought and planning –
military tactics, strategy, and doctrine
Military doctrine – level of military planning between national strategy and unit-level
Military strategy – collective name for planning the conduct of warfare
Military tactics – collective name for methods of engaging and defeating an enemy in battle
Military unit – an organization within an armed force.
It may consist of any number of soldiers, ships, vehicles, or aircraft.
Armies, navies, and air forces, are organised hierarchically into groups of various sizes for functional, tactical and administrative purposes
Military rank
Comparative military ranks
Munitions – often defined as a synonym for ammunition.
A slightly broader definition would include bombs, missiles, warheads, and mines
Bullet
Missile
Bomb
Mine
Landmine
Naval mine
Naval warfare – combat in and on seas and oceans
Navy
Naval ship
Submarine
Small arms and firearms
– a firearm is a kinetic energy weapon that fires either a single or multiple projectiles propelled at high velocity by the gases produced by action of the rapid confined burning of a propellant


==
Military by region ==
List of militaries by country
List of air forces
List of armies by country
List of navies
List of military special forces units
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army


==
History of military science and technology ==
Military history
===
By historical period ===
Prehistoric warfare
Ancient warfare
Medieval warfare
Gunpowder warfare
Industrial warfare
Total war
Irregular warfare
Modern warfare
===
By battlespace ===
Air power history
History of aerial warfare
Army history
History of land warfare
History of information warfare
History of espionage
Nuclear espionage
Atomic spies
History of surveillance
Naval history
History of naval warfare
History of space warfare
===
By terrain ===
History of arctic warfare
History of cyber-warfare
History of desert warfare
History of jungle warfare
History of mountain warfare
History of urban warfare


===
By weapon technology ===
History of armoured warfare
History of artillery
History of biological warfare
History of cavalry
History of chemical warfare
History of electronic warfare
History of infantry
History of mechanized warfare
History of sea-based and land-based mine warfare
History of nuclear warfare
History of nuclear weapons
History of psychological warfare
History of radiological warfare
History of ski warfare
History of submarine warfare


===
History of military tactics ===
History of amphibious warfare
History of asymmetric warfare
History of attrition warfare
History of cavalry tactics
History of conventional warfare
History of fortification
History of guerrilla warfare
History of hand to hand combat
History of invasion
History of joint warfare
History of maneuver warfare
Siege warfare
Total warfare
Trench warfare
History of unconventional warfare


===
History of military strategy ===
History of economic warfare
History of grand strategy
History of operational warfare


==
General military science and technology concepts ==
Aircraft
Bomber
Fighter aircraft
Aircraft carrier
Air superiority
Basic training
Battlespace
Defense
Draft
Exchange officer
Maginot line
Militaria
Military Aid to the Civil Power
Military Aid to the Civil Community
Military academy
Military courtesy
Military fiat
Military history
Military incompetence
Military logistics
Junta
Military organization
Military rule (disambiguation)
Military science
Military tactics
Military technology and equipment
Mutually assured destruction (MAD)
Napalm
Nuclear missile
SLBM
ICBM
MIRV
Tactical nuclear weapon
Radar
Recruiting
Sonar
Strategic Bombing
Troop density
War crime (list)
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
Mass murder
War rape


==
Influential military strategists ==
Following are examples from throughout history of prominently influential military strategists:

Cyrus the Great
Sun Tzu – Chinese military general, strategist, and philosopher during the Zhou dynasty's Spring and Autumn Period.
He is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War, an extremely influential ancient Chinese book on military strategy.

Sun Bin
Chanakya
Alexander the Great
Chandragupta Maurya
Hannibal
Qin Shi Huang
Julius Caesar
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa
Zhuge Liang
Khalid ibn al-Walid
Genghis Khan
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
Frederick the Great
Napoleon Bonaparte
Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington
Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher
Antoine-Henri Jomini
Nathan Bedford Forrest
Carl von Clausewitz – German-Prussian soldier and military theorist who stressed the psychological and political aspects of war.
His ideas have been widely influential in military theory and have had a strong influence on German military thought specifically.

Robert E. Lee
Ulysses S. Grant
William Tecumseh Sherman
Helmuth von Moltke
the Elder
Alfred von Schlieffen
Hans Delbrück
Alfred Thayer Mahan
Ferdinand Foch
Giulio Douhet
Billy Mitchell
J. F. C. Fuller
B. H. Liddell Hart
Hans von Seeckt
Heinz Guderian
Erwin Rommel
Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke
Bernard Montgomery,
1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein
George Marshall
Dean Acheson


==
Military science and technology lists ==
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army
List of air forces
List of navies
List of armies
List of battles


==
See also ==
Outline of war
Military science fiction


==
External links ==
Collection of military handbooks etc.
In Hinduism, an astra (Sanskrit: अस्त्र) was a supernatural weapon, presided over by a specific deity and imbued with spiritual and occult powers that caused its effect or impact.
Later the word came to denote any weapon which was used by releasing it from one's hand (e.g. an arrow), as opposed to being used while held like a sword (Shastra).
In Ramayana and Mahabharata, Arjuna had more astras than any other warrior.
Various texts have stated that Arjuna possessed almost all astras except Narayanastra.

==
Astradhari ==
The bearer of the weapon is called an Astradhari (Sanskrit: अस्त्रधारी).

==
Summoning of Astra ==
To summon or use an astra required use of a specific incantation or invocation.
The deity invoked would then endow the weapon with supernatural powers, making it impossible to counter through regular means.
Specific conditions existed involving the usage of astras, the violation of which could be fatal.
Because of the power involved, the knowledge involving an astra was passed in the Guru-shishya tradition from a Guru (teacher) to a Shishya (pupil) by word of mouth alone, and only following the establishment of the student's character.
Certain astras had to be handed down from the deity involved directly, knowledge of the incantation being insufficient.

==
Astras in Hindu Epics ==
Astras come into importance mainly in the Ramayana and Mahabharata, where they are used in the great battles described in each epic.
They are depicted as used by archers such as Parashurama, Rama, Lakshman, Meghanada (Indrajit), Ravana, Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Ashwatthama, Arjuna and other warriors.

The divya ("divine")
astras were generally invoked into arrows, although they could potentially be used with anything.
Ashwatthama invoked Brahmashirsha astra using a blade of grass as his weapon.
Arjuna was capable of shooting all of his celestial weapons including Pashupatastra by the power of his mind alone.[1]


==
See also ==
Astras of Arjuna
The Ramayana
The Mahabharata
Bhagavata Purana


== References ==
A pulsed energy weapon is any weapon that:

uses pulses of electricity to fire a projectile, or
operates by transferring electric current to its target.
These weapons often use large capacitors to build up a charge which is released when the weapon is fired.
Large high-end systems sometimes use compulsators which store energy using rotational inertia.
Weapons which do not use projectiles, such as the stun gun and laser gun, do not need any ammunition other than a power source.

==
Common pulsed energy weapons ==
Taser -
A combination of a conventional weapon & electrical weapon
Stun gun


==
Experimental pulsed energy weapons ==
Railgun
Coilgun
Certain lasers


==
Fictional pulsed energy weapons ==
Some rayguns and plasma rifles
Weapons mounted on space ships in the Star Trek universe
Most weapons used by advanced species in the Stargate universe
The most common weapon type in the Farscape television series


==
References ==


==
See also ==
Directed energy weapon
The following is a list of lists of currently active military equipment by country.

==
Afghanistan ==
List of military equipment used by Afghan National Army


==
Albania ==
List of equipment of the Albanian Armed Forces


==
Algeria ==
List of equipment of the Algerian People's National Army


==
Angola ==
List of equipment of the Angolan Army


==
Argentina ==
Active Argentine Navy ships
Active Argentina military aircraft
Equipment of the Argentine Army


==
Armenia ==
List of equipment of the Armenian Armed Forces


==
Australia ==
Current Royal Australian Navy ships
Current Royal Australian Air Force Aircraft
Equipment of the Australian Army


==
Austria ==
List of equipment of the Austrian Army


==
Azerbaijan ==
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Land Forces
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Air Force


==
Bangladesh ==
Currently active ships of the Bangladesh Navy
List of ships of the Bangladesh Coast Guard
Active aircraft of the Bangladesh Air Force
Active Bangladesh military aircraft
Equipment of the Bangladesh Army


==
Belarus ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Belarus


==
Belgium ==
List of equipment of the Belgian Land Component


==
Bhutan ==
List of equipment used by the Royal Bhutan Army


==
Bolivia ==
List of equipment of the Bolivian Armed Forces


==
Bosnia and Herzegovina ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina


==
Botswana ==
List of equipment of the Botswana Ground Force


==
Brazil ==
Currently active Brazil military watercraft
Currently active Brazil military land vehicles
Active Brazilian military aircraft
Modern equipment of the Brazilian Army


==
Bulgaria ==
Modern equipment of the Bulgarian land forces


==
Burkina Faso ==
List of equipment of the Burkina Faso Armed Forces


==
Cambodia ==
List of equipment of the Royal Cambodian Army


==
Canada ==
Fleet of the Royal Canadian Navy
List of aircraft of the Royal Canadian Air Force
List of active Canadian military aircraft
List of modern Canadian Army equipment


==
Chad ==
List of equipment of the Chadian Ground Forces


==
Chile ==
List of active ships of the Chilean Navy
List of aircraft of the Chilean Air Force
List of equipment of the Chilean Army


==
China ==
Active Chinese Navy ships
Active Chinese military aircraft
Aircraft of the People's Liberation Army Air Force
Equipment of the PLA Ground Force


==
Colombia ==
List of equipment of the National Army of Colombia


==
Comoros ==
List of equipment of the Comorian Army


==
Croatia ==
List of equipment of the Croatian Army


==
Cuba ==
List of equipment of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces


==
Cyprus ==
List of military equipment of Cyprus


==
Czech Republic ==
Military equipment of the Czech Republic


==
DR Congo ==
List of equipment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Army


==
Denmark ==
List of equipment of the Royal Danish Army


==
Djibouti ==
List of equipment of the Djiboutian Army


==
Dominican Republic ==
List of equipment of the Dominican Army


==
Egypt ==
Equipment of the Egyptian Army


==
El Salvador ==
List of equipment of the Salvadoran Army


==
Eritrea ==
List of equipment of the Eritrean Army


==
Ecuador ==
List of equipment of the Ecuadorian Army


==
Estonia ==
List of equipment of the Estonian Defence Forces


==
Ethiopia ==
List of equipment of the Ethiopian National Defence Force


==
Finland ==
List of equipment of the Finnish Army
List of equipment of the Finnish Navy
List of active Finnish Navy ships
List of military aircraft of Finland


==
France ==
Active French Navy ships
Modern equipment and uniform of the French Army
Active French military aircraft


==
Georgia ==
List of equipment of the Defense Forces of Georgia


==
Germany ==
List of modern equipment of the German Army
Active German Navy ships


==
Greece ==
List of equipment of the Hellenic Army
List of active Hellenic Navy ships


==
India ==
Active Indian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indian Army
Active Indian military aircraft
Guided missiles of India
Weapon systems of the Indian Navy


==
Indonesia ==
Equipment of the Indonesian Navy
List of active Indonesian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indonesian Army
Equipment of the Indonesian Air Force


==
Iran ==
List of active Iranian Navy ships
List of active Iranian military Aircraft
Equipment of Iranian army


==
Ireland ==
Modern equipment of the Irish Army
List of aircraft of the Irish Air Corps


==
Italy
==
Equipment of the Italian Army
List of active Italian military aircraft
List of active Italian Navy ships
List of aircraft used by Italian Air Force


==
Japan ==
Active Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force ships
List of modern equipment of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force


==
South Korea ==
List of active Republic of Korea Navy ships
List of equipment of the Republic of Korea Army


==
Malaysia
==
Equipment of the Malaysian Army
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Air Force
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Navy
List of aircraft of the Malaysian Armed Forces


==
Myanmar ==
List of equipment of the Myanmar Army
List of equipment in the Myanmar Navy


==
Malta ==
Equipment of the Armed Forces
Active aircraft of the Air Wing
Active vessels of the Maritime Squadron


==
Morocco
==
List of active Moroccan military aircraft


==
Netherlands ==
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Army
Active Royal Netherlands Navy ships
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Air Force


==
New Zealand ==
List of active New Zealand military aircraft
List of active Royal New Zealand Navy ships
List of individual weapons of the New Zealand armed forces


==
Norway ==
List of equipment of the Norwegian Army
List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships


==
Pakistan ==
List of active Pakistan Navy ships
Equipment of the Pakistan Army
List of missiles of Pakistan
List of active Pakistan Air Force aircraft


==
Philippines ==
 Equipments of the Philippine Army
Current ships of the Philippine Navy
Current aircraft of the Philippine Air Force


==
Poland
==
Equipment of the Polish Army
List of ships of the Polish Navy


==
Portugal ==
Equipment of the Portuguese Army
Active Portuguese Navy ships
List of aircraft of the Portuguese Air Force


==
Romania ==
Equipment of the Romanian Armed Forces
List of aircraft of the Romanian Air Force


==
Russia ==
List of active Russian Navy ships
List of active Russian Air Force aircraft
List of active Russian military aircraft
List of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces


==
Serbia ==
List of equipment of the Serbian Armed Forces


==
South Africa ==
List of equipment of the South African Army
List of aircraft of the South African Air Force
List of weapon systems of the South African Air Force
List of active South African Navy ships


==
Spain ==
List of active Spanish Navy ships
List of currently active Spain military land vehicles
List of active Spanish military aircraft


==
Sri Lanka ==
Sri Lanka Army Equipment
List of current Sri Lanka Navy ships
Sri Lanka Air Force Inventory


==
Sweden ==
List of equipment of the Swedish Army


==
Switzerland ==
List of equipment of the Swiss Armed Forces


==
Syria ==
Equipment of the Syrian Army


==
Thailand ==
List of equipment of the Royal Thai Army
Equipment of the Royal Thai Navy
Aircraft of the Royal Thai Air Force


==
Turkey ==
List of active aircraft of the Turkish Air Force
List of equipment of the Turkish Land Forces
List of active Turkish Navy ships


==
Ukraine ==
Active Ukrainian Navy ships
Equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces


==
United Kingdom ==
Active Royal Navy ships
List of active Royal Marines military watercraft
Royal Fleet Auxiliary
Active United Kingdom military aircraft
Modern equipment of the British Army
Active Royal Navy weapon systems


==
United States
==
Equipment of the United States Armed Forces
Currently active United States military missiles
List of currently active United States military land vehicles
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
Uniforms of the United States Armed Forces
Equipment of the United States Army
Equipment of the United States Marine Corps
Equipment of the United States Navy
Currently active ships of the United States Navy
Currently active United States military watercraft
Equipment of the United States Air Force
Currently active United States military aircraft
Equipment of the United States Coast Guard


==
See also ==
List of military special forces units
The following outline is provided as a topical overview of science:
Science is both the systematic effort of acquiring knowledge through observation, experimentation and reasoning, and the body of knowledge thus acquired.
The word "science" comes from the Latin word "scientia" meaning knowledge.
A practitioner of science is called a "scientist".
Modern science respects objective logical reasoning, and follows a set of core procedures or rules to determine the nature and underlying natural laws of the universe and everything in it.
Some scientists do not know of the rules themselves, but follow them through research policies.
These procedures are known as the scientific method.

==
Essence of science ==
Research – systematic investigation into existing or new knowledge.

Scientific discovery – observation of new phenomena, new actions, or new events and
providing new reasoning to explain the knowledge gathered through such observations with previously acquired knowledge from abstract thought and everyday experiences.

Laboratory – facility that provides controlled conditions in which scientific research, experiments, and measurement may be performed.

Objectivity – the idea that scientists, in attempting to uncover truths about the natural world, must aspire to eliminate personal or cognitive biases, a priori commitments, emotional involvement, etc.

Inquiry – any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem.
==
Scientific method ==
Scientific method
(outline) – body of techniques for investigating phenomena and acquiring new knowledge, as well as for correcting and integrating previous knowledge.
It is based on observable, empirical, measurable evidence, and subject to laws of reasoning, both deductive and inductive.

Empirical method –
Experimental method –
The steps involved to produce a reliable and logical conclusion include:
Conducting initial research and asking a question about a natural phenomenon
Making observations of the phenomenon
and/or collecting data about it
Forming a hypothesis – proposed explanation for a phenomenon.
For a hypothesis to be a scientific hypothesis, the scientific method requires that one can test it.
Scientists generally base scientific hypotheses on previous observations that cannot satisfactorily be explained with the available scientific theories.

Predicting a logical consequence of the hypothesis
Testing the hypothesis through an experiment – methodical procedure carried out with the goal of verifying, falsifying, or establishing the validity of a hypothesis.
The 3 types of scientific experiments are:
Controlled experiment – experiment that compares the results obtained from an experimental sample against a control sample, which is practically identical to the experimental sample except for the one aspect the effect of which is being tested (the independent variable).

Natural experiment – empirical study in which the experimental conditions (i.e., which units receive which treatment) are determined by nature or by other factors out of the control of the experimenters and yet the treatment assignment process is arguably exogenous.
Thus, natural experiments are observational studies and are not controlled in the traditional sense of a randomized experiment.

Observational study – draws inferences about the possible effect of a treatment on subjects, where the assignment of subjects into a treated group versus a control group is outside the control of the investigator.

Field experiment – applies the scientific method to experimentally examine an intervention in the real world (or as many experimentalists like to say, naturally occurring environments) rather than in the laboratory.

See also field research.

Gather and analyze data from experiments or observations, including indicators of uncertainty.

Draw conclusions by comparing data with predictions.

Possible outcomes:
Conclusive:
The hypothesis is falsified by the data.

Data are consistent with the hypothesis.

Data are consistent with alternative hypotheses.

Inconclusive:
Data are not relevant to the hypothesis, or data and predictions are incommensurate.

There is too much uncertainty in the data to draw any conclusion.

Further steps include peer review and enabling others to reproduce or falsify the observations and/or conclusions
Deductive-nomological model
Scientific modelling –
Models of scientific method
Hypothetico-deductive model – proposed description of scientific method.
According to it, scientific inquiry proceeds by formulating a hypothesis in a form that could conceivably be falsified by a test on observable data.
A test that could and does run contrary to predictions of the hypothesis is taken as a falsification of the hypothesis.
A test that could but does not run contrary to the hypothesis corroborates the theory.

==
Branches of science ==
Branches of science – divisions within science with respect to the entity or system concerned, which typically embodies its own terminology and nomenclature.
===
Formal science ===
Formal science – branches of knowledge that are concerned with formal systems, such as those under the branches of: logic, mathematics, computer science, statistics, and some aspects of linguistics.
Unlike other sciences, the formal sciences are not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the real world, but instead with the properties of formal systems based on definitions and rules.

Branches of formal science (also known as the formal sciences)


===
Natural science ===
Natural science
(outline) – major branch of science, that tries to explain and predict nature's phenomena, based on empirical evidence.
In natural science, hypotheses must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.
Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are among the criteria and methods used for this purpose.
Natural science can be broken into two main branches: biology, and physical science.
Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

Branches of natural science (also known as the natural sciences)


===
Social science ===
Social science – study of the social world constructed between humans.
The social sciences usually limit themselves to an anthropomorphically centric view of these interactions with minimal emphasis on the inadvertent impact of social human behavior on the external environment (physical, biological, ecological, etc.).
'
Social' is the concept of exchange/influence of ideas, thoughts, and relationship interactions (resulting in harmony, peace, self enrichment, favoritism, maliciousness, justice seeking, etc.)
between humans.
The scientific method is used in many social sciences, albeit adapted to the needs of the social construct being studied.

Branches of social science (also known as the social sciences)


===
Applied science ===
Applied science – branch of science that applies existing scientific knowledge to develop more practical applications, including inventions and other technological advancements.

Branches of applied science (also known as the applied sciences)


==
Types of scientific fields ==
Exact science – any field of science capable of accurate quantitative expression or precise predictions and rigorous methods of testing hypotheses, especially reproducible experiments involving quantifiable predictions and measurements.

Fundamental science – science that describes the most basic objects, forces, relations between them and laws governing them, such that all other phenomena may be in principle derived from them following the logic of scientific reductionism.

Hard and soft science –
colloquial terms often used when comparing scientific fields of academic research or scholarship, with hard meaning perceived as being more scientific, rigorous, or accurate.
==
Politics of science ==
Disruptive technology – innovation that helps create a new market and value network, and eventually goes on to disrupt an existing market and value network (over a few years or decades),
displacing an earlier technology.

Kansas evolution hearings – series of hearings held in Topeka, Kansas, United States 5 to 12 May 2005 by the Kansas State Board of Education and its State Board Science Hearing Committee to change how evolution and the origin of life would be taught in the state's public high school science classes.

List of books about the politics of science – list of books about the politics of science.

Politicization of science – politicization of science is the manipulation of science for political gain.

Science by press release – refers to scientists who put an unusual focus on publicizing results of research in the media.

==
History of science ==
History of science – history of science in general
History of scientific method – history of scientific method is a history of the methodology of scientific inquiry, as differentiated from a history of science in general.

Theories/sociology of science – sociology and philosophy of science, as well as the entire field of science studies, have in the 20th century been occupied with the question of large-scale patterns and trends in the development of science, and asking questions about how science "works" both in a philosophical and practical sense.

Historiography – study of the history and methodology of the sub-discipline of history, known as the history of science, including its disciplinary aspects and practices (methods, theories, schools) and to the study of its own historical development ("History of History of Science", i.e., the history of the discipline called History of Science).

History of pseudoscience – history of pseudoscience is the study of pseudoscientific theories over time.
A pseudoscience is a set of ideas that presents itself as science, while it does not meet the criteria to properly be called such.

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific thought – lists the major landmarks across all scientific philosophy and methodological sciences.

===
By period ===
History of science in early cultures – history of science in early cultures refers to the study of protoscience in ancient history, prior to the development of science in the Middle Ages.

History of science in Classical Antiquity – history of science in classical antiquity encompasses both those inquiries into the workings of the universe aimed at such practical goals as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses and those abstract investigations known as natural philosophy.

History of science in the Middle Ages – Science in the Middle Ages comprised the study of nature, including practical disciplines, the mathematics and natural philosophy in medieval Europe.

History of science in the Renaissance – During the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, mathematics, manufacturing, and engineering.

Science and inventions of Leonardo da Vinci – Italian polymath, regarded as the epitome of the "Renaissance Man", displaying skills in numerous diverse areas of study.

Scientific revolution –
scientific revolution is an era associated primarily with the 16th and 17th centuries during which new ideas and knowledge in physics, astronomy, biology, medicine and chemistry transformed medieval and ancient views of nature and laid the foundations for modern science.

Governmental impact on science during WWII –
Governmental impact on science during World War II represents the effect of public administration on technological development that provided many advantages to the armed forces, economies and societies in their strategies during the war.

====
By date ====
List of years in science – events related to science or technology which occurred in the listed year
(current year in the box on the right).

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific experiments – shows the date of publication of major scientific experiments.

Timeline of the history of the scientific method – shows an overview of the cultural inventions that have contributed to the development of the scientific method.

List of science timelines
– more timeline articles
===
By field ===
History of natural science – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural philosophy – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural history – scientific research of plants or animals, leaning more towards observational rather than experimental methods of study, and encompasses more research published in magazines than in academic journals.

History of biology – traces the study of the living world from ancient to modern times.

History of ecology – history of the science of ecology.

History of molecular biology – begins in the 1930s with the convergence of various, previously distinct biological disciplines: biochemistry, genetics, microbiology, and virology.

History of astronomy –
Timeline
History of chemistry –
By 1000 BC, ancient civilizations used technologies that would eventually form the basis of the various branches of chemistry.

History of geography
History of geology –
Timeline
History of meteorology – Timeline
History of physics –
As forms of science historically developed out of philosophy, physics was originally referred to as natural philosophy, a field of study concerned with "the workings of nature."

History of science and technology
History of the social sciences – has origin in the common stock of Western philosophy and shares various precursors, but began most intentionally in the early 19th century with the positivist philosophy of science.

History of archaeology –
Timeline
History of cognitive science
History of criminal justice –
Throughout the history of criminal justice, evolving forms of punishment, added rights for offenders and victims, and policing reforms have reflected changing customs, political ideals, and economic conditions.

History of economics – study of different thinkers and theories in the subject that became political economy and economics from the ancient world to the present day.

History of education – development of systematic methods of teaching and learning.

History of law – study of how law has evolved and why it changed.

History of linguistics – endeavors to describe and explain the human faculty of language.

History of marketing – recognized discipline, along with concomitant changes in marketing theory and practice.

History of parapsychology
History of political science – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

History of psychology – Timeline
History of sociology –
Timeline


===
By region ===


====
History of science in present states, by continent ====
See –
Category:Science and technology by continent


====
History of science in historic states ====
Science and technology of the Han Dynasty
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire
Science and technology of the Song Dynasty
Science and technology in the Soviet Union
Science and technology of the Tang Dynasty


==
Philosophy of science ==
Philosophy of science – questions the assumptions, foundations, methods and implications of science.

Models of scientific inquiry


==
Adoption, use, results and coordination of science ==
Science and technology studies
Scientometrics
Altmetrics
Article-level metrics
Expert elicitation
Lists of science and technology awards
Research and development
Innovation
Science policy
Knowledge#Scientific
knowledge
Funding of science


==
Technology and mechanisms of science ==
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Laboratory automation
History of communication
Internet research
Scientific journal
Peer review
Metascience


== Scientific community ==
Scientific community – group of all interacting scientists.

===
Scientific organizations ===
Academy of Sciences – national academy or another learned society dedicated to sciences.

===
Scientists ===
Scientist – practitioner of science; an individual who uses scientific method to objectively inquire into the nature of reality—be it the fundamental laws of physics or how people behave.

There are many names for scientists, often named in relation to the job that they do.
One example of this is a biologist, a scientist who studies biology (the study of living organisms and their environments).

====
Types of scientist ====


=====
By field =====
The scientific fields mentioned below are generally described by the science they study.

Agricultural scientist – broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.

Archaeologist – study of human activity, primarily through the recovery and analysis of the material culture and environmental data that they have left behind, which includes artifacts, architecture, biofacts and cultural landscapes (the archaeological record).

Astronomer – astronomer is a scientist who studies celestial bodies such as planets, stars and galaxies.

Astrophysicist – branch of astronomy that deals with the physics of the universe, including the physical properties of celestial objects, as well as their interactions and behavior.

Biologist – scientist devoted to the study of living organisms and their relationship to their environment.

Astrobiologist – study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of extraterrestrial life.

Biophysicist – interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physical science to study biological systems.

Biotechnologist – field of applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Botanist – discipline of biology, is the science of plant life.

Cognitive scientists – scientific study of the mind and its processes.

Ecologist – scientific study of the relations that living organisms have with respect to each other and their natural environment.

Entomologist – scientific study of insects, a branch of arthropodology.

Evolutionary biologist – sub-field of biology concerned with the study of the evolutionary processes that have given rise to the diversity of life on Earth.

Geneticist – biologist who studies genetics, the science of genes, heredity, and variation of organisms.

Herpetologist – branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians (including frogs, toads, salamanders, newts, and gymnophiona) and reptiles (including snakes, lizards, amphibians, turtles, terrapins, tortoises, crocodiles, and the tarantulas).

Immunologist – branch of biomedical science that covers the study of all aspects of the immune system in all organisms.

Ichthyologist – study of fish.

Lepidopterist – person who specializes in the study of Lepidoptera, members of an order encompassing moths and the three superfamilies of butterflies, skipper butterflies, and moth-butterflies.

Marine biologist – scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water.

Medical scientist – basic research, applied research, or translational research conducted to aid and support the body of knowledge in the field of medicine.

Microbiologist – study of microscopic organisms.

Mycologist – branch of biology concerned with the study of fungi, including their genetic and biochemical properties, their taxonomy and their use to humans as a source for tinder, medicinals (e.g., penicillin), food (e.g., beer, wine, cheese, edible mushrooms) and entheogens, as well as their dangers, such as poisoning or infection.

Neuroscientist – individual who studies the scientific field of neuroscience or any of its related sub-fields.

Ornithologist – branch of zoology that concerns the study of birds.

Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life.

Pathologist – precise study and diagnosis of disease.

Pharmacologist – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

Physiologist – science of the function of living systems.

Zoologist – branch of biology that relates to the animal kingdom, including the structure, embryology, evolution, classification, habits, and distribution of all animals, both living and extinct.

Chemist – scientist trained in the study of chemistry.

Analytical chemist – study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

Biochemist – study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.

Inorganic chemist – branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

Organic chemist – subdiscipline within chemistry involving the scientific study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

Physical chemist – study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

Earth scientist – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.

Geologist – scientist who studies the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth as well as the processes and history that has shaped it.

Glaciologist – study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

Hydrologist – study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Limnologist – study of inland waters
Meteorologist – study of weather
Mineralogist – study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

Oceanographer – branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life
Seismologist – scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies.

Volcanologist – study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

Informatician – science of information, the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems.

Computer scientist – scientist who has acquired knowledge of computer science, the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation
Library scientist – interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools of management, information technology, education, and other areas to libraries; the collection, organization, preservation, and dissemination of information resources; and the political economy of information.

Management scientist – study of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions.

Mathematician – person with an extensive knowledge of mathematics, a field that has been informally defined as being concerned with numbers, data, collection, quantity, structure, space, and change.

Statistician – someone who works with theoretical or applied statistics.

Military scientist – process of translating national defense policy to produce military capability by employing military scientists, including theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and military personnel responsible for prototyping.

Physicist – scientist who does research in physics
Psychologist – professional or academic title used by individuals who practice psychology
Abnormal psychologist – branch of psychology that studies unusual patterns of behavior, emotion and thought, which may or may not be understood as precipitating a mental disorder.

Educational psychologist – psychologist
whose differentiating functions may include diagnostic and psycho-educational assessment, psychological counseling in educational communities (students, teachers, parents and academic authorities), community-type psycho-educational intervention, and mediation, coordination, and referral to other professionals, at all levels of the educational system.

Biopsychologist – application of the principles of biology (in particular neurobiology), to the study of physiological, genetic, and developmental mechanisms of behavior in human and non-human animals.

Clinical psychologist – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Comparative psychologist – scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior.

Cognitive psychologist – subdiscipline of psychology exploring internal mental processes.
It is the study of how people perceive, remember, think, speak, and solve problems.

Developmental psychologist – scientific study of systematic psychological changes, emotional changes, and perception changes that occur in human beings over the course of their life span.

Evolutionary psychologist – approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological traits such as memory, perception, and language from a modern evolutionary perspective.

Experimental psychologist – study of behavior and the processes that underlie it, by means of experiment
Neuropsychologist – studies the structure and function of the brain as they relate to specific psychological processes and behaviors.

Social psychologist – scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others.

Social scientist –  field of study concerned with society and human behaviors.

Anthropologist – study of humanity.

Ethnologist – branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the origins, distribution, technology, religion, language, and social structure of the ethnic, racial, and/or national divisions of humanity.

Communication scientist – academic field that deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning.

Criminologist – study of criminal behavior
Demographer – statistical study of populations
Economist –
professional in the social science discipline of economics.

Geographer – geographer is a scholar whose area of study is geography, the study of Earth's natural environment and human society.

Political economist – study of production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.

Political scientist – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

Sociologist –
Technologist
Architectural technologist – specialist in the technology of building design and construction
Educational technologist – specialist in tools to enhance learning
Engineering technologist – specialist who implements technology within a field of engineering
Industrial technologist – specialist in the management, operation, and maintenance of complex operation systems
Medical Technologist – healthcare professional who performs diagnostic analysis on a variety of body fluids
Radiologic technologist – medical professional who applies doses of radiation for imaging and treatment
Surgical technologist – health specialist who facilitates the conduct of invasive surgical procedures
=====
By employment status =====
Academic – community of students and scholars engaged in higher education and research.

Corporate Scientist – someone who is employed by a business to do research and development for the benefit of that business
Layperson – someone who is not an expert or someone who has not had professional training
Gentleman scientist – financially independent scientist who pursues scientific study as a hobby.

Government scientist – scientist employed by a country's government


====
Famous scientists ====
Aristotle – Greek philosopher and polymath, a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great.

Archimedes – Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer.

Andreas Vesalius – Flemish anatomist, physician, and author of one of the most influential books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica
(On the Structure of the Human Body).

Nicolaus Copernicus – Renaissance astronomer and the first person to formulate a comprehensive heliocentric cosmology which displaced the Earth from the center of the universe.

Galileo Galilei – Italian physicist, mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher who played a major role in the Scientific Revolution.

Johannes Kepler – German mathematician, astronomer and astrologer.
A key figure in the 17th century scientific revolution, he is best known for his eponymous laws of planetary motion, codified by later astronomers, based on his works Astronomia nova, Harmonices Mundi, and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy.

René Descartes – French philosopher, mathematician, and writer who spent most of his adult life in the Dutch Republic.

Isaac Newton – English physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural philosopher, alchemist, and theologian, who has been "considered by many to be the greatest and most influential scientist who ever lived."

Leonhard Euler – pioneering Swiss mathematician and physicist.

Pierre-Simon Laplace – French mathematician and astronomer whose work was pivotal to the development of mathematical astronomy and statistics.

Alexander von Humboldt – German geographer, naturalist and explorer, and the younger brother of the Prussian minister, philosopher and linguist Wilhelm von Humboldt.

Charles Darwin – Charles Robert Darwin FRS (12 February 1809 - 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist.[I]
He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors, and proposed the scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process that he called natural selection.

James Clerk Maxwell – Scottish physicist and mathematician.

Marie Curie – Polish physicist and chemist famous for her pioneering research on radioactivity.

Albert Einstein – German-born theoretical physicist who developed the theory of general relativity, effecting a revolution in physics
Linus Pauling – American chemist, biochemist, peace activist, author, and educator.
He was one of the most influential chemists in history and ranks among the most important scientists of the 20th century.

John Bardeen – American physicist and electrical engineer, the only person to have won the Nobel Prize in Physics
twice
Frederick Sanger – English biochemist and a two-time Nobel laureate in chemistry, the only person to have been so.

Stephen Hawking – British theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author.

==
Science education ==
Science education

Scientific literacy – encompasses written, numerical, and digital literacy as they pertain to understanding science, its methodology, observations, and theories.
Pseudo-scholarship – is a work (e.g., publication, lecture) or body of work that is presented as, but is not, the product of rigorous and objective study or research; the act of producing such work; or the pretended learning upon which it is based.

Science communication


==
See also ==
Outline of academic disciplines
Sci-Mate – open collaboration of scientists using Web 2.0 software to address well known challenges in academic publishing and technology transfer
Science Daily – news website for topical science articles
Phys.org – news website for topical science articles with some public metrics
Science.tv – virtual community for people interested in science
Sci-Hub – Scientific research paper file sharing website
Science studies


=
=
References ==
Military Institute of Technology (MILIT), Pune is an inter-services institution of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of India.
MILIT is considered as soul of earstwhile Institute of Armament Studies (IAT), Girinagar established in year 1952.
It conducts prestigious Defence Services Technical Staff Course and trains officers of the three Services of Indian Armed Forces and officers from friendly foreign countries for command and staff appointments.

==
History ==
The fore-runner of MILIT is the Institute of Armament Studies established within the campus of College of Military Engineering (CME), Dapodi, Pune in 1952.
The Institute then was conducting only the Technical Staff Officers' Course for the Army.
In the ensuing years, several courses were added to the Institute curriculum based on the needs of the three Services, Defence Research and Development Organisation, DGQA, DAQA and Defence PSUs etc.

In 1967, the institute was renamed as "Institute of Armament Technology" (IAT), which moved into the picturesque location of Girinagar, on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake; its present location.
The institute is spread over 496 acres (201 ha) in scenic beautiful location, overlooking Khadakwasla dam, in Sahyadri hills.
From the relatively narrow scope of Armament Studies alone in the Fifties, the role of the institute was considerably enlarged by the Defence R&D Council in 1964 and further in 1981.

On the basis of accreditation by the All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), Pune University recognised eight courses for the award of ME degree in 1982.
The institute acquired the status of a Deemed University in 1999.
It became autonomous w.e.f.
1 April 2006 and was rechristened as Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), a Deemed to be University (DU).
At the same time, thoughts about bifurcating Military Training Wing started mushrooming and same was implemented om 19 Jan 2012.

To have an Institute completely dedicated to the needs of the three Services, a case was initiated to bifurcate MILIT from DIAT (DU).

The major Milestones leading to final formation of MILIT are given subsequently.
==
Campus ==
The institute is located on Pune-Sinhagad-Panshet road on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake at Girinagar, a scenicbeautiful place.
There is an all-weather road between NDA and MILIT.
MILIT Campus is serviced by Pune Municipal Transport bus services route
No 49, 50, 51 and 52.

The campus is spread over 496 acres, divided into Technical Complex and Residential Complex.

The Technical Complex is spread over 100 acres and houses the Academic Block, Administrative Headquarters, 51 Laboratories, library, etc.
of DIAT (DU) and MILIT, Pune.

Residential Complex is spread over 396 acres and has accommodation for 200 staff and student officers with the ancillaries like Officers' Mess, Officers' Institute, JCOs' Mess, MI Room, Sports Complex, CSD Canteen, Helipad, Gole Market with Bank, Post Office,
Gas Agency etc.
KV, Girinagar and MILIT Tiny Tots Primary School are also located in the campus.
Climate – Situated at a height of about 650 meters above mean sea level
, Girinagar has a pleasant and temperate climate.
However, the possibility of chilly nights cannot be ruled out from Nov to Jan.
The temperature varies from 8–40 Celsius during the year.
Summer, Monsoon and Winter seasons extend from Mar–Jun, Jul–Oct and Nov–Feb respectively.

==
Courses ==
In order to meet the specific and futuristic training requirements of Armed Forces, DIAT (DU) was bifurcated to form Military Institute of Training (MILIT), Pune.

MILIT is mandated to conduct 23 courses of varying durations from three days to 48 weeks for the Officers of the three services.

First Technical Staff Course was conducted in Yr 1953–54, later the name of the course was changed to Technical Staff Officer's Course (TSOC)
TSOC-01 was conducted in Yr 1975–76.

On 01 Jul 2018, TSOC-44 course was redesignated as Defence Services Technical Staff Course (DSTSC-01).
The  DSTSC-01 is the pioneer course of all Arms and Inter -Services mid seniority bracket of Officers whose Non Tech and Tech phase commenced from 4 June 18 and 2 July 18 respectively.
The student officers are being equipped, trained and nurtured by exposing them to cutting-edge technologies, latest procurement procedures and concrete military training so as to mould the course to face, handle and emerge victorious in all future challenges.

== See also ==
Indian National Defence University
Military Academies in
India
Sainik school


==
References ==
https://ids.nic.in/milit.php

Pune military institute of technology adopts Donje village, Indian Express
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/First-batch-of-tech-staff-officers-pass-out-of-Military-Institute-of-Technology/articleshow/13424150.cms
https://www.robolab.in/clients/military-institute-of-technology-pune/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/events/pune/military-institute-of-technology-at-defexpo-2018/articleshow/63882547.cms?utm_source=whatsapp&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=TOIMobile
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/seminar-on-challenges-of-self-reliance-in-defence-requirements-organised-5175747/
https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/128-officers-pass-out-from-military-institute-of-technology-2802674/
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village-5120085/
https://www.nyoooz.com/news/pune/1072795/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village/
https://www.punekarnews.in/valedictory-function-at-milit/
http://www.punekarnews.in/148-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/
http://www.uniindia.com/~/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/States/news/1234974.html
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-milit-city-18347
http://www.dainikprabhat.com/%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%95%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b7%e0%a4%ae-%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%88%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%af-%e0%a4%a6%e0%a4%b2%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a0%e0%a5%80-%e0%a4%86%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%9f/
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/milit-organises-workshop-ai-25090
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-over-22-officers-from-three-services-take-part-in-the-sixth-chapter-of-capstar-5365619/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/military-officials-deliberate-digitisation-of-terrorism-social-media-misuse/articleshow/65903393.cms?utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=iOSapp&utm_source=WhatsApp.com
https://twitter.com/HQ_IDS_India/status/1033041483644002305https://www.punekarnews.in/milit-handle-bar-cycling-club-to-organise-a-farewell-ride-for-avm-vivek-rajhans-tomorrow/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-military-institute-of-technology-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.mypunepulse.com/milit-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-maj-gen-hari-singh-is-the-new-commandant-of-military-institute-of-technology/


==
External links ==
https://www.ids.nic.in/
https://www.nda.nic.in/
http://www.unipune.ac.in/
Military art (French: L'Art de la Guerre;
lit.
art of war) is a field of theoretical research and training methodology in military science used in the conduct of military operations on land, in the maritime or air environments.
Military art includes the study and application of the principles of warfare and laws of war that apply equally to the closely interrelated military strategy, operational art and tactics.
Exercise of military art is highly dependent on the economics and logistics supporting the armed forces, their military technology and equipment, and reflects the social influences on the military organisation exercising military art.
Often misunderstood due to its 19th-century perception as generally "including the entire subject of war", it is primarily, as the term implies, the expression of creative thinking on the part of the decision-makers in employing their forces, with the map of the area of operations as a veritable canvas, and the movement of forces commonly marked on the map with arrows, as brush strokes.
Less imaginatively it was defined in France during the 19th century as
The art of war is the art of concentrating and employing, at the opportune moment, a superior force of troops upon the decisive point.

and
The art of divining the intention of the enemy from slight indications is one which rarely misleads, and is one of the most precious attributes of military genius.

It is not well known that many of the greatest military leaders in Europe and Asia, notably Japan, were themselves either accomplished artists, or collectors of art.

==
History ==
In history, schools of thinking about military art can be divided during the ancient and medieval periods by the influence of infantry troops on tactics in Europe, and cavalry on tactics in Asia, and the period commencing with the Early Modern period when firearms and artillery increasingly influenced employment of forces.
The need for mobility, opportunity and decisiveness have tended to associate military art with offensive manoeuvre, cavalry, and therefore, before advent of late-19th century firearms, Asia.
In Europe military art was primarily concerned with time of combat, understanding the best way an occupied position can enhance defensive potential of a small field army largely consisting of relatively low mobility troops, by often using high ground, terrain choke points or field entrenchments.
Due to relative lack of economic and logistic support, European military art theorists advocated decisive battles that could bring a military campaign to a quick conclusion, thus reducing the economic cost of war, notably through the shock tactics of the armoured cavalry.

In Asia, due to a more developed and widespread horse breeding offering enhanced mobility, military art developed a more offensive-based way of thinking about military tactics, and military art was dominated by considerations of choosing point of attack and military communications.

The confrontation between these two forms of military art that took place as a result of the Crusades and the Mongol invasion of Europe, and the contemporaneous introduction of artillery into warfare significantly changed thinking about military art in Europe, leading to wide-ranging experiments in tactical formation of troops, use of combined arms and exercise of maneuver warfare concepts and methods not only in tactics, but on a larger scale, including in use of naval forces.
This later led to creation of European colonial empires.

Although European military art on land can be argued not to have reached its developed stage until the 19th century in the attempt to defeat linear tactics that led to the First World War, and ultimate sophistication during the Second World War and the Cold War, great increases in the firepower of the European firearms and artillery were usually able to negate greater number and mobility of the Asian field forces, no-where more illustrated than during the French Invasion of Egypt in 1798.
The defining application of firepower and manoeuvre in military art became expressed during the conduct of strategic operations of the Red Army in World War II that sought to combine the shock of armoured warfare with mobility, and the traditional reliance on infantry in strengthened positions to first stop the German advances and during counter-attacks to achieve breakthrough of the enemy position, and in conducting deep operations to destroy the logistic support, literally starving German troops of supplies and ammunition, and forcing them to surrender.

Military art in naval warfare likewise developed along the considerations of position versus speed, initially through use of galleys and later during the Age of Sail.
However, increasingly naval tactics became dominated by the relative firepower of individual vessels, and this was demonstrated during the epic Battle of Trafalgar.
The use of naval forces in military art significantly expanded the scale of conflicts to global ranges.
For much of the 19th and 20th centuries naval military art became concerned primarily with the firepower and the ability of ships to withstand it through use of increasing their armour until the introduction of naval aviation into consideration of naval battles and naval strategy.

Introduction of aircraft into warfare drastically altered the 19th century understanding of military art, and application of its principles.
Aerial warfare became the ultimate solution to manoeuvre in delivery of firepower, and drastically increased the tempo of conflicts, making blitzkrieg possible during the Second World War.
Aerial warfare also finally negated the advantage of a defensive position which left the defender as an easily detected and attacked target for the bombers.
While German industrial centres became just such targets for the Allied strategic bombing during World War II, on the Eastern Front
the Soviet Red Army chose to adapt by developing concepts and methods suggested by theorists during the interwar period to a more offensive-based and dynamic conduct of operations coordinating ground and air offensives.

The final development in military art came with the increased influence of the electronics and its implications for the ability by infantry to halt the breakthroughs using increasingly powerful infantry support weapons, and the effect on the military communications by a new form of combat, electronic warfare.
The potential of losing ability to exercise command and control over forces, particularly strategically significant forces, completely undermined much of the theoretical thinking of the Cold War.
Some have argued that this was one of the factors, along with those of economic considerations, that eventually led to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, and Dissolution of the USSR.

Since the end of the Cold War in Europe, application of military art has been sought primarily by conventional forces in combat operations against unconventional opponents, and this has many attempts to review military history in the effort to find solutions to successful conduct of operations against these forces.

==
Citations and notes ==


==
References ==
De La Barre Duparcq, Nicolas Édouard, Translated by George Washington Cullum, (Brig.
Gen.)Elements of Military Art and History:
Comprising the History and Tactics of the Separate Arms; the Combination of the Arms; and the Minor Operations of War, D. Van Nostrand, New York, 1863
Halleck, H. Wager, (Mag.
Gen.)
,
Elements of Military Art and Science, D. Appleton & company, New York, 1862
Non-lethal weapons, also called less-lethal weapons, less-than-lethal weapons, non-deadly weapons, compliance weapons, or pain-inducing weapons are weapons intended to be less likely to kill a living target than conventional weapons such as knives and firearms.
It is often understood that unintended or incidental casualties are risked wherever force is applied, but non-lethal weapons try to minimise the risk of casualties (e.g. serious/permanent injuries or death) as much as possible.
Non-lethal weapons are used in policing and combat situations to limit the escalation of conflict where employment of lethal force is prohibited or undesirable, where rules of engagement require minimum casualties, or where policy restricts the use of conventional force.
These weapons occasionally cause serious injuries or death; the term "less-lethal" has been preferred by some organizations as it describes the risks of death more accurately than the term "non-lethal", which some have argued is a misnomer.
Non-lethal weapons may be used by conventional military in a range of missions across the force continuum.
They may also be used by military police, by United Nations forces, and by occupation forces for peacekeeping and stability operations.

Non-lethal weapons may also be used to channelize a battlefield, control the movement of civilian populations, or to limit civilian access to restricted areas (as they were utilized by the USMC's 1st Marine Expeditionary Force in Somalia in 1995).
Similar weapons, tactics, techniques and procedures are employed by police forces domestically in riot control, prisoner control, crowd control, refugee control, and self-defense, where the terminology of "Less-than-Lethal" is often used.

==
History ==


===
Military ===
In the past, military and police faced with undesirable escalation of conflict had few acceptable options.
Military personnel guarding embassies often found themselves restricted to carrying unloaded weapons.
National guards or policing forces charged with quelling riots were able to use only batons or similar club-like weapons, or bayonet or saber charges, or fire live ammunition at crowds.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Non-lethality Policy Review Group at U.S. Global Strategy Council in Washington and other independent think tanks around the world called for a concerted effort to develop weapons that were more life-conserving, environmentally friendly, and fiscally responsible than weapons available at that time.
The U.S. Congress and other governments agreed and began an organized development of non-lethal weapons to provide a range of options between talking and shooting.

Recognizing the need to limit the escalation of force, research and development of a range of non-lethal weapons has since been undertaken internationally by governments and weapons manufacturers to fill the need for such weapons.
Some non-lethal weapons may provide more effective riot control than firearms, truncheons or bayonets with less risk of loss of life or serious injury.
Before the general availability of early military non-lethal weapons in the mid 1990s, war-fighters had few or no casualty-limiting options for the employment of scalable force and were continually at risk whenever lethal force was prohibited during sensitive missions.

In 2001 the United States Marine Corps revealed its development of a less-than-lethal energy weapon called the Active Denial System, a focused high frequency microwave device said to be capable of heating all living matter in the target area rapidly and continuously for the duration of the beam, causing transient intolerable pain but no lasting damage.
The skin temperature of a person subjected to this weapon can jump to approximately 130 °F (54 °C) in as little as 2 seconds depending on the skin's starting temperature.
The system is nonlethal (the penetration of the beam into human skin is only a few millimeters).In 2004, author Jon Ronson cited an unclassified military report titled "Non-Lethal Weapons: Terms and References" 21 acoustic weapons were listed, in various stages of development, including the Infrasound ("Very low-frequency sound which can travel long distances and easily penetrate most buildings and vehicles ...
biophysical effects are projected to be: nausea, loss of bowels, disorientation, vomiting, potential internal organ damage or death may occur.
Superior to ultrasound...)
", however no such effects had been achieved as of 2002.In 2010, the Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate (JNLWD)
Non-Lethal Weapons (NLW)
Reference Book was created.
The weapons in this book are currently in development.

===
Police ===
Until the development of non-lethal weapons, police officers around the world had few if any non-lethal options for riot control.
Common tactics used by police that were intended to be non-lethal or less lethal included a slowly advancing wall of men with batons, officers on horses trained to deal with policing situations, or a charge into a riot using the flats of sabers.
Other reasonably successful approaches included shotguns with lower-powered cartridges, "salt shells", using bean-bag rounds and ricocheting the shot off of the ground.
In the mid-20th century, with the integration of fire-control systems into major cities, police found that high-pressure fire hoses could be effective in dispersing a crowd (the use of water cannons and fire trucks has remained an effective nonlethal tactic to disperse riots).
Trained police dogs were also commonly used to scare and disperse rioters and apprehend individuals.
In the 1980s the development of the high-tensile plastics Kevlar and Lexan revolutionized personal armor and shields, and led to new tactics for riot squads and other special-purpose teams.
Officers could now stand up against violent rioters throwing dangerous projectiles without having to resort to lethal methods to quickly disperse the danger.

Coupled with the introduction of effective non-lethal chemical agents such as tear gas and offensive odor canisters, and non-lethal impact rounds such as rubber bullets and "bean bag" flexible baton rounds, riot tactics were modified to rely less on violent response to attacking rioters than on a return to the slowly advancing wall, with supporting officers firing non-lethal ordnance into the crowd to discourage advance.

Police officers on patrol were traditionally armed with a baton or pistol or both, and non-lethal methods of subduing an attacker centered on hand-fighting techniques such as jujutsu and baton use.
In the 1980s and 1990s officers began deploying non-lethal personal sidearms such as pepper sprays, and eventually electroshock weapons such as Tasers, which were developed for use by police and also found a market in self-defense by private citizens.
However, these weapons were developed for non-lethal resolution of a one-on-one conflict.

During the 1990s and early 2000s (decade) interest in various other forms of less-than-lethal weapons for military and police use rose.
Amongst other factors, the use of less-than-lethal weapons may be legal under international law and treaty in situations where weapons such as aerosol sprays or gases defined as chemical are not.
Less-than-lethal weapons are also useful in keeping the peace in the aftermath of violent conflict.

Between the years of 1987–1990 after a three-year field study by the FBI's Firearm's Training Unit; In 1990 the use of Oleoresin Capsicum was first issued and used by the FBI as the first official law enforcement agency.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s (decade)
police began to adopt a new pepper spray delivery system based on the equipment used in paintballs.
A specialized paintball, called a "pepperball", is filled with liquid or powdered capsaicin, the active ingredient in pepper spray, and is propelled by compressed gas using a paintball marker similar to those used for the sport but operating at higher pressure.
The impact of the capsule is immediately painful (a pepperball's shell is thicker than a standard paintball and is fired at higher velocity), and it breaks open on impact, dispersing the capsaicin with similar effect to aerosol-delivered pepper spray.

However, to be most effective, pepper spray must contact the eyes, nose, or mouth of the target; pepper spray on clothing or tougher skin has a much reduced effect.

== Effects ==
Non-lethal weapons have a design intent to provide an effect to reliably elicit a degree of incapacitation but without the typically lethal or permanent lasting effects of conventional weapons.

This design intent has often made them a weapon of choice for use by law enforcement during civil protests, etc.

Effect modalities vary by the technology being employed:  kinetic projectiles function by blunt impact which actuate pain receptors to elicit a behavioral change, lights affect visual perception, acoustics affect hearing, etc.

Notwithstanding their design intent, non-lethal weapons can still cause harm.
This is particularly true with certain technologies that interact with appropriately vulnerable regions; an example is kinetic munitions on the head, neck, eyes, abdominal and urogenital regions of the body.

As a result, some analysts describe "non-lethal" as a misnomer and recommend defining them as "less-lethal", whereas other sources identify "non-lethal" as representing a goal of minimization of producing fatalities or permanent injuries while not literally requiring minimization to a zero probability thereof.

Because the design intent is to avoid/minimize permanence, the effects invariably have been transient in nature.

Some effects may be momentary while others may persist for some finite period of time.

==
Mechanics ==
Non-lethal weapons are intended to minimize injury or death.
While people are occasionally seriously injured or killed by these weapons, fatalities are relatively infrequent.

Causes of death from non-lethal weapons are varied and occasionally uncertain.
Misplaced or ricocheting shots, pre-existing medical conditions, inadequate user training, repetitive applications and intentional misuse have been implicated in different cases where death has occurred.

As different parts of the body differ in vulnerability, and because people vary in weight and fitness, any weapon powerful enough to incapacitate may be capable of killing under certain circumstances.

Thus "non-lethal force" does have some risk of causing death: in this context "non-lethal" means only "not intended to kill".

Several groups maintain there is great room for improvement in non-lethal weapons and procedures for their use.
Claims for the relative safety of such weapons are usually contingent on their being used "properly".
For example, the rubber bullets developed during the 1960s were supposed to be fired at the ground and hit the target only after ricochet, and other non-lethal bullets are designed to be fired at the lower body; they can be lethal if fired directly at the head.

== Ammunition ==
Non-lethal rounds are firearm rounds which are designed to incapacitate, but not kill, a target.
The rounds rely on the transfer of kinetic energy and blunt force trauma to accomplish this incapacitation.
Rubber bullets, rubber buckshot, soft polymer rounds, wax bullets, plastic bullets, beanbag rounds, sponge grenades, ring airfoil projectiles (both kinetic and tear gas projectiles) and rubber bullets with electroshock effect (e.g. Taser XREP rounds) are less lethal than conventional metal bullets, and are also propelled at lower speed by using less propellant.
"
Bean bag" type bullets are sometimes referred to as flexible baton rounds.
More recently, high-velocity paintball guns are also used to launch less-lethal rounds, including the FN 303 launcher and PepperBall commercial products.
There is also the Variable Velocity Weapon Concept, for which a propulsion energy source may not yet have been clearly established and/or finalized.
In any case, all of these technologies apply the same basic mechanism, which is to launch a mass at the target that interacts kinetically.

==
Explosives ==
Hand grenades come in several less-lethal varieties, such as "flashbang" (stun) grenades, "sting" grenades with rubber shrapnel, and grenades designed to release chemical irritants (described below).

In 1972 stun grenades were used to capture the hijacked Sabena Flight 571, allowing the Israeli forces headed by Ehud Barak and including Benjamin Netanyahu to storm the plane and take it over within 10 minutes while capturing two terrorists and killing Ali Taha, the leader of the terrorist group and his aide, while rescuing all passengers (three were wounded, and one died of her injuries several days later).

A stun grenade was apparently used by members of the IHH against the IDF soldiers during the Gaza flotilla raid at the beginning of the IDF storming of the Mavi Marmara.
In June 2010 in Kenya, a stun grenade was used to draw attention, and then a real grenade along with an explosive package were used, killing many people.
In April during the 2010 Kyrgyzstani uprising police attempted to use stun grenades to stop a demonstration but the crowd overwhelmed the police.
In March stun grenades were used by Belarusian police in Minsk against demonstrators, and in September they were used by Greek police in Athens.
In these latter two cases the demonstrations were dispersed with no injuries.

In February 2011 stun grenades were seen used by Egyptian police against rioters.

==
Gases and sprays ==


===
Water ===
Water cannons are commonly used in crowd and riot control, for dispersal or to prevent movement on a particular position.
These water cannons are intended to disperse crowds with little risk of harm, but the pressure can still cause eye injuries or even death.
Water-filled rounds for small arms are in experimental stages.
Electrified water cannon was in development but was abandoned.

===
Scent-based weapons ===
Malodorants produce strong odours that cause people to leave the affected area.

In 2008, the Israeli Defence Forces began using Skunk for crowd control.
It is a form of mist sprayed from a water cannon, which leaves a terrible odor of rot or sewage on whatever it touches, and does not wash off easily.

===
Pepper spray ===
The active ingredient in pepper spray is oleoresin capsicum (OC), an acrid irritant chemical derived from cayenne pepper plants.
A 1998 estimate by the Internet Association of Chiefs of Police suggested at least 113 pepper spray-related fatalities had occurred in the United States, all with aggravating factors such as intoxication, pre-existing health problems, or from the police use of airway-restrictive immobilizing holds that can cause positional asphyxia.
The Southern California chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union recommends against maximal prone restraint techniques following pepper spray application, and they caution that anyone sprayed should be monitored to ensure effective breathing.

===
Tear gas ===
The use of chemical weapons such as tear gas (CS) and pepper spray (OC) has come under increasing scrutiny and criticism due to studies showing serious long term side effects.
Many police forces are no longer exposing their members to the chemicals during training.

Journalist Rubén Salazar was killed in Los Angeles in 1970 by an errant CS gas canister during the Chicano riots.
Other serious injuries and fatalities have occurred from either tear gas itself or the projectiles it is delivered in, including the critical injury of veteran Scott Olsen from a tear gas canister during the 2011 Occupy Oakland protests.

===
Psychochemical ===
Psychochemical weapons are psychoactive drugs, such as BZ, LSD, Kolokol-1, EA-3167, and 3-Methylamphetamine designed to have a disorienting effect when used during combat or interrogation.

===
Sleep gas ===
During the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis, Russian special forces used an unidentified gas (thought to be 3-methylfentanyl or another fentanyl variant dissolved in halothane gas) in an attempt to induce sleep in both hostages and terrorists.
Many of the hostages and terrorists (including all of the suicide bombers) were anesthetized, but some terrorists donned gas masks and thus were able to avoid the effects of the gas.
Because the agent used was a potent Fentanyl derivative (a synthetic opioid), it causes respiratory depression and ultimately respiratory failure if administered in high enough dosages.
The central nervous system effects, such as anesthesia and respiratory depression could have been reversed by an opioid antagonist such as naloxone, which is stocked by hospitals and most ambulances.
However, because the Russian authorities did not release any information regarding what type of agent was used, medical professionals were unaware that an opioid had been used during the rescue attempt and thus were unable to administer the antidote which could have saved most hostages.
Approximately 700 hostages were rescued, while 130 died from exposure to the gas.
All the terrorists were ultimately killed by Russian forces through some combination of gas exposure and gunfire.
===
Other chemical agents ===
Blister agents, including CR gas, are less often used riot control agents.
Other irritants include CS gas and nonivamide (PAVA).

==
Sticky foam ==
Sticky foam was tried by the U.S. Marine Corps in the peacekeeping Operation United Shield in 1995 with some success, but as a result various complications in its field use were also discovered.

==
Area denial ==
Area denial weapons work by either incapacitating or deterring the enemy.

=== Anti-vehicle ===

Vehicle stoppers include a wide range of methods and devices meant to disable a vessel or vehicle to prevent attack by an oncoming vessel or vehicle or to stop that vessel or vehicle for evaluation.
Vessel and vehicle stoppers may include kinetic, chemical, or electromagnetic means.

====
Caltrops ====
Caltrops are known to have been in use since Roman times and may have been used earlier: the concept was familiar to the 4th century BC Greeks, who used rocks, brush, nets and trees placed in the path of enemy conveyances on land or ensnarement devices hidden under water to achieve the same result: stop the enemy or suspected hostile in his tracks for examination or to prevent or limit incursions.
Contemporary caltrops look something like large jacks from the childhood game.
Placed in the path of oncoming wheeled or tracked vehicles, they are meant to foul wheels, destroy tires and tracks, and incapacitate vehicles.

===
Anti-personnel ===


====
Caltrops ====
Simple rows or clusters of sharpened sticks (also known as punji sticks), and the use of small caltrops have been a feature of anti-infantry warfare for centuries.
However, due to the difficulty of mass-producing them in the pre-modern age, they were rarely used except in the defense of limited areas or chokepoints, especially during sieges, where they were used to help seal breaches.
Increasing ease of production still did not prevent these methods from slowly falling out of favor from the late Middle Ages onward.
Caltrops are still sometimes used in modern conflicts, such as during the Korean War, where Chinese troops, often wearing only light shoes, were particularly vulnerable.
In modern times, special caltrops are also sometimes used against wheeled vehicles with pneumatic tires.
Some South American urban guerrillas as the Tupamaros and Montoneros called them "miguelitos" and used these as a tactic to avoid pursuit after ambushes.

==
Riot gun ==
In current usage a riot gun or less-lethal launcher is a type of firearm that is used to fire "non-lethal" or "less-lethal" ammunition for the purpose of suppressing riots.
Less-lethal launchers may be special purpose firearms designed for riot control use, or standard firearms, usually shotguns and grenade launchers, adapted to riot control use with appropriate ammunition.
The ammunition is most commonly found in 12 gauge (.729 inches) shotguns and 37mm and 40 mm (1.46 and 1.57 inches) grenade launchers.

In the United States, the term riot gun more commonly refers to a riot shotgun.

==
Electroshock weapons ==
Electroshock weapons are incapacitant weapons used for subduing a person by administering electric shock aimed at disrupting superficial muscle functions.
One type is a conductive energy device (CED), an electroshock gun popularly known by the brand name "Taser", which fires projectiles that administer the shock through a thin, flexible wire.
Other electroshock weapons such as stun guns, stun batons, and electroshock belts administer an electric shock by direct contact.

== Directed energy weapons ==
Directed energy weapons are weapons that emit energy in an aimed direction without the means of a projectile.
They are non-lethal and can immobilize people as well as machines (e.g. vehicles).
Directed energy weapons include electromagnetic weapons, (including laser weapons) and microwave weapons, particle beam weapons, sonic weapons and plasma weapons.

===
Ultraviolet laser ===
HSV Technologies,
Inc. (Stood for the last names of the original founders, Herr, Schlesinger and Vernon; this is NOT the same company as Holden Special Vehicles), formerly of San Diego, California, USA, then Port Orchard, WA, designed a non-lethal device which was profiled in the 2002 TIME magazine article "Beyond the Rubber Bullet".
It is an electrolaser using ultraviolet laser beams of 193 nm, and promises to immobilize living targets at a distance without contact.
There is plan for an engine-disabling variation for use against the electronic ignitions of cars using a 248 nm laser.
The lead inventor, Eric Herr, died in 2008 and the company appears to have been dissolved, with their website defunct as of September 2017.

===
Pulsed energy projectile ===
Pulsed energy projectile or PEP is a technology of non-lethal directed energy weaponry currently under development by the US military.
It involves the emission of an invisible laser pulse which, upon contact with the target, ablates the surface and creates a small amount of exploding plasma.
This produces a pressure wave that stuns the target and knocks them off their feet, and electromagnetic radiation that affects nerve cells causing a painful sensation.
The technology can also be used as a lethal weapon, and indeed an early name was pulsed impulsive kill laser.

The pulsed energy projectile is intended for riot control and is said to work over distances of up to 2 km.
It weighs about 230 kg and will probably be mounted on vehicles.
The weight could become lighter as laser production technology improves.

The system was developed by Mission Research Corporation (now owned by Orbital ATK).
It uses a chemical deuterium fluoride laser device producing infrared laser pulses.

The plasma (produced by the early part of the pulse) explodes because its electrons absorb the energy of the later part of the pulse.

In 2003, a US military review reported that the electromagnetic radiation produced by PEPs had been shown to cause pain and temporary paralysis in animal experiments.

United States
Special Operations Command FY 2010 plans included starting developmental work on a Counter UAV Pulsed Energy Projectile.

===
Active Denial System (ADS) ===
The Active Denial System (ADS) weapon system is a dish that projects electromagnetic radiation just powerful enough to penetrate human skin and make the nervous system think the victim is on fire, although no physical damage is done.
Future combat vehicles such as the American GCV Infantry Fighting Vehicle will incorporate non-lethal weapons.

The Active Denial System is a non-lethal, directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, designed for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control.
Informally, the weapon has also been referred to as a heat ray, since it works by heating the surface of targets, such as the skin of targeted human subjects.

In 2011, the ADS was redesigned to make it smaller, more reliable, and able to be used on the move.
ADS II is being designed to operate from moving aircraft, as well as moving ground vehicles.
The redesign does not address problems in different environmental conditions.
Air Force Special Operations Command is experimenting with mounting an ADS on the AC-130J Ghostrider gunship to target threatening crowds or individuals on the ground.
This is to give the gunship a non-lethal option so the crew has more engagement options.
Due to the increasing number of engagements in populated areas, the Air Force is aiming to field a system within 5–10 years to have enough aircraft available with non-lethal systems.
The aircraft will apparently use the ADS II version.

===
Dazzler ===
A Dazzler is a directed-energy weapon intended to temporarily blind or disorient its target with intense directed radiation.
Targets can include sensors or human vision.
Dazzlers emit infrared or invisible light against various electronic sensors, and visible light against humans, when they are intended to cause no long-term damage to eyes.
The emitters are usually lasers, making what is termed a laser dazzler.
Most of the contemporary systems are man-portable, and operate in either the red (a laser diode) or green (a diode-pumped solid-state laser, DPSS) areas of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Initially developed for military use, non-military products are becoming available for use in law enforcement and security.
Weapons designed to cause permanent blindness are banned by the 1995 United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
The dazzler is a non-lethal weapon intended to cause temporary blindness or disorientation and therefore falls outside this protocol.

The personnel halting and stimulation response rifle (PHASR) is a prototype non-lethal laser dazzler developed by the Air Force Research Laboratory's Directed Energy Directorate, U.S. Department of Defense.
Its purpose is to temporarily disorient and blind a target.
Blinding laser weapons have been tested in the past, but were banned under the 1995 UN Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons, which the United States acceded to on 21 January 2009.
The PHASR rifle, a low-intensity laser, is not prohibited under this regulation, as the blinding effect is intended to be temporary.

It also uses a two-wavelength laser.
The PHASR was tested at Kirtland Air Force Base, part of the Air Force Research Laboratory Directed Energy Directorate in New Mexico.

====
Blinding laser weapons ====
Several nations developed blinding laser weapons and they were allegedly used during War in Donbass by Russia.

====
Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) ====
The Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) is an acoustic hailing device developed by LRAD Corporation to send messages and warning tones over longer distances or at higher volume than normal loudspeakers.
LRAD systems are used for long-range communications in a variety of applications including as a means of non-lethal, non-kinetic crowd control.

Though they have been called "sonic weapons", LRADs are not inherently for military use.

The round black device on top of the New York City police Hummer is an LRAD.

According to the manufacturer's specifications, the systems weigh from 15 to 320 pounds (6.8 to 145.1 kg) and can emit sound in a 30°- 60° beam at 2.5 kHz.
The manufacturer also produces systems for public address and mass notification use that broadcast 360°.
=== Safety and legal status ===
In the United States, the University of Texas-Austin Institute for Advanced Technology (IAT) conducts basic research to advance electrodynamics and hypervelocity physics related to electromagnetic weapons.
Although generally considered 'non-lethal weapons', electromagnetic weapons do pose health threats to humans.

In fact, "non-lethal weapons can sometimes be deadly.
"United
States Department of Defense policy explicitly states that non-lethal weapons "shall not be required to have a zero probability of producing fatalities or permanent injuries."

Although a Human Effects Advisory Panel was established in 1998 to provide independent assessment on human effects, data, and models for the use of 'non-lethal weapons' on the general population, the TECOM Technology Symposium in 1997 concluded on non-lethal weapons: "Determining the target effects on personnel is the greatest challenge to the testing community," primarily because  "the potential of injury and death severely limits human tests."

However, "directed energy weapons that target the central nervous system and cause neurophysiological disorders" may violate the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons of 1980.
And weapons that go beyond non-lethal intentions and cause "superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering" could violate the Protocol
I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977.
"
Safety and evaluation of the physical and psychological effects of the long-term or repetitive uses of the pain-inducing non-lethal weapons on humans have not been well understood or studied in any great details.
Any such studies require explicit consent of all participants so as not to violate the UN Convention against torture and other cruelties.

==
Misuse ==
Pepper spray is one non-lethal weapon alleged to have been misused by American police.
In two incidents in California in 1997, police swabbed pepper spray directly into the eyes of protesters.
Amnesty International condemned these actions, and claimed that they were likely a violation of the 1984 United Nations Convention Against Torture.

==
Terrorism concerns ==
Loren Thompson, chief operating officer of the Lexington Institute in Virginia states that: "The relevant (electromagnetic weapon) technology is well within the grasp of some countries and transnational terrorist groups", and further states that U.S. hardware is susceptible to microwave and other directed-energy weapons.
Suitable materials and tools to create electromagnetic weapons are commonly available.

"The threat of electromagnetic bomb proliferation is very real."

==
See also ==
== Notes ==


==
External links ==
Council on Foreign Relations Independent Task Force Report on Nonlethal Weapons
usmilitary.about.com
(Non-lethal weapons)
Weapons of Mass Protection, Air Force Journal article on Nonlethal Weapons.

The Sunshine Project, 'Non-Lethal' Incapacitating (Bio)Chemical Weapons (website)
Centre for Conflict Resolution, Department of Peace Studies, Bradford Non-Lethal Weapons Research Project (BNLWRP), Research Report No.
8
Time - Beyond the rubber bullet
Less-Lethal.org -
Non Lethal and Less Lethal Law Enforcement Technologies.
Hosted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP).

US Deptment of Defense Non-Lethal Weapons Program.
A letter of credence (French: Lettre de créance) is a formal diplomatic letter that appoints a diplomat as ambassador to another sovereign state.
Commonly known as diplomatic credentials, the letter is addressed from one head of state to another, asking them to give credence (French: créance) to whatever the ambassador may say on their country's behalf.
The letter is presented personally by the ambassador to the receiving head of state in a formal ceremony, marking the beginning of the ambassadorship.

Letters of credence are traditionally written in French, the lingua franca of diplomacy.
However, they may also be written in the official language of the sending state.

==
Presentation of credentials ==
Upon arrival at his or her post, an ambassador meets with the foreign minister to arrange for an audience with the head of state.

The ambassador carries both a sealed original and an unsealed copy of his credentials.
The unsealed copy is given to the foreign minister upon arrival, and the original is presented personally to the head of state in a formal ceremony.
Ambassadors do not begin their duties until their credentials are accepted, and their precedence within the diplomatic corps is determined by the date on which the credentials were presented.
However, ambassadors are entitled to diplomatic immunity as soon as they enter the country.
The ambassador travels to the presentation ceremony in an official vehicle provided by the receiving state, accompanied by a military escort.

In constitutional monarchies and parliamentary democracies, the head of state or viceroy acts according to advice (binding instructions) from the government.
The foreign minister will attend (be present with)
the head of state at the actual ceremony, to symbolize the fact that the credentials are being accepted on the basis of government advice.

The ambassador uses both hands to present his or her credentials to the head of state.

===
Chargé-level relations ==
=
When two countries maintain relations at the chargé d'affaires level, the letter of credence will be written by the foreign minister of the sending state and addressed to the foreign minister of the receiving state.

The chargé will present his or her credentials to the foreign minister.

The head of state is neither addressed nor presented with the credentials, symbolizing the lower level of diplomatic relations between the countries.

The chargé is not entitled to a military escort or an official car.

===
Commonwealth ===
High commissioners from Commonwealth nations do not present letters of credence.

When two Commonwealth realms share the same British monarch as head of state, the prime minister of the sending state writes an informal letter of introduction to the prime minister of the receiving state.
When a Commonwealth nation is a republic, high commissioners are dispatched and received with letters of commission, which are written by one head of state and presented to another head of state.

Both forms of letters were standardized in 1950–1951 after India became a republic, replacing a chaotic system where some high commissioners carried letters from the prime minister, some carried letters from the minister of external relations, and others carried no letters at all.

== See also ==
Dago dazzler


=
= References ==
A chemical weapon (CW) is a specialized munition that uses chemicals formulated to inflict death or harm on humans.
According to the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), "the term chemical weapon may also be applied to any toxic chemical or its precursor that can cause death, injury, temporary incapacitation or sensory irritation through its chemical action.
Munitions or other delivery devices designed to deliver chemical weapons, whether filled or unfilled, are also considered weapons themselves.
"Chemical
weapons are classified as weapons of mass destruction (WMD), though they are distinct from nuclear weapons, biological weapons, and radiological weapons.
All may be used in warfare and are known by the military acronym NBC (for nuclear, biological, and chemical warfare).
Weapons of mass destruction are distinct from conventional weapons, which are primarily effective due to their explosive, kinetic, or incendiary potential.
Chemical weapons can be widely dispersed in gas, liquid and solid forms, and may easily afflict others than the intended targets.
Nerve gas, tear gas and pepper spray are three modern examples of chemical weapons.

Lethal unitary chemical agents and munitions are extremely volatile and they constitute a class of hazardous chemical weapons that have been stockpiled by many nations.
Unitary agents are effective on their own and do not require mixing with other agents.
The most dangerous of these are nerve agents (GA, GB, GD, and VX) and vesicant (blister) agents, which include formulations of sulfur mustard such as H, HT, and HD.
They all are liquids at normal room temperature, but become gaseous when released.
Widely used during the World War I, the effects of so-called mustard gas, phosgene gas and others caused lung searing, blindness, death and maiming.

The Nazi Germans during World War II committed genocide (mainly against Jews but including other targeted populations) using a commercial hydrogen cyanide blood agent trade-named Zyklon B. Discharging it in large gas chambers was the preferred method to efficiently murder their victims in a continuing industrial fashion.
The Holocaust resulted in the largest death toll to chemical weapons in history.
As of 2016, CS gas and pepper spray remain in common use for policing and riot control; while CS is considered a non-lethal weapon, pepper spray is known for its lethal potential.
Under the Chemical Weapons Convention (1993), there is a legally binding, worldwide ban on the production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons and their precursors.
Notwithstanding, large stockpiles of chemical weapons continue to exist, usually justified as a precaution against putative use by an aggressor.

== Use ==
Chemical warfare involves using the toxic properties of chemical substances as weapons.
This type of warfare is distinct from nuclear warfare and biological warfare, which together make up NBC, the military initialism for Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical (warfare or weapons).
None of these fall under the term conventional weapons, which are primarily effective because of their destructive potential.
Chemical warfare does not depend upon explosive force to achieve an objective.
It depends upon the unique properties of the chemical agent weaponized.

A lethal agent is designed to injure, incapacitate, or kill an opposing force, or deny unhindered use of a particular area of terrain.
Defoliants are used to quickly kill vegetation and deny its use for cover and concealment.
Chemical warfare can also be used against agriculture and livestock to promote hunger and starvation.
Chemical payloads can be delivered by remote controlled container release, aircraft, or rocket.
Protection against chemical weapons includes proper equipment, training, and decontamination measures.

==
History ==
Simple chemical weapons were used sporadically throughout antiquity and into the Industrial age.
It was not until the 19th century that the modern conception of chemical warfare emerged, as various scientists and nations proposed the use of asphyxiating or poisonous gasses.
So alarmed were nations that multiple international treaties, discussed below, were passed – banning chemical weapons.
This however did not prevent the extensive use of chemical weapons in World War I.
The development of chlorine gas, among others, was used by both sides to try to break the stalemate of trench warfare.
Though largely ineffective over the long run, it decidedly changed the nature of the war.
In many cases the gasses used did not kill, but instead horribly maimed, injured, or disfigured casualties.
Some 1.3 million gas casualties were recorded, which may have included up to 260,000 civilian casualties.
The interwar years saw occasional use of chemical weapons, mainly to put down rebellions.
In Nazi Germany, much research went into developing new chemical weapons, such as potent nerve agents.
However, chemical weapons saw little battlefield use in World War II.
Both sides were prepared to use such weapons, but the Allied powers never did, and the Axis used them only very sparingly.
The reason for the lack of use by the Nazis, despite the considerable efforts that had gone into developing new varieties, might have been a lack of technical ability or fears that the Allies would retaliate with their own chemical weapons.
Those fears were not unfounded: the Allies made comprehensive plans for defensive and retaliatory use of chemical weapons, and stockpiled large quantities.
Japanese forces used them more widely, though only against their Asian enemies, as they also feared that using it on Western powers would result in retaliation.
Chemical weapons were frequently used against Kuomintang and Chinese communist troops.
However, the Nazis did extensively use poison gas against civilians in The Holocaust.
Vast quantities of Zyklon B gas and carbon monoxide were used in the gas chambers of Nazi extermination camps, resulting in the overwhelming majority of some three million deaths.
This remains the deadliest use of poison gas in history.
The post-war era has seen limited, though devastating, use of chemical weapons.
The U.S. program, codenamed Operation Ranch Hand, sprayed more than 20 million gallons of various herbicides over Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos from 1961 to 1971.
Agent Orange, which contained the deadly chemical dioxin, was the most commonly used herbicide.
Some 400.000 people were killed or maimed as a result of herbicides like Agent Orange.
Some 100,000 Iranian troops were casualties of Iraqi chemical weapons during the Iran–Iraq War.
Iraq used mustard gas and nerve agents against its own civilians in the 1988 Halabja chemical attack.
The Cuban intervention in Angola saw limited use of organophosphates.
The Syrian government has used sarin, chlorine, and mustard gas in the Syrian civil war – generally against civilians.
Terrorist groups have also used chemical weapons, notably in the Tokyo subway sarin attack and the Matsumoto incident.
See also chemical terrorism.

==
International law ==


===
Before the Second World War ===
International law has prohibited the use of chemical weapons since 1899, under the Hague Convention: Article 23 of the Regulations Respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land adopted by the First Hague Conference "
especially" prohibited employing "poison and poisoned arms".
A separate declaration stated that in any war between signatory powers, the parties would abstain from using projectiles "the object of which is the diffusion of asphyxiating or deleterious gases".
The Washington Naval Treaty, signed February 6, 1922, also known as the Five-Power Treaty, aimed at banning chemical warfare but did not succeed because France rejected it.
The subsequent failure to include chemical warfare has contributed to the resultant increase in stockpiles.
The Geneva Protocol, officially known as the Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous or other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, is an International treaty prohibiting the use of chemical and biological weapons.
It was signed at Geneva June 17, 1925, and entered into force on February 8, 1928.
133 nations are listed as state parties to the treaty.
Ukraine is the newest signatory; acceding August 7, 2003.This treaty states that chemical and biological weapons are "justly condemned by the general opinion of the civilised world".
And while the treaty prohibits the use of chemical and biological weapons, it does not address the production, storage, or transfer of these weapons.
Treaties that followed the Geneva Protocol did address those omissions and have been enacted.

===
Modern agreements ===
The 1993 Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is the most recent arms control agreement with the force of International law.
Its full name is the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction.
That agreement outlaws the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons.
It is administered by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), which is an independent organization based in The Hague.
The OPCW administers the terms of the CWC to 192 signatories, which represents 98% of the global population.
As of June 2016, 66,368 of 72,525 metric tonnes, (92% of chemical weapon stockpiles), have been verified as destroyed.
The OPCW has conducted 6,327 inspections at 235 chemical weapon-related sites and 2,255 industrial sites.
These inspections have affected the sovereign territory of 86 States Parties since April 1997.
Worldwide, 4,732 industrial facilities are subject to inspection under provisions of the CWC.

==
Countries with stockpiles ==


==
Manner and form ==
There are three basic configurations in which these agents are stored.
The first are self-contained munitions like projectiles, cartridges, mines, and rockets; these can contain propellant and/or explosive components.
The next form are aircraft-delivered munitions.
This form never has an explosive component.
Together they comprise the two forms that have been weaponized and are ready for their intended use.
The U.S. stockpile consisted of 39% of these weapon ready munitions.
The final of the three forms are raw agent housed in one-ton containers.
The remaining 61% of the stockpile was in this form.
Whereas these chemicals exist in liquid form at normal room temperature, the sulfur mustards H, and HD freeze in temperatures below 55 °F (12.8 °C).
Mixing lewisite with distilled mustard lowers the freezing point to −13 °F
(−25.0 °
C).Higher temperatures are a bigger concern because the possibility of an explosion increases as the temperatures rise.
A fire at one of these facilities would endanger the surrounding community as well as the personnel at the installations.
Perhaps more so for the community having much less access to protective equipment and specialized training.
The Oak Ridge National Laboratory conducted a study to assess capabilities and costs for protecting civilian populations during related emergencies, and the effectiveness of expedient, in-place shelters.

==
Disposal ==
===
United States ===
The stockpiles, which have been maintained for more than 50 years, are now considered obsolete.
Public Law 99-145, contains section 1412, which directs the Department of Defense (DOD) to dispose of the stockpiles.
This directive fell upon the DOD with joint cooperation from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
The Congressional directive has resulted in the present Chemical Stockpile Disposal Program.

Historically, chemical munitions have been disposed of by land burial, open burning, and ocean dumping (referred to as Operation CHASE).
However, in 1969, the National Research Council (NRC) recommended that ocean dumping be discontinued.
The Army then began a study of disposal technologies, including the assessment of incineration as well as chemical neutralization methods.
In 1982, that study culminated in the selection of incineration technology, which is now incorporated into what is known as the baseline system.
Construction of the Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS) began in 1985.

This was to be a full-scale prototype facility using the baseline system.
The prototype was a success
but there were still many concerns about CONUS operations.
To address growing public concern over incineration, Congress, in 1992, directed the Army to evaluate alternative disposal approaches that might be "significantly safer", more cost effective, and which could be completed within the established time frame.
The Army was directed to report to Congress on potential alternative technologies by the end of 1993, and to include in that report: "
any recommendations that the National Academy of Sciences makes ..." In June 2007, the disposal program achieved the milestone of reaching 45% destruction of the chemical weapon stockpile.
The Chemical Materials Agency (CMA) releases regular updates to the public regarding the status of the disposal program.
By October 2010, the program had reached 80% destruction status.

==
Lethality ==
Chemical weapons are said to "make deliberate use of the toxic properties of chemical substances to inflict death".
At the start of World War II it was widely reported in newspapers that "entire regions of Europe" would be turned into "lifeless wastelands".
However, chemical weapons were not used to the extent predicted by the press.

An unintended chemical weapon release occurred at the port of Bari.
A German attack on the evening of December 2, 1943, damaged U.S. vessels in the harbour and the resultant release from their hulls of mustard gas inflicted a total of 628 casualties.

The U.S. Government was highly criticized for exposing American service members to chemical agents while testing the effects of exposure.
These tests were often performed without the consent or prior knowledge of the soldiers affected.
Australian service personnel were also exposed as a result of the "Brook Island trials" carried out by the British Government to determine the likely consequences of chemical warfare in tropical conditions; little was known of such possibilities at that time.

Some chemical agents are designed to produce mind-altering changes; rendering the victim unable to perform their assigned mission.
These are classified as incapacitating agents, and lethality is not a factor of their effectiveness.

==
Unitary versus binary weapons ==
Binary munitions contain two, unmixed and isolated chemicals that do not react to produce lethal effects until mixed.
This usually happens just prior to battlefield use.
In contrast, unitary weapons are lethal chemical munitions that produce a toxic result in their existing state.
The majority of the chemical weapon stockpile is unitary and most of it is stored in one-ton bulk containers.

== See also ==
1990
Chemical Weapons Accord
CB military symbol
General-purpose criterion
List of chemical warfare agents
Riot control


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Glenn Cross, Dirty War: Rhodesia and Chemical Biological Warfare, 1975–1980, Helion & Company,
2017


==
External links ==
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons Home page
Lecture by Santiago Oñate Laborde entitled The Chemical Weapons Convention:
an Overview in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law
"
The Government of Canada 'Challenge' for chemical substances that are a high priority for action".

"Chemical categories".
Archived from the original on November 8, 2005.

"Chemical Warfare Agents".

"U.S. Army Chemical Materials Agency (home page)".
Archived from the original on October 15, 2004.
Retrieved August 10, 2010.
During the First Indochina War (1946 –1954), Vietnam War (1955–1975), Cambodian–Vietnamese War (1977–1989), Sino-Vietnamese War (1979) and the Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979– 1991 (1979–1991), the Vietnam People's Ground Force relied almost entirely on Soviet-derived weapons and equipment systems.
With the end of the Cold War in 1992 Soviet military equipment subsidies ended and Vietnam began the use of hard currency and barter to buy weapons and equipment.

Vietnam prioritises economic development and growth while maintaining defense spending.
The government does not conduct procurement phases or major upgrades of weapons.
From the end of the 1990s the Government of Vietnam has announced the acquisition of a number of strategic systems equipped with modern weapons.
Accordingly, Vietnam has been slow to develop naval and air forces to control shallow waters and its exclusive economic zone (EEZ).
Currently most defence procurement programs focus on remedying this priority.
For example, Vietnam has purchased a number of combat aircraft and warships with the capability to operate in high seas.
Vietnam also plans to develop its defence industry, with priority placed on the Navy, combined with assistance from its former communist allies, India, and Japan.
Since 2015, Vietnam has begun exploring purchases of U.S. and European weapons while facing numerous political, historical, and financial barriers, as they cannot continue to rely on Soviet and Chinese weapons especially due to the increasing tensions in the South China Sea dispute.

==
Uniform equipment ==


==
Infantry weapons ==


==
Vehicles
==
==
Procurement ==
In 2006, Israel reported to the United Nations Register Organisation of Conventional Arms (UNROCA)
that two of its light armoured vehicles had been sold to Vietnam.
A number of Israeli companies won a bid to modernise and upgrade T-54/55 tanks as well as establishing factories in the country.
Israel's program includes upgrading armour, night vision system and a fire control system upgrade (produced in Poland).
In May 2002, Vietnam and Ukraine reached an agreement of military technical co-operation which extended to 2005.
Accordingly, Ukraine will support Vietnam primarily to upgrade its armour and artillery, and improve weapons co-production and repair facilities.
In February 2005, the Ministry of Defence of Finland ceded to Vietnam about 70 T-54 and T-55 tanks from the Soviet era.
In early March 2005, Poland signed a contract to sell to Vietnam 150 T-72 tanks which would have been used to support training, ammunition, equipment maintenance, and repair, but this contract was cancelled in 2006 because Vietnam wanted to focus more on its Navy and Air Force.
In addition to upgrading tanks, the Ministry of Defence of Vietnam signed a military co-operation agreement with Russia.
The Vietnamese have also developed the capacity to produce their own equipment and repair existing equipment.

==
References ==
The following is a list of modern Russian small arms and light weapons which were in service in 2016:


==
Handguns ==


=== Revolvers ===


===
Pistols ===


===
Special purpose ===


==
Submachine guns ==


===
Special purpose ===


==
Shotguns ==


== Rifles ==


===
Bolt-action ===


===
Semi-automatic ===


===
Selective-fire ===


===
Special purpose ===


===
Anti-materiel rifles ===


==
Machine guns ==


===
Squad automatic weapons (SAWs) ===
Special Forces of the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces (Russian:
Части и подразделения специального назначения (спецназ)
Главного управления
Генерального штаба
Вооружённых сил
Российской Федерации (СпН ГУ ГШ ВС РФ)), commonly known as the Spetsnaz G.U. or Spetsnaz GRU is the special forces (spetsnaz) of the G.U., the foreign military intelligence agency of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.

The Spetsnaz GRU was formed in 1949, the first spetsnaz force in the Soviet Union, as the military force of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU), the foreign military intelligence agency of the Soviet Armed Forces.
The force was designed in the context of the Cold War to carry out reconnaissance and sabotage against enemy targets in the form of special reconnaissance and direct action attacks.
The Spetsnaz GRU inspired additional spetsnaz forces attached to other Soviet intelligence agencies, such as the Vympel and Alpha Group of the KGB.

==
Modus operandi ==
The concept of using special forces tactics and strategies in the Soviet Union was originally proposed by the military theorist Mikhail Svechnykov, who envisaged the development of unconventional warfare capabilities in order to overcome disadvantages that conventional forces faced in the field.
Svechnykov was executed during the Great Purge in 1938, but practical implementation of his ideas was begun by Ilya Starinov, dubbed the "grandfather of the spetsnaz".
Following the entrance of the Soviet Union into World War II, basic forces dedicated to acts of reconnaissance and sabotage were formed under the supervision of the Second Department of the General Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces, and were subordinate to the commanders of Fronts.
The primary function of Spetsnaz troops in wartime was infiltration/insertion behind enemy lines (either in uniform or civilian clothing), usually well before hostilities are scheduled to begin and, once in place, to commit acts of sabotage such as the destruction of vital communications logistics centers, as well as the assassination of key government leaders and military officers.
Spetsnaz GRU training included: weapons handling, fast rappelling, explosives training, marksmanship, counter-terrorism, airborne training, hand-to-hand combat, climbing (alpine rope techniques), diving, underwater combat, emergency medical training, and demolition.

==
History ==


===
Soviet era ===
The situation was reviewed after the war ended, and between 1947 and 1950 the whole of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) was reorganized.

The first "independent reconnaissance companies of special purpose" were formed in 1949, to work for tank and combined-arms armies, which were tasked to eliminate amongst others enemy nuclear weapons systems such as the MGR-3 Little John and MGM-1 Matador.
In 1957, the first Spetsnaz battalions were formed under the GRU, five to operate beyond the 150–200 km range of the reconnaissance companies.
The first brigades were formed in 1962, reportedly to reach up to 750 kilometres in the rear to destroy U.S. weapons systems such as the MGM-52 Lance, MGM-29 Sergeant, and MGM-31 Pershing.

Two 'study regiments' were established in the 1960s to train specialists and NCOs, the first in 1968 at Pechora near Pskov, and the second in 1970 at Chirchik near Tashkent.
According to Vladimir Rezun, a GRU defector who used the pseudonym "Viktor Suvorov", there were 20 GRU Spetsnaz brigades plus 41 separate companies at the time of his defection in 1978.

====
Known missions ====
In May 1968, at the peak of the Vietnam War, nine GRU special forces operatives raided a secret US airbase in Cambodia in a bid to capture a brand new Super Cobra attack helicopter, equipped with the latest guidance systems and guided missiles at the time.
As a result of the operation, one helicopter was stolen and taken to Vietnam which was eventually brought back to the Soviet Union.
The rest were destroyed and 15 Americans soldiers were killed in the operation.
According to the Soviets, the U.S. learnt about the attack on the base by Soviet special forces years later thanks to a KGB leak.
The first major foreign operation of the unit came in August 1968, when Moscow decided to crack down on the Prague Spring and move the troops of Warsaw Pact countries into Czechoslovakia.
The Spetsnaz GRU was tasked with capturing the Prague Airport.
On the night of 21 August, a Soviet passenger plane requested an emergency landing at the Prague Airport, allegedly due to engine failure.
After landing, the commandos, without firing a shot, seized the airport and took over air traffic control.
At the same time, other Spetsnaz GRU units that had infiltrated into Prague a few days before the operation seized control of other key city points.
In December 1979, the undercover Spetsnaz GRU unit codenamed "Muslim Battalion" participated in Operation Storm-333, the successful mission to assassinate Hafizullah Amin, the President of Afghanistan, and to capture Amin's residential palace which triggered the Soviet–Afghan War.
Most of Spetsnaz GRU's operations remain classified even after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
It is believed the special forces had participated in operations in more than nineteen countries around the world in Africa, Asia and South America.
From time to time, the men also served as military instructors and set up training camps for Soviet-backed fighters in Vietnam and Angola.
===
Russian Federation era ===
Following the deactivation of the Soviet GRU in 1992, control of the special forces was transferred to the newly formed G.U. of Russia and were maintained to their respective assigned units as before.
According to Stanislav Lunev, who defected to the U.S. in 1992, the GRU also commanded some 25,000 Spetsnaz troops as of 1997.Following the 2008 Russian military reform, a brand new Directorate of Special Operations was established in 2009 following studies of American and various Western special operations forces units and commands.
The newly formed Special Operations Forces which is directly subordinated to the General Staff, bypassing the GRU.
In 2013, the Directorate became the Special Operations Forces Command with a GRU unit transferring to the command.
In 2010, Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to the military districts of the Ground Forces and was subordinate to the operational-strategic commands until 2012, due to then Defence Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov's military reforms.
This decision was reversed in 2013 and Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to their original GRU divisions.

====
Known operations ====
Throughout the mid-1990s to the 2000s, Spetsnaz GRU were involved in both the First Chechen War and more prominently in the Second Chechen War and also the Invasion of Dagestan in August 1999.
The special forces learned invaluable lessons from the first war and transformed into a better and more effective fighting force and were instrumental in Russia's and the Russian backed government's success in the second war.

In 2003, during the Second Chechen War, the GRU formed the Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad, two ethnic Chechen units that belonged to the Spetsnaz GRU which fought primarily in Chechnya, and also in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War as well as peacekeeping operations after the 2006 Lebanon War.

Spetsnaz GRU maintains an airborne unit, the Separate Spetsnaz Airborne Reconnaissance Unit (codenamed No.
48427), which participated in the 2008 Georgian War.
The unit is housed at Matrosskaya Tishina 10 in Moscow.
During the period of insurgency in the North Caucasus region, Spetsnaz GRU along with special forces from the FSB and MVD conducted numerous special operations and counter-terrorism operations against mainly the Caucasus Emirate, Wilayat al-Qawqaz and other smaller terrorist groups.

After the Crimean crisis, during which some units of Spetsnaz GRU were a part of the "Little green men", and the start of the rebel insurgency by pro-Russian rebels, Ukraine has on numerous occasions accused various Spetsnaz forces of aiding the rebels and even fighting on the ground in Eastern Ukraine.
In December 2014, the Ukrainian military claimed that the Spetsnaz GRU was involved in attacks on an airport in Donetsk which was later captured by DPR in the battle.

In late 2015, GRU special forces operators were reportedly involved in the Syrian Civil War, appearing in the government offensives of Aleppo and Homs.
GRU officials have also visited Qamishli, near the border with Turkey.

==
List of GRU special units ==
Below is a list of current "Spetsnaz" units in the Russian Armed Forces that fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations:
Russian Ground Forces - fields
7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

2nd Spetsnaz Brigade – based in Promezhitsa, Pskov Oblast
Brigade
HQ
Signals Battalion (2× Company)
Support Company
70th
Special Purpose Detachment
329th Special Purpose Detachment
700th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
3rd Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tolyatti 
Brigade HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
1st Special Purpose Detachment (1st Battalion)
790th
Special Purpose Detachment (2nd Battalion)
791st Special Purpose Detachment (3rd Battalion)
Training Battalion (2× Company)
10th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Mol'kino, Krasnoyarsk Territory
Brigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
K-9 Unit
325th
Special Purpose Detachment
328th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
14th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Ussuriysk
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
282nd Special Purpose Detachment
294th Special Purpose Detachment
308th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
16th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tambov, with all units deployed in Tambov except for the 664th SPD.

Brigade HQ
EOD company
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
370th Special Purpose Detachment
379th Special Purpose Detachment
585th Special Purpose Detachment
664th Special Purpose Detachment
669th
Special Purpose Detachment
22nd Special Purpose Brigade – entire unit is based in Stepnoi, Rostov Oblast 
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Support Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
Engineer Unit
108th Special Purpose Detachment
173rd Special Purpose Detachment
305th Special Purpose Detachment
411th Special Purpose Detachment
24th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Irkutsk, with all units and units deployed in IrkutskBrigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
281st Special Purpose Detachment
297th Special Purpose Detachment
641th Special Purpose Detachment
25th Special Purpose Regiment
Russian Airborne
Troops45th Guards Special Purpose Brigade – based in Kubinka 
Russian Navy
The navy also fields dedicated maritime sabotage and counter-sabotage diver units which are attached to the naval infantry.
These units also include combat swimmers, trained to conduct underwater combat, mining and clearance diving.
The task is to protect ships and other fleet assets from enemy frogmen and special forces.
The term "combat swimmers" is correct term in relation to the staff of the OSNB PDSS.
Every PDSS unit has approximately 50–60 combat swimmers.
There are PDSS units in all major naval bases across Russia.
The OMRP is composed of reconnaissance divers that fall under operational subordination to the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU).
There are four OMRPs in Russia serving each fleet: Northern Fleet, Baltic Fleet, Black Sea Fleet and Pacific Fleet, with each consisting of 120–200 personnel.

Naval Special Reconnaissance (OMRP)42nd Marine Reconnaissance point (Pacific Fleet)
388th Marine Reconnaissance point (Black Sea Fleet) – reorganized from the former 431st MRP
420th Marine Reconnaissance point (Northern Fleet)
561st
Marine Reconnaissance point (Baltic Fleet)
Counteraction Underwater Diversionary Forces and Facilities
(PDSS)
101st PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
102nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Sevastopol
136th PDSS Detachment - based in Novorossiysk
137th PDSS Detachment - based in Makhachkala
140th PDSS Detachment - based in Vidyayevo
152nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Polyarny, Murmansk Oblast
153rd PDSS Detachment - based in Ostrovnoy, Murmansk Oblast
159th PDSS Detachment - based in Razboynik
160th
PDSS Detachment - based in Murmansk
269th
PDSS Detachment - based in Gadzhiyevo
311th PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
313rd PDSS Detachment - based in Baltiysk
473rd PDSS Detachment - based in Kronstadt


===
Dissolved units ===
The Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad were two Spetsnaz units; Vostok headquartered at Eastern Chechnya and Zapad headquartered at Western Chechnya.

It was subordinate to the GRU and responsible for carrying out mountain warfare and special operations in Chechnya.
A power struggle then broke out between rival pro-Russian Chechen warlords then Head of the Chechen Republic Kadyrov and Sulim Yamadaev which led to a series of assassinations and shootouts in the ensuing years forcing the GRU to disband the controversial battalions in November 2008.

== See also ==
Similar foreign special forces units:
List of special forces units


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Carey Schofield, The Russian Elite:
Inside Spetsnaz and the Airborne Forces, Greenhill, London, 1993
Scott and Scott, The Armed Forces of the Soviet Union
Viktor Suvorov, Spetsnaz:
The Story Behind the Soviet SAS, 1987, Hamish Hamilton Ltd, ISBN 0-241-11961-8
Steve Zaloga, James W. Loop, Soviet Bloc Elite Forces, Volume 5 of Elite Series, Osprey Publishing, 1985, ISBN 0850456312, 9780850456318
An academic discipline or field of study is a branch of knowledge, taught and researched as part of higher education.
A scholar's discipline is commonly defined by the university faculties and learned societies to which they belong and the academic journals in which they publish research.

Disciplines vary between well-established ones that exist in almost all universities and have well-defined rosters of journals and conferences, and nascent ones supported by only a few universities and publications.
A discipline may have branches, and these are often called sub-disciplines.

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to academic disciplines.
In each case an entry at the highest level of the hierarchy (e.g., Humanities) is a group of broadly similar disciplines; an entry at the next highest level (e.g., Music) is a discipline having some degree of autonomy and being the basic identity felt by its scholars; and lower levels of the hierarchy are sub-disciplines not normally having any role in the structure of the university's governance.

==
Humanities ==


===
Performing arts ===


===
Visual arts ===


===
History ===


===
Languages and literature ===


===
Law ===


===
Philosophy ===


===
Theology ===
Biblical studies
Biblical Hebrew, Koine Greek, Aramaic
Religious studies
Buddhist theology
Pali Studies
Christian theology
Anglican theology
Baptist theology
Catholic theology
Eastern Orthodox theology
Protestant theology
Hindu theology
Sanskrit Studies
Jewish theology
Muslim theology
Arabic Studies


==
Social Sciences ==


===
Anthropology ===
Biological anthropology
Linguistic anthropology
Cultural anthropology
Social anthropology
Archaeology


===
Economics ===


===
Geography ===


===
Political science ===


===
Psychology ===


===
Sociology ===


===
Social Work ===
Clinical Social Work
Community practice
Mental health
Psychosocial rehabilitation
Person-centered therapy
Family therapy
Financial social work


==
Natural Sciences ==


===
Biology ===


===
Chemistry ===


===
Earth science ===
Edaphology
Environmental chemistry
Environmental science
Gemology
Geochemistry
Geodesy
Physical geography (outline)
Atmospheric science / Meteorology (outline)
Biogeography / Phytogeography
Climatology /
Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography
Coastal geography / Oceanography
Edaphology / Pedology or Soil science
Geobiology
Geology (outline)
(Geomorphology, Mineralogy, Petrology, Sedimentology, Speleology, Tectonics, Volcanology)
Geostatistics
Glaciology
Hydrology
(outline)/
Limnology / Hydrogeology
Landscape ecology
Quaternary science
Geophysics (outline)
Paleontology
Paleobiology
Paleoecology


===
Space sciences ===
Astrobiology
Astronomy (outline)
Observational astronomy
Gamma ray astronomy
Infrared astronomy
Microwave astronomy
Optical astronomy
Radio astronomy
UV astronomy
X-ray astronomy
Astrophysics
Gravitational astronomy
Black holes
Interstellar medium
Numerical simulations
Astrophysical plasma
Galaxy formation and evolution
High-energy astrophysics
Hydrodynamics
Magnetohydrodynamics
Star formation
Physical cosmology
Stellar astrophysics
Helioseismology
Stellar evolution
Stellar nucleosynthesis
Planetary science


===
Physics ===


==
Formal Sciences ==


===
Computer Science ===
Also a branch of electrical engineering


===
Mathematics ===
Pure mathematics
Applied mathematics


== Applied Sciences ==


===
Business ===
Accounting
Business management
Finance
Marketing
Operations management


===
Engineering and technology ===


===
Medicine and health ===


==
See also ==
Academia (outline)
Academic genealogy
Curriculum
Interdisciplinarity
Transdisciplinarity
Professions
Classification of Instructional Programs
Joint Academic Coding System
List of fields of doctoral studies in the United States
List of academic fields
International Academic Association for the Enhancement of Learning in Higher Education


==
References ==
Abbott, Andrew (2001).
Chaos of Disciplines.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-00101-2.

Oleson, Alexandra; Voss, John (1979).
The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860-1920.
ISBN 0-8018-2108-8.

US Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences.
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP).
National Center for Education Statistics.

==
External links ==
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP 2000): Developed by the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics to provide a taxonomic scheme that will support the accurate tracking, assessment, and reporting of fields of study and program completions activity.

Complete JACS (Joint Academic Classification of Subjects) from Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) in the United Kingdom
Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC 2008)
(web-page)
Chapter 3 and Appendix 1: Fields of research classification.

Fields of Knowledge, a zoomable map allowing the academic disciplines and sub-disciplines in this article be visualised.

Sandoz, R. (ed.),
Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines, University of Geneva
Military robots are autonomous robots or remote-controlled mobile robots designed for military applications, from transport to search & rescue and attack.

Some such systems are currently in use, and many are under development.

==
History ==
Broadly defined, military robots date back to World War II and the Cold War in the form of the German Goliath tracked mines and the Soviet teletanks.
The MQB-1 Predator drone was when "CIA officers began to see the first practical returns on their decade-old fantasy of using aerial robots to collect intelligence".
The use of robots in warfare, although traditionally a topic for science fiction, is being researched as a possible future means of fighting wars.
Already several military robots have been developed by various armies.
Some believe the future of modern warfare will be fought by automated weapons systems.
The U.S. military is investing heavily in research and development towards testing and deploying increasingly automated systems.
The most prominent system currently in use is the unmanned aerial vehicle (IAI Pioneer & RQ-1 Predator) which can be armed with air-to-ground missiles and remotely operated from a command center in reconnaissance roles.
DARPA has hosted competitions in 2004 & 2005 to involve private companies and universities to develop unmanned ground vehicles to navigate through rough terrain in the Mojave Desert for a final prize of 2 million.
Artillery has seen promising research with an experimental weapons system named "Dragon Fire II" which automates loading and ballistics calculations required for accurate predicted fire, providing a 12-second response time to fire support requests.
However, military weapons are prevented from being fully autonomous; they require human input at certain intervention points to ensure that targets are not within restricted fire areas as defined by Geneva Conventions for the laws of war.

There have been some developments towards developing autonomous fighter jets and bombers.
The use of autonomous fighters and bombers to destroy enemy targets is especially promising because of the lack of training required for robotic pilots, autonomous planes are capable of performing maneuvers which could not otherwise be done with human pilots (due to high amount of G-force), plane designs do not require a life support system, and a loss of a plane does not mean a loss of a pilot.
However, the largest drawback to robotics is their inability to accommodate for non-standard conditions.
Advances in artificial intelligence in the near future may help to rectify this.

==
Examples ==


===
In current use ===


===
In development ===
 
US Mechatronics has produced a working automated sentry gun and is currently developing it further for commercial and military use.

MIDARS, a four-wheeled robot outfitted with several cameras, radar, and possibly a firearm, that automatically performs random or preprogrammed patrols around a military base or other government installation.
It alerts a human overseer when it detects movement in unauthorized areas, or other programmed conditions.
The operator can then instruct the robot to ignore the event, or take over remote control to deal with an intruder, or to get better camera views of an emergency.
The robot would also regularly scan radio frequency identification tags (RFID) placed on stored inventory as it passed and report any missing items.

Tactical Autonomous Combatant (TAC) units, described in Project Alpha study Unmanned Effects:
Taking the Human out of the Loop.

Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System is an experimental robotic weapons system being developed by the U.S. Army since 2005.
It consists of a remotely operated sniper rifle attached to an unmanned autonomous helicopter.
It is intended for use in urban combat or for several other missions requiring snipers.
Flight tests are scheduled to begin in summer 2009.

The "Mobile Autonomous Robot Software" research program was started in December 2003 by the Pentagon who purchased 15 Segways in an attempt to develop more advanced military robots.
The program was part of a $26 million Pentagon program to develop software for autonomous systems.

== Effects and impact ==


===
Advantages ===
Autonomous robotics would save and preserve soldiers' lives by removing serving soldiers, who might otherwise be killed, from the battlefield.
Lt.
Gen. Richard Lynch of the United States Army Installation Management Command and assistant Army chief of staff for installation stated at a 2011 conference:
As I think about what’s happening on the battlefield today ...
I contend there are things we could do to improve the survivability of our service members.
And you all know that’s true.

Major Kenneth Rose of the US Army's Training and Doctrine Command outlined some of the advantages of robotic technology in warfare:
Machines don't get tired.
They don't close their eyes.
They don't hide under trees when it rains and they don't talk to their friends ...
A human's attention to detail on guard duty drops dramatically in the first 30 minutes ...
Machines know no fear.

Increasing attention is also paid to how to make the robots more autonomous, with a view of eventually allowing them to operate on their own for extended periods of time, possibly behind enemy lines.
For such functions, systems like the Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot are being tried, which is intended to gain its own energy by foraging for plant matter.
The majority of military robots are tele-operated and not equipped with weapons; they are used for reconnaissance, surveillance, sniper detection, neutralizing explosive devices, etc.
Current robots that are equipped with weapons are tele-operated
so they are not capable of taking lives autonomously.
Advantages regarding the lack of emotion and passion in robotic combat is also taken into consideration as a beneficial factor in significantly reducing instances of unethical behavior in wartime.
Autonomous machines are created not to be "truly 'ethical' robots", yet ones that comply with the laws of war (LOW) and rules of engagement (ROE).
Hence the fatigue, stress, emotion, adrenaline, etc.
that affect a human soldier's rash decisions are removed; there will be no effect on the battlefield caused by the decisions made by the individual.

===
Risks ===
Human rights groups and NGOs such as Human Rights Watch and the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots have started urging governments and the United Nations to issue policy to outlaw the development of so-called "lethal autonomous weapons systems" (LAWS).
The United Kingdom opposed such campaigns, with the Foreign Office declaring that  "international humanitarian law already provides sufficient regulation for this area".
In July 2015, over 1,000 experts in artificial intelligence signed a letter calling for a ban on autonomous weapons.
The letter was presented in Buenos Aires at the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-15) and was co-signed by Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, Noam Chomsky, Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and Google DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis, among others.

===
Psychology ===
American soldiers have been known to name the robots that serve alongside them.
These names are often in honor of human friends, family, celebrities, pets, or are eponymic.
The 'gender' assigned to the robot may be related to the marital status of its operator.
Some affixed fictitious medals to battle-hardened robots, and even held funerals for destroyed robots.
An interview of 23 explosive ordnance detection members shows that while they feel it is better to lose a robot than a human, they also felt anger and a sense of loss if they were destroyed.
A survey of 746 people in the military showed that 80% either 'liked' or 'loved' their military robots, with more affection being shown towards ground rather than aerial robots.
Surviving dangerous combat situations together increased the level of bonding between soldier and robot, and current and future advances in artificial intelligence may further intensify the bond with the military robots.

==
In fictional media ==


== Pictures ==

		
		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
Lethal autonomous weapon
Robot combat
Unmanned combat air vehicle
US battlefield UAVs
Powered exoskeleton
Network-centric warfare
Missile guidance
DARPA Grand Challenge
Multi Autonomous Ground-robotic International Challenge
Roboethics
Telerobotics
Three Laws of Robotics
Supersoldier
Robot Wars (disambiguation)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Biomass military robot in development"
EATR:
Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot - Phase II Project
=== Ethical and legal concerns ===
Gerhard Dabringer (Hg.),
Ethica Themen: Ethical and Legal Aspects of Unmanned Systems.
Interviews, Wien 2010
Public Say It's Illegal to Target Americans Abroad as Some Question CIA Drone Attacks, according to Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll - February 7, 2013
The future of warfare: Why we should all be very afraid (2014-07-21), Rory Tolan, Salon
Archive on air wars, Geographical Imaginations
Logical Limitations to Machine Ethics, with Consequences to Lethal Autonomous Weapons.
Also discussed in:
Does the Halting Problem Mean No Moral Robots?

Robots in War: Issues of Risk and Ethics - 2009
===
Organizations ===
United States Joint Forces Command website: "Leading the transformation of the U.S. military"
irobot.com, builder of the PackBot and the R-Gator systems
Boston Dynamics, builder of BigDog


===
News articles/
press releases ===
USJFC: 'Robotics to play major role in future warfighting'
"From bomb disposal to waste
disposal" Robots help deal with hazards, emergencies and disasters
(International Electrotechnical Commission, July 2011)
"War robots still in Iraq", DailyTech, April 17, 2008
New Model Army Soldier Rolls Closer to Battle (SWORDS)
TALON Small Mobile Robot
TWG Military Robots
Carnegie Mellon University's snooping robot going to Iraq
PackBot Battlefield robotic Platform
Archived 2015-04-05 at the Wayback Machine
Miniature Unmanned Aerial Systems - UAV
Guardium Autonomous Security Vehicle
Unmanned Ground Systems from Israel Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine
High-Tech Military in Due Course
Launching a new kind of warfare
Gerry J. Gilmore (January 24, 2006).
"
Army's Veteran Bomb-Disposal Robot Now 'Packs Heat'".
American Forces Press Service.
Retrieved 2008-02-02.

As Wars End, Robot Field Faces Reboot April 11, 2012
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to war:
War – organised and often prolonged armed conflict that is carried out by states or non-state actors – is characterised by extreme violence, social disruption, and economic destruction.
War should be understood as an actual, intentional and widespread armed conflict between political communities, and therefore is defined as a form of political violence or intervention.
Warfare – refers to the common activities and characteristics of types of war, or of wars in general.

== Types of war ==


===
Types of warfare ===
Asymmetric warfare
Expeditionary warfare
Expeditionary maneuver warfare


====
Warfare by objective ====
Defensive warfare
Offensive warfare


====
Warfare by strategic doctrine ====
====
Warfare by terrain ====
====
Warfare by equipment or weapon type ====


====
Warfare by era ====
====
Warfare by stages ====
First-generation warfare – refers to battles fought with massed manpower, using line and column tactics with uniformed soldiers governed by the state.
It includes the earliest stages of organized, state-controlled armed forces waging war in the modern era.

Second-generation warfare – tactics of warfare used after the invention of the rifled musket and breech-loading weapons and continuing through the development of the machine gun and indirect fire.

Third-generation warfare – focuses on using speed and surprise to bypass the enemy's lines and collapse their forces from the rear.
Essentially, this was the end of linear warfare on a tactical level, with units seeking not simply to meet each other face to face but to outmaneuver each other to gain the greatest advantage.

Fourth-generation warfare – conflict characterized by a blurring of the lines between war and politics, soldier and civilian.
It includes any war in which one of the major participants is not a state but rather a violent non-state actor.
Fourth-generation warfare is characterized by the nation states' loss of their near-monopoly on combat forces, returning to modes of conflict common in pre-modern times.

====
Other ====
Champion warfare
Underwater warfare


== History of war ==


===
Warfare by era ==
=
See:
Warfare by era, above
===
Wars ===


====
Wars by death toll ====
List of wars by death toll


====
Wars by date ====


====
Wars by region ====


====
Wars by type of conflict ====


===
Battles ===
Lists of battles
List of battles by casualties
List of orders of battle
List of sieges


===
Factions and forces ===


== Weapons of war ==


==
Military theory ==
Military theory
Philosophy of war
Principles of war
War cycles


===
Military organization ===


====
Operational level of war ====
Blitzkrieg
Soviet deep battle
Maneuver warfare
Operational manoeuvre group


=====
Military operations =====
List of military operations
Military operation plan
Military operations other than war


=====
=
Types of military operations ======
Types of military operations, by scope:

Theater
– operation over a large, often continental area of operation and represents a strategic national commitment to the conflict such as Operation Barbarossa, with general goals that encompass areas of consideration outside of the military such as the economic and political impacts.

Campaign – subset of the theatre operation, or a more limited geographic and operational strategic commitment such as Battle of Britain, and need not represent total national commitment to a conflict, or have broader goals outside of the military impacts.

Battle – subset of a campaign that will have specific military goals and geographic objectives, as well as clearly defined use of forces such as the Battle of Gallipoli, which operationally was a combined arms operation originally known as the "Dardanelles landings" as part of the Dardanelles Campaign, where about 480,000 Allied troops took part.

Engagement – tactical combat event of contest for specific area or objective by actions of distinct units.
For example, the Battle of Kursk, also known from its German designation as Operation Citadel, included many separate engagements, several of which were combined into the Battle of Prokhorovka.
The "Battle of Kursk" in addition to describing the initial German offensive operation (or simply an offensive), also included two Soviet counter-offensive operations Operation Kutuzov and Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev.

Strike – single attack, upon a specified target.
This often forms part of a broader engagement.
Strikes have an explicit goal, such as, rendering facilities inoperable (e.g. airports), to assassinating enemy leaders, or to limit supply to enemy troops.

===
Military strategy ===
Attrition warfare
Battlespace
Military deception
Strategic defence
Offensive (military)
Strategic goal (military)
Naval strategy


====
Grand strategy ====
Containment
Economic warfare
Military science
Philosophy of war
Strategic studies
Total war
====
Military tactics ====


==
Politics of war ==
Casus belli – Latin expression meaning the justification for acts of war.
In theory, present international law allows only three situations as legal cause to go to war: out of self-defense, defense of an ally under a mutual defense pact, or sanctioned by the UN.

Declaration of war
War effort
War economy
Surrender
Capitulation an agreement in time of war for the surrender to a hostile armed force of a particular body of troops, a town or a territory.

Strategic surrender – surrender to avoid a last, chaotic round of fighting that would have the characteristics of a rout, allowing the victor to obtain his objective without paying the costs of a last battle.

Unconditional surrender – surrender without conditions, except for those provided by international law.

Victory
Debellatio – when a war ends because of the complete destruction of a belligerent state.

No quarter – when a victor shows no clemency or mercy and refuses to spare the life of the vanquished when they surrender at discretion.
Under the laws of war "... it is especially forbidden ... to declare that no quarter will be given".

Pyrrhic victory – victory with such a devastating cost
that it carries the implication that another such victory will ultimately lead to defeat.

===
Philosophy of war ===
Philosophy of war – examines war beyond the typical questions of weaponry and strategy, inquiring into such things as the meaning and etiology of war, the relationship between war and human nature, and the ethics of war.

Militarism – belief that war is not inherently bad but can be a beneficial aspect of society.

Realism – its core proposition is a skepticism as to whether moral concepts such as justice can be applied to the conduct of international affairs.
Proponents of realism believe that moral concepts should never prescribe, nor circumscribe, a state's behaviour.
Instead, a state should place an emphasis on state security and self-interest.
One form of realism – descriptive realism – proposes that states cannot act morally, while another form – prescriptive realism – argues that the motivating factor for a state is self-interest.
Just wars that violate Just Wars principles effectively constitute a branch of realism.

Revolution and Civil War – Just War Theory states that a just war must have just authority.
To the extent that this is interpreted as a legitimate government, this leaves little room for revolutionary war or civil war, in which an illegitimate entity may declare war for reasons that fit the remaining criteria of Just War Theory.
This is less of a problem if the "just authority" is widely interpreted as "the will of the people" or similar.
Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions side-steps this issue by stating that if one of the parties to a civil war is a High Contracting Party (in practice, the state recognised by the international community,) both Parties to the conflict are bound "as a minimum, the following [humanitarian] provisions."
Article 4 of the Third Geneva Convention also makes clear that the treatment of prisoners of war is binding on both parties even when captured soldiers have an "allegiance to a government or an authority not recognized by the Detaining Power."

Absolutism – holds that there are various ethical rules that are absolute.
Breaking such moral rules is never legitimate and therefore is always unjustifiable.

Pacifism – belief that war of any kind is morally unacceptable or pragmatically not worth the cost.
Pacifists extend humanitarian concern not just to enemy civilians but also to combatants, especially conscripts.
For example, Ben Salmon believed all war to be unjust.
He was sentenced to death during World War I (later commuted to 25 years hard labor) for desertion and spreading propaganda.

Right of self-defence – maintains (based on rational self-interest) that the use of retaliatory force is justified against repressive nations that break the zero aggression principle.
In addition, if a free country is itself subject to foreign aggression, it is morally imperative for that nation to defend itself and its citizens by whatever means necessary.
Thus, any means to achieve a swift and complete victory over the enemy is imperative.
This view is prominently held by Objectivists.

Consequentialism – moral theory most frequently summarized in the words "the end justifies the means," which tends to support the just war theory (unless the just war causes less beneficial means to become necessary, which further requires worst actions for self-defense with bad consequences).
=== Laws of war ===
Laws of war
War crimes
List of war crimes


===
Prisoners of war ===
===
Effects of war ===
Effects of war

Casualties
Casualty
Casualty classifications
KIA –
Killed In Action
DOW - Died Of Wounds
MIA –
Missing In Action
WIA – Wounded in action
Assassination
List of genocides by death toll


==
War and culture ==


==
War-related media ==


===
War publications ===
The Art of War
On War


===
War films ===
List of war films and TV specials – lists movies and shows by the war depicted in them, the sections arranged chronologically


==
Persons influential in war ==
List of military writers


==
See also ==


===
War ===
===
Wars ===


==
References ==
Charles Phillips and Alan Axelrod: Encyclopedia of Wars.
Facts On File, Inc., 2005, ISBN 0-8160-2851-6.
(
With about 1,800 wars, this is probably the most complete overview in English language).

R. Ernest Dupuy, Trevor N. Dupuy:
The Harper Encyclopedia of Military History.
From 3500 B.C. to the Present.
4th Edition, HarperCollins Publisher, 1993, ISBN 978-0062700568.
(
With about 1,300 wars this is probably the second most complete overview in English language, with the added value to summarize about 4,500 battles).

Vittorio Ferretti:
Weltchronik der Kriege und Demozide - Ein Abriss der Ursachen, Abläufe und Folgen von über 5.000 gewalttätig ausgetragenen Konflikten bis zum Jahr 2000.
Amazon, 2014, ISBN 978-3000403538.
(
With over 5,000 conflicts, this German book is by far the most complete overview published in any language till now.
Its added value is to include democides into its scope).

==
External links ==

World History Database Listing of all wars
Newspaper by Martin John Callanan translated into different languages listing all wars "[1]"
Correlates of War Project
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Complex Emergency Database (CE-DAT) –
A database on the human impact of conflicts and other complex emergencies.

World War
I primary source collection
International humanitarian law – International Committee of the Red Cross website
Customary international humanitarian law International Committee of the Red Cross
International humanitarian law database – Treaties and States Parties
Customary IHL Database
 War zone safety travel guide from Wikivoyage
Credentialism and educational inflation are any of a number of related processes involving increased demands for formal educational qualifications, and the devaluation of these qualifications.
In Western society, there has been increasing reliance on formal qualifications or certification for jobs.
This process has, in turn, led to credential inflation (also known as credential creep, academic inflation, or degree inflation), the process of inflation of the minimum credentials required for a given job and the simultaneous devaluation of the value of diplomas and degrees.
These trends are also associated with grade inflation, a tendency to award progressively higher academic grades for work that would have received lower grades in the past.
There are some occupations that used to require a high school diploma, such as construction supervisors, loans officers, insurance clerks, and executive assistants, that are increasingly requiring a bachelor's degree.
Some jobs that formerly required candidates to have a bachelor's degree, such as becoming a director in the federal government, tutoring students, or being a history tour guide in a historic site, now require a master's degree.
Some jobs that used to require a master's degree, such as junior scientific researcher positions and sessional lecturer jobs, now require a PhD.
Also, some jobs that formerly required only a PhD, such as university professor positions, are increasingly requiring one or more postdoctoral fellowship appointments.
Often increased requirements are simply a way to reduce the number of applicants to a position.
The increasingly global nature of competitions for high-level positions may also be another cause of credential creep.

==
Credentialism and professionalization ==
Credentialism is a reliance on formal qualifications or certifications to determine whether someone is permitted to undertake a task, speak as an expert or work in a certain field.
It has also been defined as "excessive reliance on credentials, especially academic degrees, in determining hiring or promotion policies.
"
Credentialism occurs where the credentials for a job or a position are upgraded, even though there is no skill change that makes this increase necessary.
Professionalization is the social process by which any trade or occupation is transformed into a true "profession of the highest integrity and competence.
"
This process tends to involve establishing acceptable qualifications, a professional body or association to oversee the conduct of members of the profession and some degree of demarcation of the qualified from unqualified amateurs.
This creates "a hierarchical divide between the knowledge-authorities in the professions and a deferential citizenry."
This demarcation is often termed "occupational closure", as it means that the profession then becomes closed to entry from outsiders, amateurs and the unqualified:
a stratified occupation "defined by professional demarcation and grade."

===
Causes ===


====
Knowledge economy ====
The developed world has transitioned from an agricultural economy (pre-1760s) to an industrial economy (1760s - 1900s) to a knowledge economy (late 1900s - present) due to increases in innovation.
This latest stage is marked by technological advancement and global competition to produce new products and research.
The shift to a knowledge economy, a term coined by Peter Drucker, has led to a decrease in the demand for physical labor (such as that seen during the Industrial Age) and an increase in the demand for intellect.
This has caused a multitude of problems to arise.
Economists from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, who categorized jobs as being either routine cognitive, routine manual, nonroutine cognitive or nonroutine manual, have examined a 30 million increase in the number of nonroutine cognitive jobs over the past 30 years, making it the most common job type.
These nonroutine cognitive jobs, according to researchers, require "high intellectual skill.
"
This can be rather difficult to measure in potential employees.

Additionally, production outputs differ amongst labor types.
The results of manual labor are tangible, whereas the results of knowledge labor are not.
Management consultant Fred Nickols identifies an issue with this:

The working behaviors of the manual worker are public and those of the knowledge worker are private.
From the perspective of a supervisor or an industrial engineer, this means the visibility of working is high for a manual worker and low for a knowledge worker.

Decreased visibility in the workplace correlates with a greater risk of employees underperforming in cognitive tasks.
This, along with the previously mentioned issue of measuring cognitive skill, has resulted in employers requiring credentials, such as college degrees.
Matt Sigelman, CEO of a labor market analysis firm, elaborates on why employers such as himself value degrees:
Many employers are using the bachelor's degree as a proxy for quality employees—a rough, rule-of-thumb screening mechanism to sort through the resume pile.
Employers believe in the college experience, not just as an incubator for job-specific skills but particularly for the so-called soft skills, such as writing, analytical thinking and even maturity.

====
History ====
Western culture, specifically that in the United States, has experienced a rise in the attractiveness of professions and a decline in the attractiveness of manufacturing and independent business.
This shift could be attributed to the class stratification that occurred during the Gilded Age.
The Gilded Age was period of time marked by a rise in big businesses and globalization, particularly within the construction and oil industries.
The popularity of farming declined as individuals took jobs working on large projects such as the Transcontinental Railroad.
Rapid advancements such as railroad developments and increased use of steamboats to import/export goods made in cities such as New York and Chicago convenient places to operate a business, and therefore ideal places to find work.
Local business owners had a difficult time competing with the large companies such as Standard Oil and Armour operating out of cities.
The popularity of entrepreneurship declined, and people began taking underpaying jobs at these companies.
This fueled a class divide between the working class and industrialists (also called "robber barons") such as Andrew Carnegie and John Rockefeller.
Attempting to increase the prestige of one's occupation became standard among working class individuals trying to recover from the financial hardships of this time.
Unqualified individuals turned to professions such as medicine and law, which had low barriers to entry.
Referring to this phenomenon, historian Robert Huddleston Wiebe once commented:
The concept of a middle class crumbled to a touch.
Small businesses appeared and disappeared at a frightening rate.
The so-called professions meant little as long as anyone with a bag of pills and a bottle of syrup could pass for a doctor, a few books and a corrupt judge made a man a lawyer, and an unemployed literate qualified as a teacher.
Nor did the growing number of clerks, salesman, and secretaries of the city share much more than a common sense of drift as they fell into jobs that attached them to nothing in particular, beyond a salary, a set of clean clothes, and a hope that they would somehow rise in the world.

The establishment of legitimized professional certifications began after the turn of the twentieth century when the Carnegie Foundation published reports on medical and law education.
One example of such reports is the Flexner Report, written by educator Abraham Flexner.

This research led to the closing of low-quality medical and law schools.
The impact of the many unqualified workers of the Gilded age also increased motivation to weed out unqualified workers in other professions.
Professionalization increased, and the number of professions and professionals multiplied.
There were economic benefits to this because it lowered the competition for jobs by weeding out unqualified candidates, driving up salaries.
The alliance of employers with educational institutions progressed throughout the twentieth century as businesses and technological advancements progressed.
Businessmen were unable to keep schedules or accounts in their heads like the small-town merchant had once done.
New systems of accounting, organization, and business management were developed.
In his book The Visible Hand, Alfred Chandler of Harvard Business School explained that the increase in large corporations with multiple divisions killed off the hybrid owner/managers of simpler times and created a demand for salaried, "scientific" management.
The development of professional management societies, research groups, and university business programs began in the early 1900s.
By 1910, Harvard and Dartmouth offered graduate business programs and NYU, the University of Chicago, and the University of Pennsylvania offered undergraduate business programs.
By the 1960s, nearly half of all managerial jobs formally required either an undergraduate or graduate degree.

==
Academic inflation ==
Academic inflation is the contention that an excess of college-educated individuals with lower degrees (associate and bachelor's degrees) and even higher qualifications (master's or doctorate degrees) compete for too few jobs that require these degrees.
Academic inflation occurs when university graduates take up work that was not formerly done by graduates of a certain level, and higher-degree holders continue to migrate to this particular occupation until it eventually becomes a field known as a "graduate profession" and the minimum job requirements have been inflated academically for low-level job tasks.
The institutionalizing of professional education has resulted in fewer and fewer opportunities for young people to work their way up from by "learning on the job."
Academic inflation leads employers to put more faith into certificates and diplomas awarded on the basis of other people's assessments.
The term "academic inflation" was popularized by Ken Robinson in his TED Talk entitled "Schools Kill Creativity.
"Academic
inflation has been analogized to the inflation of paper currencies where too much currency chases too few commodities.

==
Credential inflation or degree inflation ==
Credential inflation refers to the devaluation of educational or academic credentials over time and a corresponding decrease in the expected advantage given a degree holder in the job market.
Credential inflation is thus similar to price inflation, and describes the declining value of earned certificates and degrees.
Credential inflation has been recognized as an enduring trend over the past century in Western higher education, and is also known to have occurred in ancient China and Japan, and at Spanish universities of the 17th century.
For instance, in the late 1980s, a bachelor's degree was the standard qualification to enter the profession of physical therapy.
By the 1990s, a master's degree was expected.
Today, a doctorate is becoming the norm.

===
Indications ===
A good example of credential inflation is the decline in the value of the US high school diploma since the beginning of the 20th century, when it was held by less than 10 percent of the population.
At the time, high school diplomas attested to middle-class respectability and for many years even provided access to managerial level jobs.
More recently, however, a high school diploma barely qualifies the graduate for menial service work.
One indicator of credential inflation is the relative decline in the wage differential between those with college degrees and those with only high school diplomas.
An additional indicator is the gap between the credentials requested by employers in job postings and the qualifications of those already in those occupations.
A 2014 study in the United States found, for example, that 65% of job postings for executive secretaries and executive assistants now call for a bachelor's degree, but only 19% of those currently employed in these roles have a degree.
Jobs that were open to high school graduates decades ago now routinely require higher education as well—without an appreciable change in required skills.
In some cases, such as IT help desk roles, a study found there was little difference in advertised skill requirements between jobs requiring a college degree and those that do not.

===
Causes ===
The causes of credential inflation are controversial, but it is generally thought to be the result of increased access to higher education.
This has resulted in entry level jobs requesting a bachelor's (or higher) degree when they were once open to high school graduates.
Potential sources of credential inflation include: degree requirements by employers, self-interest of individuals and families, increased standards of living which allow for additional years of education, cultural pushes for being educated, and the availability of federal student loans which allow many more individuals to obtain credentials than could otherwise afford to do so.
In particular, the internal dynamics of credential inflation threaten higher education initiatives around the world because credential inflation appears to operate independently of market demand for credentials.
The push for more Americans to get a higher education rests on the well-evidenced idea that those without a college degree are less employable.
Many critics of higher education, in turn, complain that a surplus of college graduates has produced an "employer's market."
===
Problems ===
Credential inflation is a controversial topic.
There is very little consensus on how, or if, this type of inflation impacts higher education, the job market, and salaries.
Some common concerns discussed in this topic are:

College tuition and fee increases have been blamed on degree inflation, though the current data do not generally support this assertion
Credential-driven students may be less engaged than those who are attending college for personal enrichment
Devaluation of other forms of learning.

Opportunity costs of attending graduate school, which can include delayed savings, less years in work force (and less earnings), and postponement of starting families
Lack of adequately trained faculty and rises in the number of adjunct professors which can adversely impact quality of education
Grade inflation has been correlated to degree inflation by some academics, though the causal direction is debated
Some have accused degree inflation of devaluating job and employment experience, though most data show that degrees are not as highly sought after as relevant experience, which is the cited reason for student loan debt that cannot be paid back.

==
Grade inflation ==
Grade inflation is the tendency to award progressively higher academic grades for work that would have received lower grades in the past.
It is frequently discussed in relation to education in the United States, and to GCSEs and A levels in England and Wales.
It is also discussed as an issue in Canada and many other nations, especially Australia and New Zealand.

== See also ==
CredentialismDago dazzlerAcademic
inflationDigital
Taylorism
Education economics
Open admissions
Widening participationDegree inflationAffirmative
action
Class rank
Dumbing down
Flynn effect
Latin honors
Salutatorian
ValedictorianEconomicsFallacy of composition
Occupational licensing
Overqualification


=
= References ==


==
Further reading ==
Berg, I. (1970).
Education and Jobs: The Great Training Robbery.
Praeger:
New York
Brown, D. (2001) "
The Social Sources of Educational Credentialism:
Status Cultures, Labour Markets and Organisations".
Sociology of Education Extra Issue 2001;
19–34.

Tony Buon & Compton, R. (1990).
"
Credentials, Credentialism and Employee Selection".
Asia Pacific Human Resource Management.
28, 126–132.

Tony Buon (1994).
"
The Recruitment of Training Professionals".
Training & Development in Australia.
21, (5)
, 17-22
Caplan, B. (2018).
The Case Against Education: Why the Education System Is a Waste of Time and Money.
Princeton University Press.

Randall Collins, The Credential Society:
An Historical Sociology of Education and Stratification, Academic Press, 1979/2019.

Ronald Dore (1976) "
The Diploma Disease: Education, Qualification, and Development"
Charles D. Hayes, Proving You're Qualified: Strategies for Competent People without College Degrees, Autodidactic Press, 1995.

Charles Derber, William A. Schwartz, Yale Magrass, Power in the Highest Degree: Professionals and the Rise of a New Mandarin Order, Oxford University Press, 1990.

John McKnight, The Careless Society: Community and Its Counterfeits, New York, BasicBooks, 1995.

Meehl, P.E. (1997).
"
Credentialed persons, credentialed knowledge" (PDF).
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice.
4 (2):
91–98.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2850.1997.tb00103.x.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2012.

Robert S. Mendelsohn, Confessions of a Medical Heretic, Chicago:
Contemporary books, 1979.

Ivan Illich, Irving K. Zola, John McKnight, Disabling Professions, 1977.

Ivan Illich, Deschooling Society, 1971.

Woodward, Orrin & Oliver DeMille LeaderShift:
A Call for Americans to Finally Stand Up & Lead
Grand Central Publishing 2013
Sarah Kendzior (2014), "College is a promise the economy does not keep" (Al Jazeera)


==
External links ==


===
Credential inflation ===
Noel Weyrich, Failing Grades, The Pennsylvania Gazette, March/April 2006 [2].

Gary North, The PhD Glut Revisited, 24 January 2006
[3]
Randall Collins, The Dirty Little Secret of Credential Inflation, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 27 September 2002, Volume 49, Issue 5, Page B20 [4]
Randall Collins, The Credential Society.
New York:
Academic Press, 1979, pp.
191–204.
[
5]
Lowell Gallaway, The Supreme Court and the Inflation of Educational Credentials: Impact of Griggs examined.
Clarion Call, 9 November 2006
[6]
Laura Pappano
"The Masters as the New Bachelor's" (New York Times, 22 July 2011), link
Joseph B. Fuller & Manjari Raman et al.
(
October 2017).
"
Dismissed by Degrees: How degree inflation is undermining U.S. competitiveness and hurting America's middle class".
Accenture, Grads of Life & Harvard Business School.
===
Academic inflation ===
The Master's as the New Bachelor's
Sir Ken Robinson: Do schools kill creativity?

How To Stand Out from the Herd, 2007


===
Grade inflation ===
Grade Inflation At American Colleges and Universities
Alfie Kohn:
The Dangerous Myth of Grade Inflation
Steven Landsburg:
Grade Expectations:
Why grade inflation is bad for schools--and what to do about it.

Grade Inflation Sources
Grade Inflation, Ethics and Engineering Education
So that is why they are leaving (the sciences) from Inside Higher Ed
A
's for Everyone!
(
The Washington Post article written by Alicia Shepard)
Nominal GPA and Real GPA: A Simple Adjustment that Compensates for Grade Inflation
Real GPA and Real SET: Two Antidotes to Greed, Sloth, and Cowardice in the College Classroom
A letter of recommendation or recommendation letter, also known as a letter of reference, reference letter or simply reference, is a document in which the writer assesses the qualities, characteristics, and capabilities of the person being recommended in terms of that individual's ability to perform a particular task or function.
Letters of recommendation are typically related to employment (such a letter may also be called an employment reference or job reference),
admission to institutions of higher education, or scholarship eligibility.
Recommendation letters are usually specifically requested to be written about someone, and are therefore addressed to a particular requester (such as a new employer, university admissions officer, etc.),
although they may also be issued to the person being recommended without specifying an addressee.

References may also be required of companies seeking to win contracts, particularly in the fields of engineering, consultancy, industry and construction, and with regard to public procurement and tenders.
Reference letters for organizations are used to assess its ability to deliver the required level of service.

Some applications, such as professional schools give applicants the choice to waive their right to view their letters or not.
Usually, applicants are encouraged to waive their rights because if they do not, it is a sign they are not confident in their recommenders.

==
Referee ==
The person providing a reference is called a referee.
An employment reference letter is usually written by a former employer or manager, but references can also be requested from co-workers, customers and vendors.
Teachers and professors often supply references for students who have taken their classes.
Reference letters for organizations are usually supplied by parties to which the company has provided similar services in the past.
==
Content ==
The employment reference letter can cover topics such as:
the employee's tasks and responsibilities
the duration of employment or tasks/ responsibilities
the position relative to the author of the reference letter
the employee's abilities, knowledge, creativity, intelligence
the employee's qualifications (foreign languages, special skills)
the employee's social attitude
the employee's power of rapport
reason(s) of employment termination
some text with the actual recommendation itself
(e.g. 'I unequivocally recommend ...
[name] as a ...
[function/ role] and would be happy to hire him/
her again').
==
Language ==
In some countries, elements of performance are evaluated using established forms of expression, sometimes euphemistic.
For example, in the German-language Arbeitszeugnis, the following terms are frequently used:
Excellent = stets zu unserer
vollsten Zufriedenheit erledigt (always done to our complete satisfaction)
Good = stets zu unserer vollen Zufriedenheit (always to our full satisfaction)
Satisfactory
= zu
unserer vollen Zufriedenheit (to our full satisfaction)
Adequate =
zu unserer Zufriedenheit (to our satisfaction)
Poor = hat sich bemüht, den Anforderungen gerecht zu
werden (has endeavored to meet the demands)This language established itself as an unwritten code in the employment world.
Its purpose was to give even weakly performing employees a letter of recommendation that does not sound negative.
However, the euphemistically glazed-over descriptions are now codified and generally known, so that the original cryptic intent is no longer served.
Nonetheless, it is still standard to use this codified language.

==
Checking of references ==
Most potential employers will contact referees to obtain references before offering a job to a new employee.

A  survey by the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) found that eight out of ten resource professionals said they regularly conduct reference checks for professional (89%), executive (85%), administrative (84%) and technical (81%) positions.
Candidates are advised to ensure that they provide a suitable list of referees to their new prospective employer or institution, and to contact those referees to ensure that they are able and willing to provide a suitable reference.
In some cases employers will contact a candidate's former company for a reference even if no contact is supplied by the candidate.

==
Duty to provide a reference ==
Some employers may not be willing to provide reference letters because they may be worried about potential lawsuits.
In this case, the employer may only provide the job title, dates of employment and salary history for the employee.
Finland, Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Hungary and Bulgaria are the only countries in Europe where employees can legally claim an employment reference, including the right to a correct, unambiguous and benevolent appraisal.
While there is no common law duty to provide a reference, the Supreme Court of Canada has held that a refusal to do so may constitute "conduct that is unfair or is in bad faith" with respect to a wrongful dismissal, and thus "indicative of the type of conduct that ought to merit compensation by way of an addition to the notice period.
"
There is a duty of care to ensure that, where one is provided, it is accurate and fair and not give a misleading impression, as held by the House of Lords in Spring v Guardian Assurance plc.
If an employer goes beyond what a reference should contain, or if it gives inaccurate or misleading information, liability may arise in the areas of breach of statutory duty, negligent misstatement, deceit, defamation or malicious falsehood.
It does not matter what form the reference might take.
In the United Kingdom, references received by an employer from another person or organization can be disclosed to the person about whom they are written under the subject access provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998, but certain confidentiality considerations apply as to the identity of the person giving the reference.
As a result, together with the duty of care under Spring, many organizations have issued guidance as to best practice to be undertaken by reference providers.
The duty of care has also been held to apply in non-reference situations, as noted in 2011 in  McKie v Swindon College.
In another case, the Court of Appeal of England and Wales has held that "a reference must not give an unfair or misleading impression overall, even if its discrete components are factually correct."
However, while a reference must be accurate and fair, it is not necessary to report all material facts concerning an individual, but it can be argued that, if an agreed reference arising from a settlement agreement is misleadingly incomplete, the employer can be sued by a subsequent employer for breaching its duty of care.
The Employment Appeal Tribunal, in an unfair dismissal case, ruled that, in preparing a reference, it was not reasonable to provide details of complaints against an employee of which the employee was not aware.
The Court of Appeal has further held that, if an employee leaves when an investigation is ongoing but has not been concluded, or where issues arise after an employee leaves that have not been investigated, employers can disclose this information but should do so in a measured and fair way, which will be particularly important if to omit this information
would mean providing a misleading reference.
In 2016, the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority are issuing rules that will require the furnishing of references, before any approval or certification may be given by them, as well as specifying the information that they must contain.

== See also ==
Character witness
Dago dazzler


=
= References ==


==
Bibliography ==
Karl-Heinz List:
Das zeitgemäße Arbeitszeugnis.
Ein Handbuch für Zeugnisaussteller.
3.
Auflage.
BW Bildung und Wissen Verlag, Nürnberg 2008, ISBN 978-3-8214-7676-6.

Hein Schleßmann:
Das Arbeitszeugnis.
Zeugnisrecht, Zeugnissprache, Bausteine, Muster.
18.
Auflage.
Verlag Recht und Wirtschaft, Frankfurt am Main 2007, ISBN 978-3-8005-3083-0.

Volker Stück:
Das Arbeitszeugnis.
In: Monatsschrift für Deutsches Recht.
60.
Jg.,
Bd.
2, 2006, S. 791–799.

Arnulf Weuster, Brigitte Scheer: Arbeitszeugnisse in Textbausteinen.
Rationelle Erstellung, Analyse, Rechtsfragen.
11.
Auflage.
Richard Boorberg Verlag, Stuttgart, München, Hannover, Berlin, Weimar, Dresden 2007, ISBN 978-3-415-03862-2.

Gowe, Gregory T. (May 2006).
"
Reference Letters" (PDF).
greggowe.com.
Vancouver:
Lawson Lundell LLP.
==
External links ==
arbeitszeugnis.de –
PDF file
Info-Arbeitszeugnis – Secret language
Codes or Language used in German reference letters
to write letter of recommendation
Hindu Historical Wars are the battles described in the Hindu texts of ancient India.
These battles depicted great heroes, demons, celestial weapons and supernatural beings.
Major wars were fought with the aim of upholding the Dharma (righteousness that brought prosperity to humanity) over Adharma (wickedness that causes humanity to suffer).
The purpose of the wars is often described as the removal of demonic beings or lords and rulers who pursued war with ambition (wicked wishes) and domination (for worldly pleasures).
Hindu teachings prescribe war as the final option, to be employed only after all peaceful methods are exhausted.
But, when this time comes, war is taught to be a matter of great personal and social importance, where every man who belongs to the warrior caste must do his duty, exemplifying courage, honor, and fearsome prowess against all odds and even at the cost of his life.

The major Hindu gods, including Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, often engage in war, either in the form of Avatars or in their true form.
They and many Hindu heroes use astras – celestial weapons with fearsome supernatural power – to aid them in battle.

==
In Vedic literature ==


=== Indra and Vritra ===
The central battle in the Vedas is between Indra and Vritra, and the defeat of the demon Vritra leads to the liberation of rivers, cattle and Ushas (dawn/light).

Another important battle is the historic Battle of the Ten Kings, alluded to in the Rigveda, in which the Tritsu clan, led by Sudas, defeat the Puru confederation of ten Indo Aryan clans.

===
The Kshatriya order ===
War Sacrifices:
Ashvamedha:
The famous horse-sacrifice was conducted by allowing a horse to roam freely for a slated period of time, with the king performing the sacrifice laying claim to all the lands it touched.
The king whose authority is contested must prove himself in battle or accept the imperial supremacy of the challenging king.
When the horse returns safely after the period of time, the main sacrifice is performed, and the king, if successful in obtaining dominance over other kings, is crowned Emperor of the World.
The Ashwamedha allows the opportunity to maintain peace if the kings do not choose to contest the sacrificial horse.

Rajasuya: Considered the ultimate sacrifice, the king performing the sacrifice must openly challenge every king in the world to accept his supremacy or defeat him in battle.
If and when the king returns successfully, having beaten all other known rulers, the performance of the sacrifice will send him to the abode of Indra.

Vishwajeet Yagna:
a sacrifice performed by Brahmins after a king had won a war.

==
In Puranic Literature ==


===
The Devas and Asuras ===
The perennial battle between the Devas and Asuras is undertaken over the dominion of the three worlds: Svarga, Bhumi, and Patala, or Heaven, Earth, and the Nether worlds.
Both races are technically equal, possessors of great religious and martial powers, but the Devas are committed to the worship of the Supreme Being and the practice of virtue.
The Asuras have atheistic and devious tendencies that grow over time.
The divide is the greatest in the Kali Yuga, the final age.

Brhaspati: the Preceptor of the Devas.
Possessing unparalleled knowledge of the Vedas, scripture, religion, and mysticism, Bṛhaspati's mastery of the military arts is akin to Shukra, his counterpart.
Indra:
the God of thunder and lightning, King of Heaven, the leader of all the Devas against the demons.
The greatest performer of sacrifices, Indra is the most famous and fearsome warrior in the three worlds.
When facing opponents like Vritra, Indra seeks the aid of Vishnu.

Kartikeya: army commander of Devas.
He is also the god of war and victory.
He is the son of Shiva and Goddess Parvati.

Narakasura: the great Asura opponent of Vishnu.
===
War Sacrifices Conducted ===
Ashvamedha:
King Sagara performed it for 99 times successfully.
If a King performs it 100 times, he becomes eligible to obtain throne of King of Heaven.
Sagara also performed this 100th time but it failed because of Indra's evil plot.

==
Strategic Formations:
The Vyuha ==
Padma Vyuha or the Chakravyuha: A winding, ever-rotating circular formation; considered impenetrable in the Mahabharata by all warriors except for Krishna, Arjuna, Drona, Pradyumna, and Abhimanyu.
Abhimanyu had learnt how to break into the formation (in the womb of Subhadra) but not how to break out of it and is trapped inside during the Mahabharata war.

Krauncha Vyuha:
The crane-shaped formation of an army; forces are distributed to form spanning wing-sides, with a formidable penetrating centre, depicting the crane's head and beak.

Sarpa Vyuha:
Winding Snake Formation
Makara Vyuha:
Crocodile Formation
Sakata Vyuha:
Cart Formation
Shukar Vyuha:
Pig Formation
Vajra Vyuha:
Thunderbolt formation, the toughest and most difficult after Chakravyuha.

Kurma Vyuha:
Turtle formation
Garuda Vyuha:
Eagle formation
Suchi Vyuha:
Needle formation
Simha Vyuha:
Lion formation


==
The end of the world ==
The end of the world is prophesied to happen at the end of the Kali Yuga - the final stage of the world, and the last of the four stages.
Kalki, the final Avatar of Vishnu is also prophesied to appear the end of the Kali Yuga, to wage the final battle between good and evil bringing end of the world and start of new world.

Shiva Nataraja, the Destroyer, kills the paramount demon of Ego and performs the Tandava Nritya (The Dance of Tandava) on his back, ending with the destruction of the universe performing Rudra Tandava.

In Shaktism, the mystical dance by Goddess Kali (the terrifying form of Parvathi, Shiva's consort), that is, dark energy for destroying all forms of matter, materials, beings, and illusions, which are absorbed within herself i.e. the Supreme Brahman.
==
The Ramayana ==
Vishvamitra :
He was the preceptor of Rama and Lakshmana, a powerful tapasvi and Brahmarishi.
He bestows the knowledge of all divine weaponry to Rama and Lakshmana, leads them to kill powerful demons, and instructs them in religion and military arts.

Rama : He was 7th Avatar of Lord Vishnu.
Rama was an extremely powerful warrior and had knowledge of usage of many celestial astras.
Rama single-handedly slayed the 14,000 demon hordes of Khara (in one hour, in the Ramayana), the demons Maricha and Subahu, Ravana's chief commander Prahasta and is responsible for the ultimate killing of Ravana himself.

Lakshmana
: He was also very powerful like his brother.
He was incarnation of Anantha-Seshanag.
He controlled his sleep for 14 continuous years and slayed extremely powerful demons including Atikaya and Indrajit.

Hanuman : He was son of Kesari and Anjana.
He was one of the Rudras of Shiva.
He was first trained by Sun god Surya and later Shiva himself mentored him.
Later he became Vanara minister of Sugriva.
He is the greatest devotee of Rama, famous for his unerring service, absolute loyalty and great feats of courage.
Hanuman is responsible for killing many demons, as well as burning the city of Lanka.
His strength is given by his father Vayu, and by virtue of the boons bestowed on him by various Gods, no astra and weapon could harm him.
He can transform into any size and shape as he desired.
He was also well expert in using celestial astras.
He also possessed Mohini astra, Rudra astra etc.

Ravana: blessed by his fearsome 10,000 year tapasya to be the most powerful being on earth, invulnerable to every God, demon and living being, save man.
Although an expert on the Vedas, a great king, and a great devotee of Shiva, he is the emperor of evil due to his patronage of demons, murder of kings and humiliation of the Gods headed by Indra.

Indrajit :
He was first-born son of mighty Ravana.
Originally his name was Meghanada.
He was master of illusion war techniques.
He became the possessor of several supreme celestial weapons.
Through penance, he obtained a boon from Brahma : he could be killed by a common man who could control his sleep for 12 years continuously.
He defeated Indra and arrested him.
Then Brahma appeared and asked him to free Indra.
Meghanada did as Brahma directed and was then granted boon : he would never be killed in any battle, until his Yagna (fire-worship) of his native goddess Nikumbala was disturbed and destroyed.
On the completion of the Yagna, a supreme celestial chariot would appear, boarding which, Indrajit would become unkilled in any battle.
But Brahma also cautioned him that whosoever would destroy this yagna, would also kill him.
He was killed by Lakshmana.

Kumbhakarna: the gigantic brother of Ravana was a fearsome monster-demon who sleeps for six months at a stretch, rising for only one day and then returning to his slumber.
Kumbhakarna could slay hundreds of warriors by the sweep of his hand or step of his foot.
He was killed by Rama in the war.

Prahasta: the chief commander of Lanka's army who was killed on the 1st day of the war of Rama and Ravana.

Atikaya: the second son of Ravana, who had an indestructible armor given to him by Brahma that can only be pierce by the Brahmastra.
Once he caught Shiva trident in Mount Kailash when Shiva was angry with him.
Both Atikaya and his cousin Trishira were the reincarnations of Madhu and Kaitabha, who were defeated by Mahavishnu.

Akshayakumara: the youngest son of Ravana who died, fighting Hanuman in Ashok Vatika.

Shatrughna:
Youngest son of King Dasharatha, youngest brother of Rama.
He killed Lavana, son of Madhu and Kumbhini (a sister of Ravana) and became the King of Mathura.

Bharata:
Younger brother of Rama, elder to Lakshmana and Shatrugna.
He along with his maternal uncle Yudhajit, conquered Gandhara and created his kingdom of Takshasila and Pushkalavati by defeating Gandharvas and inhabiting that kingdom.

Vali: Son of Vanara king Vriksharaja, spiritual son of King of Gods- Indra.
Vali was invincible in Treta Yuga.
Vali defeated some of the greatest warriors like Ravana.
Vali was blessed with the ability to obtain half the strength of his opponent before which he already had strength of 70,000 elephants.
Hence, Rama killed Vali by hiding behind the trees.
Atirathis:
Akampana
Kampana
Devanataka
Narantaka
Akshayakumara
Ahiravana
Kumbha
Nikumbha
All younger sons of RavanaMaharathis:
Laxmana
Ravana
Kumbhakarna
Atikaya
Jambavan
Sugriva
Angada
Bharata
ShatrugnaAtimaharathis:
Rama
Indrajit
Hanuman


===
War Sacrifices Conducted ===
Ashvamedha:
Rama performed the Asvhamedha successfully.

==
The Mahabharata ==
Kuru Army: of
11 Akshauhinis is formed by the kingdom of Hastinapura in alliance with races like the Samshaptakas, Trigartas, the Narayana army, the Sindhu army and Madra.

Commanders in Chief: Bhishma, Drona, Karna and Ashwathama.

Rathis:
Duryodhana (8 Rathi), Somadatta, Sudakshina, Shakuni, Jayadratha, Dussasana, Vikarna, 97 Kauravas, Duryodhana's son Lakshmana and Dussasana's son Durjaya were Rathi warriors.

Atirathis:
Kritavarma, Kripacharya, Shalya, Bhurisravas, Brihadbala, Susharma.

Maharathis: Bhishma, Drona, Ashwathama, Bhagadatta, Karna.

Pandava Army: is a coalition of 7 Akshauhinis, primarily the Panchala and Matsya forces, the Rakshasa forces of Bhima's son, and Vrishni-Yadava heroes.

Commander in Chief:
Dhristadyumna
Rathis:
Uttamaujas, Shikhandi, Yuyutsu, Uttar and Upapandavas
Atirathis: Yudhishthira, Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva, Kuntibhoja, Satyaki, Drupada Dhristadyumna, Ghatotkacha.

Maharathis: Bhima, Abhimanyu, ￼
￼Arjuna.￼￼
juna
Abhimanyu: He was legendary archer and was a super warrior like his father,  Arjuna.
On the 13th day of war, he entered Chakravyuha and was unfairly killed by multiple Kaurava warriors.

Arjuna:
He was the son of Indra.
He was the best archer and greatest warrior in Mahabharata.
He defeated great warriors like Bhishma, Drona, Ashwatthama, Karna, Kripa many times but never got defeated by any of them through out his life.
He performed incredible feats like defeating Gandharva King Chitrasena & Nivatakavachas (whom Ravana and Indrajit together failed to defeat and made truce).
In the Mahabharata, only Shiva had the ability to beat Arjuna in battle.

Ashwatthama: the son of Drona, one of the eight Chiranjeevis .
He is a great warrior.
Ashwathama and Kripa are considered to be the lone survivors still living who actually fought in the Kurukshetra war.
Ashwathama was born with a gem in his forehead which gives him power over all living beings lower than humans.
This gem is supposed to protect him from attacks by ghosts, demons, poisonous insects, snakes, animals etc.

Bhima:
The 2nd most physically strong character in the Mahabharata after Hanuman.
Bhima had phenomenal personal strength, he is also known for killing many powerful kings and demons like Jarasandh, Kirmira, Bakasura, Hidimb, Jatasura, Kichaka, and wrestler Jimut, he was an unsurpassed master of the mace weapon and a consummate wrestler.
He slays all of the one hundred Kuru brothers including the chief antagonist of the epic, Duryodhana.

Duryodhana: He was a skilled warrior with mace in the Mahabharata war.
The only men who could beat him in a mace fight was Bhima, Arjuna and Balarama, the elder brother of Krishna.

Dussasana: Younger brother of Duryodhana who assaulted Draupadi in the Game of Dice.
He was known to be an aggressive warrior but was brutally slain by Bhima on 16th day of Kurukshetra war.

Bhishma: the most consummate warrior trained by Parashurama, Bhishma was indestructible by any warrior (except Lord Parshurama, Lord Krishna, Lord Balrama, Arjuna and Abhimanyu) when he lifts his weapons.
Having countered all the kings of the earth, he is the Commander in Chief of the Kuru Army.

Drona: the guru of the Kauravas and Pandavas, Drona is a great master of Vedic military arts and almost every celestial weapon.
He is invulnerable to any attack (except to Arjuna, Abhimanyu, Krishna and Balarama) till he holds a weapon of any sort.
He also has great religious knowledge and wisdom.
He becomes the second Kuru commander, and Arjuna was his favorite student.

Karna: the son of Surya and first born of Kunti who shunned him due to her being the mother of the Pandavas.
Karna was born with Kavacha Kundala (divine armor) which he donated to Indra just before war.
Karna was taught by Parashurama in warfare.
Karna was one of the great warriors in the Mahabharata.
He was defeated and killed by Arjuna on 17th day of the Kurukshetra war.

Nakula: the fourth brother of the Pandavas.
It is said that he was the most handsome man in the world.

He was an expert in the art of sword warfare.

He was also greatly associated with horses.
During the Kurukshetra war, he was the one who killed most of the offspring of all the Kauravas.

Sahadeva: the fifth brother of the Pandavas.
He was an expert in the art of axe warfare.

He was also greatly associated with sheep, insects.
During the Kurukshetra war, he killed Shakuni.

===
Levels of Warrior Excellence as per Bhishma from Mahabharata ===
Before war, Bhishma ill-treated Karna by calling him Artha-rathi because Karna had a very bad habit of flying away from battlefield after being defeated.
But Karna was potentially equal to 1 Maharathi warrior
From Kaurava side
Rathis

Sudhakshina-the ruler of the Kamvojas.

Shakuni-King of Gandhara and uncle of Kauravas.

Duryodhana's son-Lakshmana and the Durjaya-son of Dussasana are single Rathis
Jayadratha-the king of the Sindhu and brother in law of Kauravas is equal to 2 rathas
All 99 brothers of Duryodhana including Dushasana are single Rathis
Duryodhana is classified as a warrior equal to 8
RathisAtirathis
Kritverma-
the general of "Narayani Sena" of Krishna.

Susharma-the ruler of Trigartas
Shalya-
the ruler of Madra
Bhurisravas-the son of Somadatta
Brihadbala-a descendant of Rama, equal to 6
atirathis
Maharathis
Karna-the son of the sun god Surya; king of Anga kingdom; he is equal to 2 Maharathi.

Bhagadatta-
the ruler of Pragjyotisha and son of Narakasura- equal to 1 maharathi.

Ashwatthama-the son of Guru Drona, one of the eight chiranjeevis and equal to 1 Maharathi.
Although according to Bhisma he had the potential to become an atimaharathi after being enraged since he was a Rudra Avatar.

Drona-the teacher of Pandavas and Kauravas; equal to 2 Maharathi class warriors.

Bhishma-
even though he never classified himself, later it was revealed that Bhishma is equal to 2 Maharathi warriors.

Kripa-also known as Kripacharya, the son of Saradwat.
From Pandava side
Rathis
Uttamaujas
Sikhandin-the son of the prince/ess of the Panchalas
All sons of Draupadi (Upapandavas) are single rathis
Dhrishtaketu-the son of Shishupala, the king of the Chedis
Nakula and Sahadeva are single Rathis.

Yudhishthira-the son of Pandu and Kunti, is a Rathi.

Virata King-King of MatsyaAtirathis
Bhima-the second of the Pandava prince, is equal to 8 Atirathis.

Satyaki-of the Vrishni race-equal to 6
Atirathis
Dhrishtadyumna-the son of Drupada.

Kuntibhoja-the maternal grand uncle of Pandavas.

Ghatotkacha-prince of Rakshasas and master of all illusions, son Bhima and Hidimba.
(
During night, Ghatothkatcha is equal to Maharathi)
Drupada-King of Panchalas.
Maharathis

Abhimanyu-
the son of Arjuna is equal to 2 Maharathis.

Arjuna-
the son of mighty Indra is equal to 2 Maharathis.

===
Deities Mentioned ===
Shukra:
the Preceptor of the Asuras, their high priest and guru, worshiper of the Supreme Lord, but remains supportive of the Asuras.

Vritra: the Asura son of Savitr deva.
Deva Savitr who performs a sacrifice to obtain a son who is capable to be ruler of the three worlds.

===
War Sacrifices Conducted ===
Ashvamedha:
In the Mahabharata, Arjuna alone had conquered the whole world for the sake of Ashwamedha Yagna of his brother Yudhishtira.

Rajasuya: It was performed by king Yudhishthira in the Mahabharata epic.
Arjuna had conquered 36 kingdoms for the sake of Yudhisthira's Rajasuya Yagna- most by any Kshatriya warrior in a Rajasuya yagna


==
Levels of Warrior Excellence ==
Mahamaharathi: A warrior capable of fighting 24 Atimaharathi class warriors or 207,360,000 warriors simultaneously.
They are the most supreme warriors and are invincible.
This includes Shiva, Vishnu, Brahma, Shakti, Ayyappan, Murugan, Vinayagar and Panchmukhi Hanuman.
Atimaharathi:
A warrior capable of fighting 12 Maharathi class warriors or 8,640,000 warriors simultaneously; circumspect in his mastery of all forms of weapons and combat skills; expert in designing and destroying all strategies (vyuhas); able to fight against all illusions and win against opponents in such situations.
Indrajit Hanuman, Rama, Krishna and Arjuna are considered as Atimaharathis.
Different forms of Lord Shiva are also Atimaharthis.
Veerabhadra, Bhairava etc.
fall under this category.
Incarnations and avatars of Lord Vishnu are generally considered as Atimaharathis.
Maharathi: A warrior capable of fighting 12 Atirathi class warriors or 720,000 warriors simultaneously, circumspect in his mastery of all forms of weapons and combat skills , Abhimanyu, Vali, Babruvahana, Alambusha, Angada, Ashwatthama, Atikaya, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa,  Kumbhakarna, Sugriva, Ravana, Bhagadatta, Karna, Narakasura, Ghatotkacha (night), Iravan, Lakshmana, Balarama, Trishira, Prahasta, Bharata, Shatrughna, Parashurama
etc.
were Maharathis.
Atirathi: A warrior capable of contending with 12 Rathi class warriors or 60,000 warriors simultaneously, circumspect in his mastery of all forms of weapons and combat skills.
Lava, Jarasandha, Kusha, Kritavarma, Bhima, Shalya, Bhurisravas, Drupada, Akampana, Vibheeshana, Ghatotkacha, Jambavan, Satyaki, Kuntibhoja, Devantaka, Narantaka, Mahi Ravana, Keechaka, Rukmi, Susharma, Bahlika, Brihadbala, Pushkal, Samba and Pradyumna etc.
were Atirathis.
Rathi :
A warrior capable of contending with 5,000 warriors simultaneously.
All Kauravas, Shakuni, Yudhishtira, Nakula, Sahadeva, Matsya King Virata, Uttar, Drishtaketu, Jayadratha, Shikhandi and all Upapandavas were rathis.

==
Major deities ==


===
Vishnu ===
Vishnu is the Supreme God in Vaishnavism sect of Hinduism.
According to traditional etymologies, "Vishnu" means "all pervading" supreme being, the source of everything.
In the Vishnu Sahasranama, he is called Paramatma (supreme soul) and is periodically reborn as an Avatar upon Earth in order to destroy evil and bring deliverance to the pious.
He is also the refuge of the Devas in their battles against Asuras.
Lord Vishnu has 10 avatars
The 10 Avatars of Vishnu include Matsya, Kurma, Varaha, Narasimha, Vamana, Parshurama, Rama, Krishna, Buddha/Balarama and Kalki.
Vishnu is also said to have total of 36 forms.
26 forms other than Dasa-Avatars include Mohini, Nara-Narayana, Arjuna, Dattatreya, Danvantri, Yagya-raja, King Prithu etc.
He is also considered in some sources to be the first God, 'Adideva'.
He is described as being beyond birth, death and time.
In battle, the avatars of Vishnu are aided by a variety of astra or celestial weapons.
His two human avatars, Rama and Krishna, were fearsome warriors and possessed many celestial weapons that accompany the past times of Vishnu.
Krishna also used a few of these weapons in Mahabharata.
These include:

Kaumodaki: The divine mace weapon of Vishnu; invincible and  unparallel;
Krishna slayed demon Dantavakra with it.

Kodanda: The powerful bow of Rama, 7th avatar of Vishnu.
Kodanda was also wielded by Vishnu.

Nandaka: The sword of Vishnu which Krishna also possessed.

Narayanastra: Narayanastra is one of the most powerful astras in the universe after Pashupatastra and Vaishnavastra.
The personal missile weapon of Vishnu in his Narayana form, this astra lets loose a powerful tirade of millions of deadly missiles simultaneously.
The intensity of the shower increases with resistance.
The only solution is total submission before the missile; only then will it cease.
The Narayanastra was first used by Rama in the Ramayana.
Then, thousands of years later, this astra was again used by Ashwathama in the Kurukshetra War against the Pandava army.
Apart from Rama, only Ashwatthama possessed this weapon.

Parashu:
The axe of Parashurama, 6th avatar of Vishnu.
This axe was given by God of Gods- Shiva.

Sharanga:
The celestial bow of Vishnu.

Sharkha:
The bow of Krishna, 8th avatar of Vishnu.

Sudarshana Chakra:
The magical Chakra, a spinning disc with sharp outer spears.
It is the most powerful Shastra in the universe, and without any parallel.
The Chakra was famously designed by Vishwakarma for Vishnu.
The Sudarshana chakra flies at the command of Krishna, spinning away to tear off the heads of his opponents, or to perform any function desired by Vishnu.
It was most famously used by Krishna in the Mahabharata.

Vaishnavastra:
Vaishnavastra is one of the most powerful astras in the universe along with the Narayanastra.
The personal missile weapon of Krishna, once fired it cannot be thwarted by any means, save by the will of Vishnu himself.
Krishna gave this astra to his cousin Arjuna.

===
Shiva ===
Mahadeva literally means "Highest of all gods" i.e. God of Gods.
He is the supreme God in Shaivism sect of Hinduism.

Shiva is also known as Maheshwar, "the great Lord", Mahadeva, the great God, Shambhu, Hara, Pinakadharik (pinakapani- South India notation), "bearer of the Pinaka" and Mrityunjaya, "conqueror of death".
He is the spouse of Shakti.
He also is represented by Mahakala and Bhairava.
Shiva is often pictured holding the damaruka, an hourglass-shaped drum, along with his trishula, a trident-staff.
His usual mantra is Om Namah Shivaya.

Shiva is also considered as the God of Gods.
The existence which represents infinity itself.
He is the supreme masculine divinity in this universe and is lord of the three worlds (Vishwanath) and is second to none in wrath and power.

Sarvaripati Shiva is one of the most fearsome manifestation of the supreme God.
Assigned with destroying all of the universe at the end of time, Shiva is one of the most fearsome warriors and unconquerable.
Tandava is the dance of the destroyer, which he performs over the body of a demon.
Shiva employs his power to kill the Asura Tripura, destroying the flying three cities of Tripura.
In battle, Shiva and his amshas (spirits) deploy formidable weapons controlled by him.
Some of these are:

Arrow of Shiva: It can destroy creation.
Returns to the quiver after being used.

Chandrahas: Sword of Ravana granted by Shiva as a boon.

Ekasha Gada: The mace of Shiva.
A blow from the weapon is the equivalent of being hit by a million elephants.

Girish: A special sword of Shiva with unique characteristics.

Jayantha Vel: A spear which contains the power of the third eye of Shiva.

Khaṭvāṅga:
In Hinduism, the god Shiva - Rudra carried the khatvāṅga as a staff weapon and are thus referred to as khatvāṅgīs.

Maheshwara Chakra:
The Chakra of Shiva.

Parashu:
The axe of Shiva given to Parashurama (the 6th Avatar of Vishnu).

Pashupatastra:
An irresistible and the most destructive personal weapon of Shiva, discharged by the mind, the eyes, words, or a bow.
This is the most devastating weapon in the universe.
Sage-King Vishwamitra and Arjuna are only other persons who possessed this weapon.

Pinaka:
The celestial bow of Shiva.(Shiva's bow):
A bow given by Shiva to Janaka and broken by Rama during Sita's swayamvara
Vijaya Dhanush:Vijaya (bow):
A bow given by Shiva to Parasurama to kill Kshatriyas
Shiva Kaakam:
An unconquerable weapon of Shiva.

Shiva Parham:
A long noose (of Shiva) from which even the Gods can't escape from.

Shiva Vajra: A vajra which is as powerful as Indra's Vajra
Teen Baan:
Shiva gave Barbarika three infallible arrows (Teen Baan).
A single arrow was enough to destroy all opponents in any war, and it would then return to Barbarika's quiver.

Trishula (Trident):
The trident of Shiva.
===
Shakti ===
Shakti is the supreme Goddess in Shaktism sect of Hinduism.
Both a supreme being and an energy that is considered to be the source of all works of creation, preservation and destruction, Adi Parashakti is the source of Trimurti, the universe and all of creation.
She took many incarnations to fight with demons, including Parvati, wife of Shiva, Lakshmi, wife of Vishnu,  the complete avatar of Shakti herself, according to the Devi Gita and Durga Saptashati, the main scriptures for Shakti worshipers.
As the goddess Parvati, she is considered to be the most powerful of all deities.
Sometimes, the gods worship Parvati, who came before them in different avatars:

Durga, who killed the demon Mahishasura
Kali, the most ferocious form of the Goddess, who can not be pacified by anyone after war.

Chandi, the gentle manifestation of Durga or Kali, who killed Mahishasura in the battle of Alkapuri.

Kanyakumari, who killed Banasura
Chamunda, who killed Chanda and Munda
Kaushiki, who killed Shumbha and Nishumbha
Minakshi, who defeated all the demigods and destroyed the arrogance of all demigods.
Shakti is usually depicted as having the weapons of all the gods, even the Trimurti.
She holds the trident of Shiva, the Chakra of Vishnu, the Vajra of Indra, the Gada of Yamaraj.

==
Celestial Weapons ==
An Astra is a power, weapon, missile that is to be hurled at an enemy.
Generally astra is in form of an arrow.
Astras can be invoked using incantations (mantras).
Different astras have different power.
A Shastra is a personal weapon like swords, bows, spades, axes, spears and maces which must be constantly operated by a warrior.

Brahmastra: Embedded with the mystical force of Brahma, this weapon releases millions of missiles, great fires and a destructive potential capable of extinguishing all creation, if not used by and aimed only at a celestial fighter.
It was used multiple times in the Ramayana, Indrajit used it against Hanuman, Lakshmana asked permission to use it against Indrajit, which Rama declined, Lakshmana used it to kill Atikaya,  Rama used it as final arrow to kill Ravana.
In the epic the Mahabharata, it is said that the weapon manifest with the single head of Brahma as its tip.
In the Mahabharata era Parashurama, Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Kripa, Ashwatthama, Arjuna, Yudhishtira and many Maharathis possessed the knowledge to invoke this missile.

Brahmashirsha astra:
A weapon capable of greater destruction than the Brahmastra.
It can burn all creation to ashes once discharged, Arjuna and Ashwathama both used it against each other after the Mahabharata war.
Capable of killing even heavens.
Was used by Ashwatthama on Parikshit.
It is thought that the Brahmashirsha is the evolution of the Brahmastra, 4 times stronger than Brahmastra.
"
It blazes up with terrible flames within a huge sphere of fire.
Numerous peals of thunder were heard, thousands of meteors fell and all living creatures became terrified with great dread.
The entire sky seemed to be filled with noise and assumed a terrible aspect with flames of fire.
The whole earth with her mountains and waters and trees trembled.
"
When it strikes an area it will cause complete destruction and nothing will ever grow, not even a blade of grass for the next 12 years.
It will not rain for 12 years in that area and everything including metal and earth becomes poisoned.
In the epic Mahabharata, it is said that the weapon manifest with the four heads of Brahma as its tip.
In the Mahabharata, Agnivesha, Drona, Ashwatthama, Arjuna possessed the knowledge to invoke this weapon.

Brahmanda astra:
This is the most powerful weapon of Brahma.
It was first used by sage Vashishtha against Vishwamitra's (who was King Vishwarath at that time)
Brahmashirsha, as only Brahmanda astra can stop Brahmashirsha astra, it was also used by sage Piplad against Shani to avenge his father's death.
In the epic Mahabharata, it is said that the weapon manifest with the all five heads of Brahma as its tip.
Brahma earlier lost his fifth head when he fought with Siva.
This weapon is said to possess the power to destroy entire solar system or brahmand, the 14 realms according to Hindu cosmology.
In some texts it is called Brahma-dhanda astra, the weapon created by Saptarishi's to counter any weapon ever created, even that of Trimurti's.
The rishi of this weapon is Para Brahman.
It is stated to be the most difficult astra to obtain.
Capable of destroying entire universe in a blink of an eye.
Vishvamitra used all kinds of divine weapons against sage Vashistha, even Pashupatastra, but the Brahma-dhanda astra of Vashistha neutralized and swallowed all astra (weapon) of Vishwamitra proving that Brahma-dhanda astra is the most powerful of all astras.

Pashupatastra:
In Hinduism, it is considered that Pashupatastra is the most devastating weapon, as it is the weapon of the consort of the God head Mahadeva, i.e. Mahakali.
Mahadeva literally means "Highest of all gods" and Mahakali means "Goddess who is beyond time".
This weapon was granted to Arjuna by Shiva.
It is the most destructive and foreboding weapon in the Mahabharata.
It was first used by Shiva for the destruction of tripura.

It is capable of destroying entire multiverse.
In the Ramayana, Vishvamitra possessed this mighty weapon.
In the Mahabharata, only Arjuna possessed this weapon.

Narayanastra: Invincible and painful, this astra is unconquerable except by total submission, this astra was used by Krishna against Shiva, when Shiva was fighting on behalf of the evil Banasura, when Shiva charged his personal Pashupatastra on Krishna, Krishna used this to make Shiva fall asleep, allowing him to move past him and cut off Banasura's arms but at the request of Shiva does not kill Banasura.

Vaishnavastra
: One of the most powerful astras, this cannot be stopped by anyone except its creator, Vishnu.
Vaishnavastra is the most powerful astra in the universe along with the Narayanastra.
The personal missile weapon of Krishna, once fired it cannot be thwarted by any means, save by the will of Vishnu Himself.
Krishna gave this astra to his cousin Arjuna.
Rama, Krishna, Arjuna possessed this weapon.

Nagastra:
The snake weapon used by Indrajit against Rama and Lakshmana, used by Karna against Arjuna.

Nagapasham: is the celestial weapon equal to Nagastra".

Garudastra:
The eagle weapon to counter against the Nagastra.

Anjalikastra: The personal weapon of Indra.
This is the astra used by Arjuna to slay Karna in the Mahabharata war.

Ramabanam (Ramastra):
Created by Ram, and is used to kill the Ravana in Ramayana.
It cannot be countered by any weapon and could not be stopped by anyone except Rama.

Bhargavastra: this is the astra created by Parahsurama, he gave it to Karna in the Mahabharata.

Parvatastra: one of the most dangerous weapon, once it used mountains from sky fall in to the earth.

Vasavi Shakti: The magical dart weapon of Indra, unfailing at executing its target.
Indra granted it to Karna during the Kurukshetra war, in Mahabharata it was used by karna to kill Ghatotkacha.

Vajra: The thunderbolt weapon of Indra, who is the God of thunder and lightning, akin to Zeus and Jupiter.
,
In, the Rigveda, it is stated that it was fashioned by Tvashtar.
In the Puranas, the vajra stated to be made from the bones of sage Dadhichi.
In all versions, it was used by Indra to slay serpent called Vritra.
In the Mahabharata, Indra gave the Vajra to his son Arjuna.
Apart from Indra, only Arjuna possessed it.

Agneyastra:
The fire weapon, created by Agni, god of fire
Varunastra:
The water weapon, created by Varuna, god of the oceans
Vayavastra:
The wind weapon, created by Vayu
Samvarta: Weapon belonging to Yama used by Bharata to annihilate thirty million Gandharvas in a moment, tearing them to pieces.

Sammohanastra: Would cause entire hosts/armies to collapse in a trance.
It was used in the Mahabharata by Arjuna to collapse the entire army of Kuru Maharathis including Duryodhan, Drona, Kripa, Ashwatthama, Dushasana, and Karna.

Twashtastra: When used against a group of opponents (such as an army), would cause them to mistake each other for enemies and fight each other.

Sooryastra: Create a dazzling light that would dispel any darkness about and dry up water bodies.

Sabda vedastra: This weapon prevents an opponent from turning invisible.
Used by Arjuna against the Gandharva king Chitrasena.

Gandharvastra:
Created by Gandharva King Chitrasena (who defeated the combined force of Duryodhan and made Karna flee the battlefield).
He gave it to Arjuna.

Mayastra: Dispel any form of maya or sorcery in the vicinity.
It was possessed by Arjuna.

Manavastra: Created by Manu, it could overcome supernatural protections and carry the target hundreds of miles away.
Can inspire humane traits in an evil being.
This weapon was used by Rama on Maricha.

Bhaumastra:
Created by Goddess Bhumi Devi, the weapon could create tunnels deep into the earth and summon jewels.

Indrastra:
Created by the God Indra, it would bring about a 'shower' of arrows from the sky.

==
References ==
The ALKA Directed-energy weapon system (DEWS) is a Turkish dual electromagnetic/laser weapon developed by ROKETSAN.
It was first unveiled on the 2019 IDEF exhibition on 8 May 2019.
This combat laser was allegedly used to destroy one of GNC's Wing Loong II UAV, if this was true then it was the first time in human history that a combat vehicle used a combat laser to destroy another combat vehicle


==
History ==
It was reported in 2010s that various Turkish organizations like TÜBİTAK SAGE AND ASELSAN had been working on tactical lasers and some had achieved success in both 2015 and 2018 prior to the unveiling of ALKA directed-energy weapon.
According to ROKETSAN official Prof.
Uğur Kayasal
the weapon was developed in response to the increase of drone attacks on Turkish forces.
ROKETSAN spent five years making the directed energy weapon system and spent the last two years of the developmental period to make the system road-mobile.
On 4 August 2019 an ALKA DEW mounted on an off-road armored car shot down a Chinese Wing Loong II UAV in Misrata, Libya.

== Characteristics ==
The ALKA DEW is claimed to have a power of 50 kW.
It operates both laser and electromagnetic systems.
It purportedly uses ATR while using both Electro-optical and radar detection to track multiple targets simultaneously.
It is claimed by its designers to have the capability to disable a swarm of drones at a range of 4000 m, destroy a target with laser at 500 m distance and destroy a target at 1000 m distance with electromagnetic weapons.
According to the designers, it can track targets at speeds as high as 150 km/h and track targets with precision of 8 mm at 1000 m distance.
It can purportedly operate in both night and day time and on multiple platforms, both stationary and mobile.
It has allegedly been used both against IEDs and UAVs in multiple environments.

==
References ==
This is a list of surviving North American P-51 Mustangs, including airworthy planes and planes on display.

== Survivors ==


===
Australia ===
Airworthy
CA-18 Mustang 21
A68-105 (painted as Mustang IV KH677/CV-P) – Judy Pay and Richard Hourigan at Tyabb, Victoria.

A68-107 – Pay's Air Service in Scone, New South Wales
A68-110
(painted as P-51D A68-769) –
Caboolture Warplane Museum in Caboolture, Queensland.

A68-118 – Jeff Trappett in Morwell, Victoria.
CA-18
Mustang 23
A68-170 – "Duffy's Delight" at RAAF Museum,
Point Cook, Victoria.
CA-18
Mustang PR.22

A68-199 – Peter Gill at Tyabb, Victoria.
P-51D
45-11526 – Wylie Aviation in Perth, Western Australia.
On display
P-51D
A68-648 (44-13106) – Australian War Memorial in Canberra.
Under restoration
CA-17 Mustang 20

A68-71 – Australian National Aviation Museum at Moorabbin, Victoria.
P-51D
A68-750 (44-84489) – Peter N. Anderson in Sydney.
===
Belgium ===
44-72826 Scat VI – former plane of Brigadier General Robin Olds, was privately owned in Tuscaloosa, Alabama where it crashed.
It was subsequently restored and is now flying in Belgium, privately owned.
===
Canada ===
AirworthyP-51D44-73210 – CanAm Investments in The Pas, Manitoba.

44-73463
– Michael Potter in Ottawa.

44-63350 –
Terry Dieno, Davidson, SaskatchewanOn displayP-51D44-73347 – Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Rockcliffe, Ontario.
===
China ===
On displayP-51D44-73920 – Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution in Beijing.
P-51K44-12458 – People's Liberation Army Air Force Museum in Changping.

===
Czech Republic ===
AirworthyP-51D45-11540 Excalibur – sold by Jim Read to a private Czech owner.
===
Dominican Republic ===
On displayP-51D44-72123 – San Isidro Air Force Base in Santo Domingo.
===
France ===
AirworthyP-51D44-74427
– JCB Aviation in Nimes-Courbessac.
On displayP-51D44-63871 – Musee de l'Air in Paris.

===
Germany ===
AirworthyP-51D44-72773
Lucky Lady VII (D-FPSI) –
Christoph Nöthinger in Eschbach, Bremgarten Airfield (EDTG).

44-72811
– Stefan Bungarten at Eschbach, Bremgarten Airfield (EDTG).

44-73871
– Max Alpha Aviation in Eschbach, Bremgarten Airfield (EDTG).
===
Indonesia ===
On displayP-51D44-84801 /
F-338 – Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport, East Jakarta, Jakarta.
P-51K44-12752
/ F-303 – The Indonesian Air Force HQ, East Jakarta, Jakarta.
Cavalier Mustang II44-74229 /
F-362 – The Indonesian Air Force HQ, East Jakarta, Jakarta.

Unknown
/ F-347 – Satriamandala Museum, South Jakarta, Jakarta.

Unknown / F-354 – Museum Palagan Ambarawa, Semarang Regency, Central Java.
Painted in ML-KNIL livery.

Unknown /
F-361 – Dirgantara Mandala Museum, Sleman Regency, Special Region of Yogyakarta.
Painted in Ignatius Dewanto's F-338 livery.

Unknown
/ F-363 – Abdul Rachman Saleh Airbase, Malang, East Java.
===
Israel ===
On displayP-51DIsraeli Defense Force s/n 18 (later, s/n 38) - The Israeli Air Force Museum Collection in Beer Sheva
Israeli Defense Force s
/n 41 -
The Israeli Air Force Museum Collection in Beer ShevaP-51K44-11811 –
The Israeli Air Force Museum Collection in Beer Sheva.

===
Italy
===
AirworthyP-51D44-73864 –
private owner in Crocetta del Montello.
On displayP-51D44-73444 – Italian Air Force Museum at Vigna di Valle Air Force Base.
===
Mexico ===
AirworthyP-51D44-72934 – Humberto Lobo in Monterey.
===
Netherlands ===
AirworthyP-51D44-74425 – 'Damn Yankee' Owner Tom van der Meulen at Oostwold Airport (EHOW).

44-74923 –
'Trusty Rusty' Owner 'Early Birds' foundation Lelystad Airport (EHLE).On displayP-51K44-12125 – The Militaire Luchtvaart Museum in Soesterberg.
===
New Zealand ==
=
AirworthyP-51D44-13016 – Robert Broek in Wanaka.
As of May 2014 this aircraft was for sale.

44-74829
– Graham Bethell, based at Ardmore, Auckland.
On displayP-51D44-74827 – RNZAF Museum at Wigram Air Force Base.
Under restoration45-11513 – NZ2423 Brendon Deere/Biggin Hill Historic Aircraft Centre, RNZAF Base Ohakea.
Ex John Smith collection, Mapua.
===
Philippines ===
On displayP-51D44-74627 – Basa Air Force Base.

3733/4823
- Philippine Air Force Aerospace Museum.
===
South Korea ===
On displayP-51D
44-73494 – Korean War Memorial in Seoul.

44-84669
– Korean War Museum in Seoul.

===
Sweden ===
AirworthyCavalier Mustang II44-10753 (adopted serial number, exact identity of a/c is unknown).
Former Salvadoran Air Force FAS 405 –
Biltema Nordic Services AB.
Aircraft based in Ängelholm.
On displayP-51D44-63992 Swedish Air Force number 26020 – Swedish Air Force Museum, Linköping.
P-51D44-72112 Swedish Air Force number 26084 – wreckage salvaged from a moor near Vidsel in 1998.
Restored and is now on display at Flygmuseet F21, Luleå.
===
Switzerland ===
On displayP-51D44-73349 – Swiss Air Force Museum in Dubendorf.

===
South Africa ===
Under restorationP-51D44-72202
– SAAF Museum at Swartkop Air Force Base.
===
Turkey ===
AirworthyP-51D44-13704 Ferocious Frankie – M.S.Ö. Air & Space Museum, Sivrihisar.
===
United Kingdom ===
AirworthyP-51D44-72035 – Hangar 11 Collection in North Weald, Essex.

44-72216
– Robs Lamplough in Duxford and North Weald.

44-73149
– Old Flying Machine Company in Duxford.

44-73877 –
Shaun Patrick, Sharkmouth Ltd., Goodwood.
On displayP-51D44-14574 – East Essex Aviation Museum in Essex.

44-73979 – The Imperial War Museum in London.

44-74409 Donald – RAF Museum in Hendon.

44-73415p – RAF Museum Cosford.
Under restorationP-51D44-13954 – Mustang Restoration Group in Coventry.

44-14291
– Phil G. Earthey.

44-73098
– Aces High Ltd., Duxford.

44-73822 Lil Margaret – privately owned in Bungay, Norfolk.
OtherP-51D45-11518 –
Maurice Hammond in Eye, Suffolk.
Airworthy until crashed at Hardwick, Norfolk on October 2, 2016.

44-84847 –
Miss Velma, of The Fighter Collection, in Duxford.
The aircraft experienced engine problems concluding an exhibit and force-landed short of the Duxford runway in a wheat field.
The crew was unharmed; the aircraft received moderate damage.
She is currently undergoing repairs to airworthy condition.

===
United States ===
====
Airworthy ====
CA-18
Mustang 20A68-1 (painted as 44-15757 Jeannie Too) – privately owned in Troy, Alabama.
CA-18
Mustang 21A68-39 (painted as 44-14826) – based at Erickson Aircraft Collection in Madras, Oregon.

A68-100 (painted as 44-14777 Flying Dutchman) – privately owned in Snellville, Georgia.
CA-18
Mustang 22A68-187
(painted as 44-74839 La Pistolera) – based at Lewis Air Legends in San Antonio, Texas.

A68-198 (painted as 45-11483 Short-Fuse-Salle) – privately owned in Ozona, Texas.
CA-18
Mustang 23A68-175
(painted as 44-74950 Slender Tender Tall) – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.
Cavalier Mustang
II67-14866 Bum Steer – privately owned in Houston, Texas.

67-22579 Mormon Mustang – privately owned in Rexburg, Idaho.

67-22580 Six Shooter – privately owned in Ennis, Montana.

67-22581 Lou IV – based at the Mid American Flight Museum in Mount Pleasant, Texas.
P-51A43-6006 (unnamed) – privately owned in Syracuse, Kansas.

43
-6251 Mrs. Virginia – based at Planes of Fame in Chino, California.
P-51B42-106638 Impatient Virgin – based at Historic Flight Foundation in Spokane, Washington.

43-12252 Old Crow – privately owned (Jack Roush) in Livonia, Michigan.

43-24837
Berlin Express – privately owned in Houston, Texas.
P-51C42-103645 Tuskegee Airmen – based at Commemorative Air Force (Red Tail Squadron) in South St. Paul, Minnesota.

42-103831
Ina the Macon Belle – based at Fantasy of Flight in Polk City, Florida.

43
-24907 Lope's Hope 3rd – based at Dakota Territory Air Museum in Minot, North Dakota.

43-25057 Boise Bee – based at Warhawk Air Museum in Nampa, Idaho.

43-25147 Princess Elizabeth – privately owned in Houston, Texas.
TP-51C42-103293
Betty Jane – based at Collings Foundation in Stow, Massachusetts.
P-51D44-10755 Cottonmouth – privately owned in Bridgman, Michigan.

44-11153 Kimberly Kaye – privately owned in Pleasanton, California.

44-12858 Sonny Boy – privately owned in Edmonds, Washington.

44-13105 Strega – privately owned in Bakersfield, California.

44-13250 Ridge Runner III – privately owned in Blaine, Minnesota.

44-13253 Goldfinger – privately owned in Thousand Oaks, California.

44-13257 Slender Tender & Tall – privately owned in Sarasota, Florida.

44-13903 Frances Dell – privately owned in Louisville, Colorado.

44-13521 Marinell – privately owned in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

44-14985 Millie G – privately owned in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

44-63350 Lou IV – privately owned in Wenatchee, Washington.

44-63476 KWITCHERBITCHEN – privately owned in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

44-63542
Jacqueline – privately owned in Carson City, Nevada.

44-63576 (unnamed) – privately owned in McMinnville, Oregon.

44-63577
Was That Too Fast – privately owned in Scottsdale, Arizona.

44-63663 Miss Marilyn II – privately owned in San Antonio, Texas.

44-63675
Sierra Sue / Gul Kalle – privately owned in Bloomington, Minnesota.

44-63701 Grim Reaper – privately owned in San Jose, California.

44-63807
Daddy's Girl – privately owned in McClellan, California.

44-63864
Twilight Tear – based at Fagen Fighters WWII Museum in Granite Falls, Minnesota.

44-63865
Tempus Fugit - based at Triple Tree Aerodrome in Woodruff, SC.

44-63893 Glamorous Glen III – privately owned in Reno, Nevada.

44-64122 Kansas City Kitty – privately owned in Jefferson City, Missouri.

44-72051 Sweet Revenge – based at Fagen Fighters WWII Museum in Granite Falls, Minnesota.

44-72145 Petie 3rd – privately owned in Santa Barbara, California.

44-72192 Straw Boss 2 – based at California Warbirds in Hollister, California.

44-72339
The Brat III – based at Cavanaugh Flight Museum in Addison, Texas.

44-72364 Upupa Epops – based at The Flying Heritage Collection in Everett, Washington.

44-72438 Hell-er Bust – privately owned in Boise, Idaho.

44-72483
Double Trouble Two – based at Military Aviation Museum in Pungo, Virginia.

44-72739
Man O War – based at Commemorative Air Force
(Southern California Wing) Camarillo, California.

44-72777 Blondie – privately owned in Klamath, California.

44-72907 Red Dog XII – privately owned in Castro Valley, California.

44-72942 Petie 2nd – privately owned in Pewaukee, Wisconsin.

44-73029 Bald Eagle – privately owned in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

44-73079 Primo Branco – privately owned in Half Moon Bay, California.

44-73129
Merlin's Magic – privately owned in Danville, California.

44-73140 Petie 2nd – privately owned in New Iberia, Louisiana.

44-73142 E Pluribus Unum – privately owned in Port Orange, Florida.

44-73206
Hurry Home Honey – privately owned in Blowing Rock, North Carolina.

44-73254 Louisiana Kid – privately owned in Onalaska, Texas.

44-73264 Gunfighter – based at Commemorative Air Force (Gunfighter Sponsor Group) in Council Bluffs, Iowa.

44-73275
Never Miss – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.

44
-73279 Sweet and Lovely
– privately owned in Alva, Oklahoma.

44-73287 Worry Bird – based at Air Combat Museum in Springfield, Illinois.

44-73343 Live Bait – based at Lewis Air Legends in  Houston, Texas.

44-73415 VooDoo – based at Planes of Fame in Chino, California.

44-73420
(unnamed) – based at Allied Fighters in Sun Valley, Idaho.

44-73436 American Beauty – based at Olympic Flight Museum in Olympia, Washington.

44-73454
This Is It – privately owned in New Castle, Delaware.

44-73543
Sweetie Face – privately owned in North Fort Myers, Florida.

44-73656 Moonbeam McSwine – based at Warbird Heritage Foundation in Waukegan,
Illinois
44-73704 Weaver's Nude – privately owned in Los Altos, California.

44-73751 Miss Kandy – privately owned in Los Angeles, California.

44-73843 Old Red Nose – based at Commemorative Air Force (Dixie Wing) in Peachtree City, Georgia.

44-73856
Double Trouble Two – privately owned in Houston, Texas.

44-73990
Alabama Rammer Jammer – privately owned in Geiger, Alabama.

44-74008
Comfortably Numb – privately owned in Lodi, California.

44-74009
Ain't
Missbehavin – privately owned in Shoal Creek, Alabama.

44-74012
(unnamed) – based at Stonehenge Air Museum in Lincoln County, Montana.

44-74202 Swamp Fox – privately owned in Concord, North Carolina.

44-74230 Gentleman Jim – privately owned (Jack Roush) in Livonia, Michigan.

44-74389 Speedball Alice – privately owned in Sebastopol, California.

44-74391
The Hun Hunter/Texas – privately owned in Houston, Texas.

44-74404 Dazzling Donna – privately owned in Kindred, North Dakota.

44-74423 Miss Van Nuys – privately owned in Los Angeles, California.

44-74445 Pecos Bill – privately owned in Burnet, Texas.
Destroyed in fatal crash on November 17, 2018
44-74458
Sizzlin' Liz – privately owned in Jacksonville, Florida.

44-74466
Barbara Jean – privately owned in Raymond, Nebraska.

44-74483
(unnamed) – privately owned in Vineburg, California.

44-74494
Mustang Sally – privately owned in Onalaska, Texas.

44-74497 Little Witch – privately owned in Kissimmee, Florida.

44-74502
Crazy Horse 2 – privately owned in Kissimmee, Florida.

44-74506 Lady B – privately owned in Port Orange, Florida.

44-74524 Dakota Kid/Long Island Kid – based at Dakota Territory Air Museum in Minot, North Dakota.

44-74536
Miss America – based at Oklahoma Museum of Flying in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

44-74582 Crusader – privately owned in Denver, Colorado.

44-74602
(unnamed) – privately owned in Ione, California.

44-74739
Ole Yeller – based at Legacy of Flight Museum in Rexburg, Idaho.

44-74774 Old Crow – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.

44-74832 Boomer – based at Fargo Air Museum in Fargo, North Dakota.

44-74865
My Sweet Mary Lou – privately owned in Provo, Utah.

44-74813 Cripes a Mighty – privately owned in Coshocton, Ohio.

44-74878
(unnamed) – privately owned in Indianapolis, Indiana.

44-74908 Bunny – based at Palm Springs Air Museum in Palm Springs, California.

44-74976 Obsession – privately owned in Port Orange, Florida.

44-74977 Charlotte's Chariot II – privately owned in Helena, Montana.

44-74996 Dago Red – privately owned in Kerman, California.

44-75009 Rosalie – privately owned in Carson City, Nevada.

44-75452
Happy Jack's Go Buggy – privately owned in San Antonio, Texas.

44-84390 Section Eight – privately owned in Aberdeen, Idaho.

44-84410 Cincinnati Miss – based at Tri-State Warbird Museum in Batavia, Ohio.

44-84615 Blood Brother – privately owned in Sidney, Montana.

44-84655 Toulouse Nuts – based at the Collings Foundation in Stow, Massachusetts.
This aircraft has two seats.

44-84658
The Friendly Ghost – based at War Eagles Air Museum in Santa Teresa, New Mexico.

44-84745 Crazy Horse – privately owned in Nashua, New Hampshire.

44-84753 Buzzin Cuzzin – privately owned in Holderness, New Hampshire.

44-84860
Lady Jo – privately owned in Cloverdale, California.

44-84864
(unnamed) – privately owned in Hayward, California.

44-84900 NACA 127 – privately owned in Las Vegas, Nevada.

44-84933
The Rebel – privately owned in Wellington, Florida.

44-84952
Sarah Jean – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.

44-84961 Wee Willy II – based at Planes of Fame in Chino, California.

45-11367 Angels Playmate – privately owned in Cheraw, South Carolina.

45-11391 Boo Man Choo – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.

45-11439 Quicksilver – privately owned in Maxwelton, West Virginia.

45-11471 Diamondback – privately owned in Boise, Idaho.

45-11495 Little Rebel – privately owned in Alva, Oklahoma.

45-11507 Cripes a Mighty 3rd – based at Fantasy of Flight in Polk City, Florida.

45-11525 Val Halla – based at Heritage Flight Museum in Eastsound, Washington.

45-11553 Shangri-La – privately owned in Montgomery, Texas.

45-11558
(unnamed) – privately owned in Los Angeles, California.

45-11559 Mad Max – privately owned in Little Falls, New Jersey.

45-11582 Dolly – based at Planes of Fame in Chino, California.

45-11586 Little Horse – based at Dakota Territory Air Museum in Minot, North Dakota.

45-11628
Ho Hun – privately owned in Mesa, Arizona.

45
-11633 Lady Alice – privately owned in Wilmington, Delaware.

45-11636 Stang Evil – privately owned in Lakewood, Colorado.
P-51H44-64314
(unnamed) – privately owned in Alamo, California.
P-51K44-12016
Fragile but Agile – privately owned in Houston, Texas.

44-12840
Kiss
Me Kate – privately owned by Valhalla Aviation Inc. in Los Angeles, California.

44-12852 Frenesi – privately owned in Houston, Texas.
====
On display ====
Cavalier Mustang II68-15795 –
Minnesota Air National Guard Museum in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
XP-5141-038
Original XP-51 – EAA AirVenture Museum in Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
P-51A43-6274 (unnamed)
– Yanks Air Museum in Chino, California.
P-51C44-10947 Excalibur III – Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the National Air and Space Museum in Chantilly, Virginia.
P-51D
serial number
unknown Bunnie/Miss Kentucky State – National World War II Museum in New Orleans, Louisiana.

serial number unknown
Feeble Eagle – Museum of Flight in Seattle, Washington.

serial number unknown – South Carolina Air National Guard Memorial Park, McEntire Air National Guard Station, South Carolina.

assembled from multiple P-51 hulks/multiple serial numbers; marked as 44-13371 Audrey – Hill Aerospace Museum, Hill AFB, Utah.

44-13571
No unique name; painted as post-WW II Eglin Field armament evaluation aircraft- Air Force Armament Museum at Eglin AFB, Florida.

44-63272
Bad Angel – Pima Air & Space Museum, adjacent to Davis-Monthan AFB, Tucson, Arizona.

44
-63615 Bunnie – Seymour Johnson AFB, North Carolina.

44-72948
Wham Bam – Charleston ANGB, West Virginia.

44-72989
(unnamed) –
Volk Field ANGB, Wisconsin.

44
-73683 Bunnie – San Diego Aerospace Museum in San Diego, California.

44-73972
(unnamed) –
Fresno ANGB in Fresno, California.

44-74216 Derailer – Battleship Memorial Park in Mobile, Alabama.

44-74407
(unnamed) –
Fargo ANGB/Hector Field in Fargo, North Dakota.

44-74910
Miss Judy – Yanks Air Museum in Chino, California.

44-74936 Shimmy IV – National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright-Patterson AFB in Dayton, Ohio.

44-74939 Willit Run? –
National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC.

44-75007
Paul
I – EAA AirVenture Museum in Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
P-51H44-64265
Louisiana Heatwave – Museum of Aviation, Robins Air Force Base in Warner Robins, Georgia.

Formerly on display at Octave Chanute Aerospace Museum at the former Chanute AFB in Rantoul, Illinois.

44-64376
(unnamed) – Lackland AFB in Texas.
P-51K44-12116 Second Fiddle – Crawford Auto-Aviation Museum in Cleveland, Ohio.
====
Under restoration or in storage ====
P-51A43-6178 –
in storage at Fantasy of Flight in Polk City, Florida.
P-51C42-103740 – to airworthiness by The Oklahoma Museum of Flying in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
P-51D44-63762 – to airworthiness by private owner in Camden, Delaware.

44-63791 – to airworthiness by private owner in Pensacola, Florida.

44-63889 Queen of Hearts – to airworthiness by private owner in Onalaska, Texas.

44-72028 – to airworthiness by private owner in Camden, Delaware.

44-72059 – to airworthiness by private owner in Wilmington, Delaware.

44-72395 – to airworthiness by private owner in Camden, Delaware.

44-72400 – for static display by New England Air Museum in Windsor Locks, Connecticut.

44-72902 American Dreamer – in storage by private owner in West Hollywood, California.

44-72936 – to airworthiness by private owner in Encino, California.

44-72990
(unnamed) – in storage at US Army Aviation Museum at Fort Rucker, Alabama.

44-73081 – in storage by private owner in Hayward, California.

44-73163 – to airworthiness by private owner in Hot Springs, North Carolina.

44-73323 – to airworthiness by private owner in Encino, California.

44-73350 Archie – in storage by private owner in Belle, Missouri.

44-73437 – to airworthiness by private owner in Dover, Delaware.

44-73518 Precious Metal – to airworthiness by private owner in Hollywood, Florida.

44-74311 RCAF 9577 – in storage by private owner in San Martin, California.

44-74469 Red Dog – in storage by private owner in Chandler, Arizona.

44-74543 Geraldine – to airworthiness by private owner in Sierra Madre, California.

44-74960 – to airworthiness by private owner in Valparaiso, Indiana.

44-75024 – to airworthiness by War Eagles Air Museum in Santa Teresa, New Mexico.

44-77902 – in storage by private owner in Big Spring, Texas.

44-84850 Su Su – to airworthiness by private owner in La Mesa, California.

44-84896 – to airworthiness by private owner in Pensacola, Florida.

44-84962 – in storage by private owner in New Athens, Illinois.

45-11571 – in storage by private owner in Bandon, Oregon.
P-51H44-64375 – to airworthiness by private owner in Blaine, Minnesota.
P-51K44-11807 – to airworthiness by private owner in Fargo, North Dakota.

44-12118 – to airworthiness by private owner in Bemidji, Minnesota.

44-12140 – in storage by private owner in San Diego, California.
===
Venezuela ===
On displayP-51D45-11458 – Museo Aeronauticoat Maracay Air Force Base.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
A dazzler is a non-lethal weapon which uses intense directed radiation to temporarily disable its target with flash blindness.
Targets can include sensors or human vision.

Initially developed for military use, non-military products are becoming available for use in law enforcement and security.

==
Design ==
Dazzlers emit infrared or invisible light against various electronic sensors, and visible light against humans, when they are intended to cause no long-term damage to eyes.
The emitters are usually lasers, making what is termed a laser dazzler.
Most of the contemporary systems can be carried by a person, and operate in either the red (a laser diode) or green (a diode-pumped solid-state laser, DPSS) areas of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The green laser is chosen for its unique ability to react with the human eye.

==
History ==
Some searchlights are bright enough to cause permanent or temporary blindness, and they were used to dazzle the crews of bombers during World War II.
Whirling Spray was a system of search lights fitted with rotating mirrors which was used to dazzle and confuse pilots attacking the Suez canal.
This was developed into the Canal Defence Light, a small mobile tank mounted system intended for use in the Rhine crossings.
However, the system was mainly used as conventional searchlights.

Handgun or rifle-mounted lights may also be used to temporarily blind an opponent and are sometimes marketed for that purpose.
In both cases the primary purpose is to illuminate the target and their use to disorient is secondary.

The first reported use of laser dazzlers in combat was possibly by the British, during the Falklands War of 1982, when they were reputedly fitted to various Royal Navy warships to hinder low-level Argentinian air attacks.
However, Michael Heseltine, the UK's Secretary of State for Defence immediately after the conflict, advised that whilst the dazzlers had been deployed they were not used.
At the end of Operation Desert Storm, F-15E crews observing the Iraqi military's massacre of Kurdish civilians at Chamchamal were forbidden from firing on the attackers, but instead used their lasers as a dazzler weapon.
This ultimately proved ineffective in crashing any attack helicopters.
On 18 May 2006, the U.S. military announced it was using laser dazzlers mounted on M4 rifles in troops in Iraq as a non-lethal way to stop drivers who fail to stop at checkpoints manned by American soldiers.

==
Countermeasures ==
One defense against laser dazzlers are narrowband optical filters tuned to the frequency of the laser.
To counter such defense, dazzlers can employ emitters using more than one wavelength, or tunable lasers with wider range of output.
Another defense is photochromic materials able to become opaque under high light energy densities.
Nonlinear optics techniques are being investigated: e.g. vanadium-doped zinc telluride (V:ZnTe) can be used to form electro-optic power limiters able to selectively block the intense dazzler beam without affecting weaker light from an observed scene.

==
Legislation ==
Weapons designed to cause permanent blindness are banned by the 1995 United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
The dazzler is a non-lethal weapon intended to cause temporary blindness or disorientation and therefore falls outside this protocol.

==
Manufacturers and models ==
LE Systems, under the sponsorship of DARPA, developed a dazzler based on a DPSS laser, with green light output at 532 nm, essentially a higher-intensity version of a green laser pointer.
The advantage of 532 nm wavelength lies in its ability to interact with human eyes in daylight and reduced light conditions.

The Glare Mout and Glare LA-9/P, developed by B.E. Meyers, provide a non-lethal deterrent weapon which temporarily interferes with a subject's vision while causing no eye damage.
Unlike simple laser pointers that are engineered to emit a tight beam, these lasers are designed to emit a slightly diverging green beam that is less of an eye hazard but retain the desired effect on the viewer.
The diverging output also results in a larger spot at the intended target, making aiming the device at long distances, or at multiple subjects, much easier.
The Glare Mout's effective range is 150m–2 km.
The LA-9/P effective range is 300m–4 km, and it has a further safety feature that neutralizes the possibility of eye injury even at close ranges.

The Dazer Laser Guardian, Dazer Laser Stealth and "Dazer Laser Defender" by Laser Energetics, Inc. are different types of optical distraction laser systems which can temporarily visually impair, illuminate, target designate, warn and/or communicate visually with the intended target.

It is similar to the LANL-developed optical munition, Project Perseus.
The U.S. Marine Corps brought Saber 203 dazzlers to Somalia in January 1995 during Operation United Shield, but senior U.S. Department of Defense officials reportedly halted its experimental use in Somalia at the last minute for "humane reasons".
According to the Air Force, the Saber 203 system is also usable for law enforcement purposes.

The JD-3 laser dazzler is mounted on the Chinese Type 98 main battle tank.
It is coupled with a laser radiation detector, and automatically aims for the enemy's illuminating laser designator, attempting to overwhelm its optical systems or blind the operator.

The ZM-87 Portable Laser Disturber is a Chinese electro-optic countermeasure laser device.
It can blind enemy troops at up to 2 to 3 km range and temporarily blind them at up to 10 km range.
Note that this weapon is banned by the 1995 United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
See ZM-87 for more information.

The Photonic Disruptor, classified as a threat assessment laser (TALI), was developed and manufactured by Wicked Lasers in cooperation with Xtreme Alternative Defense Systems.
This tactical laser is equipped with a versatile focus-adjustable collimating lens to compensate for range and power intensity when used at close range to incapacitate an attacker, at a distance to safely identify threats.
The Photonic Disruptor has been featured on Discovery Channel's "Future Weapons.
"
It was also reportedly used by Sea Shepherd Conservation Society during their operations with the Ady Gil in the Southern Ocean against Japanese whaling.

The Outfit DEC or Laser Dazzle Sight (LDS) is a British ship-based laser, used since the 1980s
The veiling-glare laser works on ultraviolet and is designed to dazzle by causing fluorescence in the lens of the human eye.
There are other such laser weapon systems in development.

StunRay is a less-lethal optical incapacitation effector developed by
Genesis Illumination Inc. It uses collimated incoherent (non-laser) broad spectrum visible and near infrared light from a short-arc lamp to safely and temporarily impair vision, disorient and incapacitate aggressors for 5 seconds to 3 minutes without causing physical harm.
Full recover generally occurs in 10–20 minutes.
The hand-held model is designed for a range of 10m to 100m.
StunRay can be scaled up for ranges from 100m to 1000m for vehicle mounting, checkpoints, secure facilities, patrol boats, and ship protection.

The PHaSR or Personnel halting and stimulation response rifle was developed by the U.S. Department of Defense.

Three US Patents are held by Science & Engineering Associates (SEA) who is now QinetiQ North America.
They are: 5,685,636 Eye Safe Laser Security Device; 6,007,218 Self-Contained Laser Illuminator Module; and 6,190,022 B1 Enhanced Non-Lethal Security Device.

== See also ==
Flashbang
Flashlight
Terra-3
List of laser articles
Laser designator
AN
/PEQ-1 SOFLAM


== Notes ==


==
References ==
The Ground Forces of the Russian Federation (Russian:
Сухопутные войска Российской Федерации, tr.
Sukhoputnye Voyska Rossiyskoy
Federatsii, SVR) are the land forces of the Russian Armed Forces.
It is also simply referred to as the Russian Army (Russian:
Русская армия, tr.
Russkaya armiya).

==
Mission ==
The primary responsibilities of the Russian Ground Forces are the protection of the state borders, combat on land, the security of occupied territories, and the defeat of enemy troops.
The Ground Forces must be able to achieve these goals both in nuclear war and non-nuclear war, especially without the use of weapons of mass destruction.
Furthermore, they must be capable of protecting the national interests of Russia within the framework of its international obligations.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces is officially tasked with the following objectives:
the training of troops for combat, on the basis of tasks determined by the Armed Forces' General Staff
the improvement of troops' structure and composition, and the optimization of their numbers, including for special troops
the development of military theory and practice
the development and introduction of training field manuals, tactics, and methodology
the improvement of operational and combat training of the Ground Forces


==
History ==
As the Soviet Union dissolved, efforts were made to keep the Soviet Armed Forces as a single military structure for the new Commonwealth of Independent States.
The last Minister of Defence of the Soviet Union, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, was appointed supreme commander of the CIS Armed Forces in December 1991.
Among the numerous treaties signed by the former republics, in order to direct the transition period, was a temporary agreement on general purpose forces, signed in Minsk on 14 February 1992.
However, once it became clear that Ukraine (and potentially the other republics) was determined to undermine the concept of joint general purpose forces and form their own armed forces, the new Russian government moved to form its own armed forces.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed a decree forming the Russian Ministry of Defence on 7 May 1992, establishing the Russian Ground Forces along with the other branches of the military.
At the same time, the General Staff was in the process of withdrawing tens of thousands of personnel from the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany, the Northern Group of Forces in Poland, the Central Group of Forces in Czechoslovakia, the Southern Group of Forces in Hungary, and from Mongolia.

Thirty-seven divisions had to be withdrawn from the four groups of forces and the Baltic States, and four military districts—totalling 57 divisions—were handed over to Belarus and Ukraine.
Some idea of the scale of the withdrawal can be gained from the division list.
For the dissolving Soviet Ground Forces, the withdrawal from the former Warsaw Pact states and the Baltic states was an extremely demanding, expensive, and debilitating process.
As the military districts that remained in Russia after the collapse of the Union consisted mostly of the mobile cadre formations, the Ground Forces were, to a large extent, created by relocating the formerly full-strength formations from Eastern Europe to under-resourced districts.
However, the facilities in those districts were inadequate to house the flood of personnel and equipment returning from abroad, and many units "were unloaded from the rail wagons into empty fields.
"

The need for destruction and transfer of large amounts of weaponry under the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe also necessitated great adjustments.

=== Post-Soviet reform plans ===
The Ministry of Defence newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published a reform plan on 21 July 1992.
Later one commentator said it was "hastily" put together by the General Staff "to satisfy the public demand for radical changes.
"
The General Staff, from that point, became a bastion of conservatism, causing a build-up of troubles that later became critical.
The reform plan advocated a change from an Army-Division-Regiment structure to a Corps-Brigade arrangement.
The new structures were to be more capable in a situation with no front line, and more capable of independent action at all levels.
Cutting out a level of command, omitting two out of three higher echelons between the theatre headquarters and the fighting battalions, would produce economies, increase flexibility, and simplify command-and-control arrangements.
The expected changeover to the new structure proved to be rare, irregular, and sometimes reversed.
The new brigades that appeared were mostly divisions that had broken down until they happened to be at the proposed brigade strengths.
New divisions—such as the new 3rd Motor Rifle Division in the Moscow Military District, formed on the basis of disbanding tank formations—were formed, rather than new brigades.

Few of the reforms planned in the early 1990s eventuated, for three reasons: Firstly, there was an absence of firm civilian political guidance, with President Yeltsin primarily interested in ensuring that the Armed Forces were controllable and loyal, rather than reformed.
Secondly, declining funding worsened the progress.
Finally, there was no firm consensus within the military about what reforms should be implemented.
General Pavel Grachev, the first Russian Minister of Defence (1992–96), broadly advertised reforms, yet wished to preserve the old Soviet-style Army, with large numbers of low-strength formations and continued mass conscription.
The General Staff and the armed services tried to preserve Soviet era doctrines, deployments, weapons, and missions in the absence of solid new guidance.
British military expert, Michael Orr, claims that the hierarchy had great difficulty in fully understanding the changed situation, due to their education.
As graduates of Soviet military academies, they received great operational and staff training, but in political terms they had learned an ideology, rather than a wide understanding of international affairs.
Thus, the generals—focused on NATO expansion in Eastern Europe—could not adapt themselves and the Armed Forces to the new opportunities and challenges they faced.

===
Internal crisis of 1993 ===
The Russian Ground Forces reluctantly became involved in the Russian constitutional crisis of 1993 after President Yeltsin issued an unconstitutional decree dissolving the Russian Parliament, following its resistance to Yeltsin's consolidation of power and his neo-liberal reforms.
A group of deputies, including Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, barricaded themselves inside the parliament building.
While giving public support to the President, the Armed Forces, led by General Grachev, tried to remain neutral, following the wishes of the officer corps.
The military leadership were unsure of both the rightness of Yeltsin's cause and the reliability of their forces, and had to be convinced at length by Yeltsin to attack the parliament.

When the attack was finally mounted, forces from five different divisions around Moscow were used, and the personnel involved were mostly officers and senior non-commissioned officers.
There were also indications that some formations deployed into Moscow only under protest.
However, once the parliament building had been stormed, the parliamentary leaders arrested, and temporary censorship imposed, Yeltsin succeeded in retaining power.

===
Chechen Wars ===


====
First Chechen War ====
The Chechen people had never willingly accepted Russian rule.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Chechens declared independence in November 1991, under the leadership of a former Air Forces officer, General Dzhokar Dudayev.
The continuation of Chechen independence was seen as reducing Moscow's authority; Chechnya became perceived as a haven for criminals, and a hard-line group within the Kremlin began advocating war.
A Security Council meeting was held 29 November 1994, where Yeltsin ordered the Chechens to disarm, or else Moscow would restore order.
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev assured Yeltsin that he would "take Grozny with one airborne assault regiment in two hours.
"The
operation began on 11 December 1994 and, by 31 December, Russian forces were entering Grozny, the Chechen capital.
The 131st Motor Rifle Brigade was ordered to make a swift push for the centre of the city, but was then virtually destroyed in Chechen ambushes.
After finally seizing Grozny amid fierce resistance, Russian troops moved on to other Chechen strongholds.
When Chechen militants took hostages in the Budyonnovsk hospital hostage crisis in Stavropol Kray in June 1995, peace looked possible for a time, but the fighting continued.
Following this incident, the separatists were referred to as insurgents or terrorists within Russia.

Dzhokar Dudayev was assassinated in a Russian airstrike on 21 April 1996, and that summer, a Chechen attack retook Grozny.
Alexander Lebed, then Secretary of the Security Council, began talks with the Chechen rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov in August 1996 and signed an agreement on 22/23 August; by the end of that month, the fighting ended.

The formal ceasefire was signed in the Dagestani town of Khasavyurt on 31 August 1996, stipulating that a formal agreement on relations between the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria and the Russian federal government need not be signed until late 2001.

Writing some years later, Dmitri Trenin and Aleksei Malashenko described the Russian military's performance in Chechniya as "grossly deficient at all levels, from commander-in-chief to the drafted private."
The Ground Forces' performance in the First Chechen War has been assessed by a British academic as "appallingly bad".

Writing six years later, Michael Orr said "one of the root causes of the Russian failure in 1994–96 was their inability to raise and deploy a properly trained military force."
====
Second Chechen War ====
The Second Chechen War began in August 1999 after Chechen militias invaded neighboring Dagestan, followed quickly in early September by a series of four terrorist bombings across Russia.
This prompted Russian military action against the alleged Chechen culprits.

In the first Chechen war, the Russians primarily laid waste to an area with artillery and airstrikes before advancing the land forces.
Improvements were made in the Ground Forces between 1996 and 1999; when the Second Chechen War started, instead of hastily assembled "composite regiments" dispatched with little or no training, whose members had never seen service together, formations were brought up to strength with replacements, put through preparatory training, and then dispatched.
Combat performance improved accordingly, and large-scale opposition was crippled.

Most of the prominent past Chechen separatist leaders had died or been killed, including former President Aslan Maskhadov and leading warlord and terrorist attack mastermind Shamil Basayev.
However, small-scale conflict continued to drag on; as of November 2007, it had spread across other parts of the Russian Caucasus.
It was a divisive struggle, with at least one senior military officer dismissed for being unresponsive to government commands:
General Colonel Gennady Troshev was dismissed in 2002 for refusing to move from command of the North Caucasus Military District to command of the less important Siberian Military District.
The Second Chechen War was officially declared ended on 16 April 2009.

===
Reforms under Sergeyev ===
When Igor Sergeyev arrived as Minister of Defence in 1997, he initiated what were seen as real reforms under very difficult conditions.

The number of military educational establishments, virtually unchanged since 1991, was reduced, and the amalgamation of the Siberian and Trans-Baikal Military Districts was ordered.
A larger number of army divisions were given "constant readiness" status, which was supposed to bring them up to 80 percent manning and 100 percent equipment holdings.
Sergeyev announced in August 1998 that there would be six divisions and four brigades on 24-hour alert by the end of that year.
Three levels of forces were announced; constant readiness, low-level, and strategic reserves.
However, personnel quality—even in these favored units—continued to be a problem.
Lack of fuel for training and a shortage of well-trained junior officers hampered combat effectiveness.
However, concentrating on the interests of his old service, the Strategic Rocket Forces, Sergeyev directed the disbanding of the Ground Forces headquarters itself in December 1997.
The disbandment was a "military nonsense", in Orr's words, "justifiable only in terms of internal politics within the Ministry of Defence".
The Ground Forces' prestige declined as a result, as the headquarters disbandment implied—at least in theory—that the Ground Forces no longer ranked equally with the Air Force and Navy.

===
Reforms under Putin ===
Under President Vladimir Putin, more funds were committed, the Ground Forces Headquarters was reestablished, and some progress on professionalisation occurred.
Plans called for reducing mandatory service to 18 months in 2007, and to one year by 2008, but a mixed Ground Force, of both contract soldiers and conscripts, would remain.
(
As of 2009, the length of conscript service was 12 months.)Funding increases began in 1999; after some recovery in the Russian economy and the associated rise in income, especially from oil, "Russia's officially reported defence spending [rose] in nominal terms at least, for the first time since the formation of the Russian Federation".
The budget rose from 141 billion rubles in 2000 to 219 billion rubles in 2001.
Much of this funding has been spent on personnel—there have been several pay rises, starting with a 20-percent rise authorised in 2001; the current professionalisation programme, including 26,000 extra sergeants, was expected to cost at least 31 billion roubles ($1.1 billion USD).
Increased funding has been spread across the whole budget, with personnel spending being matched by greater procurement and research and development funding.

However, in 2004, Alexander Goltz said that, given the insistence of the hierarchy on trying to force contract soldiers into the old conscript pattern, there is little hope of a fundamental strengthening of the Ground Forces.
He further elaborated that they are expected to remain, to some extent, a military liability and "Russia's most urgent social problem" for some time to come.
Goltz summed up by saying: "All of this means that the Russian armed forces are not ready to defend the country and that, at the same time, they are also dangerous for Russia.
Top military personnel demonstrate neither the will nor the ability to effect fundamental changes.
"More money is arriving both for personnel and equipment; Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin stated in June 2008 that monetary allowances for servicemen in permanent-readiness units will be raised significantly.
In May 2007, it was announced that enlisted pay would rise to 65,000 roubles (US$2,750) per month, and the pay of officers on combat duty in rapid response units would rise to 100,000–150,000 roubles (US$4,230–$6,355) per month.
However, while the move to one year conscript service would disrupt dedovshchina, it is unlikely that bullying will disappear altogether without significant societal change.
Other assessments from the same source point out that the Russian Armed Forces faced major disruption in 2008, as demographic change hindered plans to reduce the term of conscription from two years to one.
===
Serdyukov reforms ===
A major reorganisation of the force began in 2007 by the Minister for Defence Anatoliy Serdyukov, with the aim of converting all divisions into brigades, and cutting surplus officers and establishments.
However, this affected units of continuous readiness (Russian: ЧПГ – части постоянной готовности) only.
It is intended to create 39 to 40 such brigades by 1 January 2016, including 39 all-arms brigades, 21 artillery and MRL brigades, seven brigades of army air defence forces, 12 communication brigades, and two electronic warfare brigades.
In addition, the 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division stationed in the Far East remained, and there will be an additional 17 separate regiments.
The reform has been called "unprecedented".

In the course of the reorganization, the 4-chain command structure (military district – field army – division – regiment) that was used until then was replaced with a 3-chain structure: strategic command – operational command – brigade.
Brigades are supposed to be used as mobile permanent-readiness units capable of fighting independently with the support of highly mobile task forces or together with other brigades under joint command.
In a statement on 4 September 2009, RGF Commander-in-Chief Vladimir Boldyrev said that half of the Russian land forces were reformed by 1 June and that 85 brigades of constant combat preparedness had already been created.
Among them are the combined-arms brigade, missile brigades, assault brigades and electronic warfare brigades.

===
Reforms Under Sergey Shoygu ===
After Sergey Shoygu took over the role of minister of defense, the reforms Serdyukov had implemented were redirected and corrected.
Sergey Shoygu replaced the purpose of the reforms to instead cover military training.
Sergey Shoygu also has helped restore trust with senior officers as well as the defense ministry.
He did this a number of ways but one of the ways was integrating himself by wearing a military uniform.
Sergey Shoygu helped improve operational readiness by ordering 750 military exercises including some that are very large (Vostok 2018).
The exercises also seemed to have helped validate the general direction of reform.
the effect of this readiness was seen during Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Since Serdyukov had already completed the unpopular reforms (military downsizing and reorganization), it had been relatively easy for Sergey Shoygu to be conciliatory with the officer corps and Ministry of Defense.
Rearmament has been a important goal of reform.
With the goal of 70% modernization by 2020
This was one of the main goals of these reforms.
From 1998 to 2001 The Russian Army received almost no new equipment.
Sergey Shoygu took a less confrontational approach with the defense industry.
By showing better flexibility on terms and pricing, the awarding of new contracts for the upcoming period was much better.
Sergey Shoygu promised that future contracts would be awarded primarily to domestic firms.
While easing tensions, these concessions also weakened incentives for companies to improve performance.

==
Structure ==
The President of Russia is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The Main Command (Glavkomat) of the Ground Forces, based in Moscow, directs activities.
This body was disbanded in 1997, but reformed by President Putin in 2001 by appointing Colonel General Nikolai Kormiltsev as the commander-in-chief of the ground forces and also as a deputy minister of defense.
Kormiltsev handed over command to Colonel General (later General of the Army)
Alexey Maslov in 2004, and
in a realignment of responsibilities, the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief lost his position as a deputy minister of defence.
Like Kormiltsev, while serving as Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief Maslov has been promoted to General of the Army.

In January 2014, the acting commander of the Russian Ground Forces was Lieutenant General Sergei Istrakov, who was appointed by Russian president Vladimir Putin upon the dismissal of former commander Colonel General Vladimir Chirkin over corruption charges in December 2013.
Istrakov handed over his position to a new commander on 2 May 2014, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces consists of the Main Staff of the Ground Troops, and departments for Peacekeeping Forces, Armaments of the Ground Troops, Rear Services of the Ground Troops, Cadres of the Ground Troops (personnel), Indoctrination Work, and Military Education.
There were also a number of directorates which used to be commanded by the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief in his capacity as a deputy defence minister.
They included NBC Protection Troops of the Armed Forces, Engineer Troops of the Armed Forces, and Troop Air Defence, as well as several others.
Their exact command status is now unknown.

===
Branches of service ===
The branches of service include motorized rifles, tanks, artillery and rocket forces, troop air defense, special corps (reconnaissance, signals, radioelectronic warfare, engineering, nuclear, biological and chemical protection, logistical support, automobile, and the protection of the rear), special forces, military units, and logistical establishments.
The Motorised Rifle Troops, the most numerous branch of service, constitutes the nucleus of Ground Forces' battle formations.
They are equipped with powerful armament for destruction of ground-based and aerial targets, missile complexes, tanks, artillery and mortars, anti-tank guided missiles, anti-aircraft missile systems and installations, and means of reconnaissance and control.
It is estimated that there are currently 19 motor rifle divisions, and the Navy now has several motor rifle formations under its command in the Ground and Coastal Defence Forces of the Baltic Fleet, the Northeastern Group of Troops and Forces on the Kamchatka Peninsula and other areas of the extreme northeast.
Also present are a large number of mobilisation divisions and brigades, known as "Bases for Storage of Weapons and Equipment", that in peacetime only have enough personnel assigned to guard the site and maintain the weapons.

The Tank Troops are the main impact force of the Ground Forces and a powerful means of armed struggle, intended for the accomplishment of the most important combat tasks.
As of 2007, there were three tank divisions in the force: the 4th and 10th within the Moscow Military District, and 5th Guards "Don" in the Siberian MD.

The 2nd Guards Tank Division in the Siberian Military District and the 21st Tank Division in the Far Eastern MD were disbanded.

The Artillery and Rocket Forces provide the Ground Forces' main firepower.
The Ground Forces currently include five or six static defence machine-gun/artillery divisions and seemingly now one division of field artillery—the 34th Guards in the Moscow MD.
The previous 12th in the Siberian MD, and the 15th in the Far Eastern MD, seem to have disbanded.
The Air Defense Troops (PVO) are one of the basic weapons for the destruction of enemy air forces.
They consist of surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery and radio-technical units and subdivisions.
Army Aviation, while intended for the direct support of the Ground Forces, has been under the control of the Air Forces (VVS) since 2003.
However, by 2015, Army Aviation will have been transferred back to the Ground Forces and 18 new aviation brigades will have been added.
Of the around 1,000 new helicopters that have been ordered under the State Armament Programmes, 900 will be for the Army Aviation.
The Spetsnaz GRU serve under the Ground Forces in peacetime and at the same time are directly subordinated to the Main Directorate of Intelligence (GRU) and will fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations or under special circumstances.
The Ground Forces currently fields 7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

=== Dispositions since 2010 ===
As a result of the 2008 Russian military reforms, the ground forces now consist of armies subordinate to the four new military districts: (Western, Southern, Central, and Eastern Military Districts).
The new districts have the role of 'operational strategic commands,' which command the Ground Forces as well as the Naval Forces and part of the Air and Air Defence Forces within their areas of responsibility.
Each major formation is bolded, and directs the non-bolded major subordinate formations.
It is not entirely clear to which superior(s) the four operational-strategic commands will report from 1 December 2010, as they command formations from multiple services (Air Force, Ground Forces & Navy).
A current detailed list of the subordinate units of the four military districts can be found in the respective articles.
During 2009, all 23 remaining divisions were reorganised into four tank brigades, 35 motor-rifle brigades, one prikritiya brigade formed from a machinegun-light artillery division, and three airborne-assault brigades (pre-existing).
Almost all are now designated otdelnaya (separate), with only several brigades retaining the guards honorific title.

In 2013, two of these brigades were reactivated as full divisions: the 2nd Guards Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division and 4th Guards
Kantemirovskaya Tank Division.
These two divisions marked the beginning of the expansion of the Ground Forces as more brigades are being reformed into full divisions within each military district.

==
Personnel ==
In 2006, the Ground Forces included an estimated total of 395,000 persons, including approximately 190,000 conscripts and 35,000 personnel of the Airborne Forces (VDV).
This can be compared to an estimated 670,000, with 210,000 conscripts, in 1995–96.
These numbers should be treated with caution, however, due to the difficulty for those outside Russia to make accurate assessments, and confusion even within the General Staff on the numbers of conscripts within the force.
The Ground Forces began their existence in 1992, inheriting the Soviet military manpower system practically unchanged, though it was in a state of rapid decay.
The Soviet Ground Forces were traditionally manned through terms of conscription, which had been reduced in 1967 from three to two years.
This system was administered through the thousands of military commissariats (Russian: военный комиссариат, военкомат, voyenkomat) located throughout the Soviet Union.
Between January and May of each year, every young Soviet male citizen was required to report to the local voyenkomat for assessment for military service, following a summons based on lists from every school and employer in the area.

The voyenkomat worked to quotas sent out by a department of the General Staff, listing how many young men were required by each service and branch of the Armed Forces.
(
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, draft evasion has skyrocketed; officials regularly bemoan the ten or so percent that actually appear when summoned.)
The new conscripts were then picked up by an officer from their future unit and usually sent by train across the country.
On arrival, they would begin the Young Soldiers' course, and become part of the system of senior rule, known as dedovshchina, literally "rule by the grandfathers.
"
There were only a very small number of professional non-commissioned officers (NCOs), as most NCOs were conscripts sent on short courses to prepare them for section commanders' and platoon sergeants' positions.
These conscript NCOs were supplemented by praporshchik warrant officers, positions created in the 1960s to support the increased variety of skills required for modern weapons.
The Soviet Army's officer-to-soldier ratio was extremely top-heavy, partially in order to compensate for the relatively low education level of the military manpower base and the absence of professional NCOs.
Following World War II and the great expansion of officer education, officers became the product of four-to-five-year higher military colleges.
As in most armies, newly commissioned officers usually become platoon leaders, having to accept responsibility for the soldiers' welfare and training (with the exceptions noted above).
Young officers in Soviet Army units were worked round the clock, normally receiving only three days off per month.
Annual vacations were under threat if deficiencies emerged within the unit, and the pressure created enormous stress.
Towards the end of the Soviet Union, this led to a decline in morale amongst young officers.
In the early 2000s, many junior officers did not wish to serve—in 2002, more than half the officers who left the forces did so early.
Their morale was low, among other reasons because their postings were entirely in the hands of their immediate superiors and the personnel department.
"
Without having to account for their actions, they can choose to promote or not promote him, to send him to Moscow or to some godforsaken post on the Chinese border.
"There is little available information on the current status of women, who are not conscripted, in the Russian Ground Forces.
According to the BBC, there were 90,000 women in the Russian Army in 2002, though estimates on numbers of women across the entire Russian Armed Forces in 2000 ranged from 115,000 to 160,000.
Women serve in support roles, most commonly in the fields of nursing, communications, and engineering.
Some officers' wives have become contract service personnel.

== Equipment ==
The Russian Ground Forces retain a very large quantity of vehicles and equipment.
There is also likely to be a great deal of older equipment in state military storage, a practice continued from the Soviet Union.
However, following the collapse of the USSR, the newly independent republics became host to most of the formations with modern equipment, whereas Russia was left with lower-category units, usually with older equipment.
As financial stringency began to bite harder, the amount of new equipment fell as well, and by 1998, only ten tanks and about 30 BMP infantry fighting vehicles were being purchased each year.
New equipment, like the Armata Universal Combat Platform, Bumerang and Kurganets-25 will be equipped from 2015 and replace many old tanks, BMPs, BTRs like the T-72, T-90, BMP-1/2/3, and BTR-80 in active service.
Funding for new equipment has greatly risen in recent years, and the Russian defence industry continues to develop new weapons systems for the Ground Forces.
Level of modern weapons in the Ground Forces is 60 per cent in late 2019.
Two Iskander-M missile system brigade sets, over 60 Tornado-G MLRS and more than 20 Msta-SM self-propelled howitzers have been received in 2016.
More than 70 upgraded Grad-M MLRS have been fielded too.
The Russian Ground Forces received two brigade sets of Buk-M3 and Buk-M2 air defence missile complexes in 2016.
Troops also received two division sets of Tor-M2 and two of Tor-M2U air defence missile complexes.
Moreover, the Forces received Verba MANPADS, more than 130 BMP-3 IFVs and BTR-82A APCs as well as more than 20 Tigr-M armored vehicles equipped with the Arbalet-DM combat module.
Russian troops have reportedly received 2,930 new or modernized systems allowing for two missile brigades, two SAM brigades and two SAM regiments, one Spetsnaz brigade, 12 motorized rifle and tank battalions, and three artillery divisions to be reequipped.
The share of modern weapons and equipment in the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 increased by 4 times.
Over eight years, more than 2.5 thousand units of armored weapons have been delivered to tank formations and military units of the Ground Forces, including more than 1,000 upgraded tanks
T-72B3, T-72B3M, T-80BVM and
T-90M.
The motorized rifle troops received more than 1.5 thousand units of infantry fighting vehicles BMP-3, upgraded BMP-2 and armored personnel carriers BTR-82A (AM).

The missile forces and artillery of the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 received over 1.5 thousand units of military equipment - operational-tactical missile systems "Iskander-M", multiple launch rocket systems of the "Tornado" family, self-propelled howitzers "Msta-SM".

Air Defense Troops of the Ground Forces received over 900 units of military equipment - long-range anti-aircraft missile systems S-300V4, short-range and medium-range anti-aircraft missile systems "Tor-M2" and "Buk-M3", portable anti-aircraft missile systems "Verba".
=== Equipment summary ===
Figures listed as "Active" only include equipment that circulated in active service.

==
Ranks and insignia ==
The newly re-emergent Russia retained most of the ranks of the Soviet Army, with some minor changes.
The principal difference from the usual Western style is some variation in generals' rank titles—in at least one case, Colonel General, derived from German usage.
Most of the rank names were borrowed from existing German/Prussian, French, English, Dutch, and Polish ranks upon the formation of the modern Russian Army in the late 17th century, and have lasted with few changes of title through the Soviet period.

==
Commanders ==


===
Commander-in-chief (1992–1997) ===
Vladimir Semyonov (1992–1997)


===
Chief of the Main Directorate (1998–2001) ===
Yury Bukreyev (1998–2001)


===
Commander-in-chief (2001–present) ===
Nikolai Kormiltsev (2001–2004)
Aleksei Maslov (2004–2008)
Vladimir Bondyrev (2008–2010)
Aleksandr Postnikov-Streltsov (2010–2012)
Vladimir Chirkin (2012–2013)
Sergei Istrakov (2013–2014)
Oleg Salyukov (2014–present)


==
Ground Forces Day ==
On 31 May 2006, President Vladimir Putin signed decree No.
549 "
On the establishment of professional holidays and memorable days in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation", according to which it was ordered to celebrate Ground Forces Day (Russian: День Сухопутных войск).
The date chosen for the holiday commemorates the edict made by Tsar Ivan the Terrible on 1 October 1550 on the placement in Moscow and surrounding districts of a thousand servicemen forming a local brigade of Streltsy, which essentially became a key document in the further formation and development of the Imperial Russian Army.

Forces Day was first celebrated on the Preobrazhenskaya Square in Moscow in the Church of the Transfiguration of the Lord, where a bishop's service was held.
Before the start of the service, an order of the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu and the decree of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow were read, according to which the Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord officially became the main temple of the RF Ground Forces.
A year later, the holiday was celebrated with the adoption of the Ground Forces Anthem.
The following holidays are also celebrated by the Ground Forces:
Day of Tankmen, Day of Rocket Forces and Artillery, Day of Air Defense.
==
Gallery ==
==
See also ==
Russian Airborne Forces
Naval Infantry (Russia)
Awards and emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Army of Russia at Wikimedia Commons
A credential is a piece of any document that details a qualification, competence, or authority issued to an individual by a third party with a relevant or de facto authority or assumed competence to do so.

Examples of credentials include academic diplomas, academic degrees, certifications, security clearances, identification documents, badges, passwords, user names, keys, powers of attorney, and so on.

Sometimes publications, such as scientific papers or books, may be viewed as similar to credentials by some people, especially if the publication was peer reviewed or made in a well-known journal or reputable publisher.

== Types and documentation of credentials ==
A person holding a credential is usually given documentation or secret knowledge (e.g., a password or key) as proof of the credential.
Sometimes this proof (or a copy of it) is held by a third, trusted party.

While in some cases a credential may be as simple as a paper membership card, in other cases, such as diplomas, it involves the presentation of letters directly from the issuer of the credential  its faith in the person representing them in a negotiation or meeting.

Counterfeiting of credentials is a constant and serious problem, irrespective of the type of credential.

A great deal of effort goes into finding methods to reduce or prevent counterfeiting.

In general, the greater the perceived value of the credential, the greater the problem with counterfeiting and the greater the lengths to which the issuer of the credential must go to prevent fraud.

=== Diplomacy ===

In diplomacy, credentials, also known as a letter of credence, are documents that ambassadors, diplomatic ministers, plenipotentiary, and chargés d'affaires provide to the government to which they are accredited, for the purpose, chiefly, of communicating to the latter the envoy's diplomatic rank.
It also contains a request that full credence be accorded to his official statements.
Until his credentials have been presented and found in proper order, an envoy receives no official recognition.

The credentials of an ambassador or minister plenipotentiary are signed by the head of state, those of a chargé d'affaires by the foreign minister.
Diplomatic credentials are granted and withdrawn at the pleasure of the issuing authority, based on widely varying criteria.
A receiving government may reject a diplomat’s credentials by declining to receive them, but in practice this rarely happens.

===
Medicine ===
In medicine, the process of credentialing is a detailed review of all permissions granted a medical doctor, physician assistant or nurse practitioner at every institution at which he or she has worked in the past, to determine a risk profile for them at a new institution.
It vets the practitioner for both receiving practice insurance and the ability to bill to insurance for patient care.

As well, it certifies legal and administrative body requirements, such as the Joint Commission.

Medical practitioners must also have credentials in the form of licenses issued by the government of the jurisdictions in which they practice, which they obtain after suitable education, training, and/or practical experience.

Most medical credentials are granted for a practice specific group.
They may also be withdrawn in the event of fraud or malpractice by their holders.

Typically they require continuing education validation and renewal to continue practice.

===
Information technology ===
Information systems commonly use credentials to control access to information or other resources.
The classic combination of a user's account number or name and a secret password is a widely used example of IT credentials.
An increasing number of information systems use other forms of documentation of credentials, such as biometrics (fingerprints, voice recognition, retinal scans), X.509, public key certificates, and so on.
===
Cryptography ===
Credentials in cryptography establish the identity of a party to communication.
Usually they take the form of machine-readable cryptographic keys and/or passwords.

Cryptographic credentials may be self-issued, or issued by a trusted third party; in many cases the only criterion for issuance is unambiguous association of the credential with a specific, real individual or other entity.

Cryptographic credentials are often designed to expire after a certain period, although this is not mandatory.
An X.509 public key certificate is an example of a cryptographic credential.

===
Operator licensing ===
Operators of vehicles such as automobiles, boats, and aircraft must have credentials in the form of government-issued licenses in many jurisdictions.
Often the documentation of the license consists of a simple card or certificate that the operator keeps on his person while operating the vehicle, backed up by an archival record of the license at some central location.
Licenses are granted to operators after a period of successful training and/or examination.

This type of credential often requires certification of good health and may also require psychological evaluations and screening for substance abuse.

Operator licenses often expire periodically and must be renewed at intervals.

Renewal may simply be a formality, or it may require a new round of examinations and training.

===
Security clearances ===
In military and government organizations, and some private organizations, a system of compartmenting information exists to prevent the uncontrolled dissemination of information considered to be sensitive or confidential.

Persons with a legitimate need to have access to such information are issued security clearances, which can be tracked and verified to ensure that no unauthorized persons gain access to protected information.

Security clearances are among the most carefully guarded credentials.
Often they are granted to individuals only after a lengthy investigation and only after their need to have access to protected information has been adequately justified to the issuing authority.

The most elaborate security-clearance systems are found in the world's military organizations.

Some credentials of this type are considered so sensitive that their holders are not even permitted to acknowledge that they have them (except to authorized parties).
Documentation of security clearances usually consists of records keep at a secure facility and verifiable on demand from authorized parties.

Breaches of security involving security clearances are often punished by specific statutory law, particularly if they occur in the context of deliberate espionage, whereas most other counterfeiting and misuse of credentials is punished by law only when used with deliberate intent to defraud in specific contexts.
Security clearances are regularly withdrawn when they are no longer justified, or when the person holding them is determined to be too great a security risk.

===
Journalism ===
In many democratic nations, press credentials are not required at the national or federal level for any publication of any kind.
However, individual corporations, and certain government or military entities require press credentials, such as a press pass, as a formal invitation to members of the press which grants them rights to photographs or videos, press conferences, or interviews.
Press credentials indicate that a person has been verified as working for a known publication, and holding a press pass typically allows that person special treatment or access rights.

Some governments impose restrictions on who may work as a journalist, requiring anyone working for the press to carry government-issued credentials.
Restricting press credentials can be problematic because of its limitations on freedom of the press, particularly if government leaders selectively grant, withhold, or withdraw press credentials to disallow critique of government policy.
Any press coverage published under governments that restrict journalism in this way is often treated with skepticism by others, and may not be considered any more truthful or informative than propaganda.

===
Trade credentials ===
Some trades and professions in some jurisdictions require special credentials of anyone practicing the trade or profession.
These credentials may or may not be associated with specific competencies or skills.

In some cases, they exist mainly to control the number of people who are allowed to exercise a trade or profession, in order to control salaries and wages.

Persons acting as merchants, freelancers, etc.,
may require special credentials in some jurisdictions as well.
Here again, the purpose is mainly to control the number of people working in this way, and sometimes also to track them for tax-reporting or other purposes like people evaluation.

===
Academic and professional credentials ===
The academic and professional world makes very extensive use of credentials, such as diplomas, degrees, certificates, and certifications, in order to attest to the completion of specific training or education programs by students, to attest to their successful completion of tests and exams, and to provide independent validation of an individual's possession of the knowledge, skills, and ability necessary to practice a particular occupation competently.

(For example: Arun Paul MSW, MPHIL)
Documentation of academic and professional credentials usually consists of a printed, formal document.
The issuing institution often maintains a record of the credential as well.

Academic credentials are normally valid for the lifetime of the person to whom they are issued.
Professional certifications are normally valid for a limited number of years, based on the pace of change in the certified profession, and require periodic recertification through reexamination (to demonstrate continuing competency as occupational standards of practice evolve) or continuing professional development (to demonstrate continually enhanced competency).Acquisition of these credentials often leads to increased economic mobility and work opportunity, especially for low-income people.

A general term for academic credentials in the form of a resume is Curriculum Vitae, abbreviated as CV.

===
Titles ===
Titles are credentials that identify a person as belonging to a specific group, such as nobility or aristocracy, or a specific command grade in the military, or in other largely symbolic ways.

They may or may not be associated with specific authority, and they do not usually attest to any specific competence or skill (although they may be associated with other credentials that do).
A partial list of such titles includes

personal titles, such as Lord, Knight, Right Honourable, indicating an earned or inherited rank or position within a formal power structure;
command ranks, such as Captain, Sergeant, etc.,
indicating likewise a very specific position in a command hierarchy, e.g. police rank or military rank;
an academic degree or professional designation such as PhD, EurIng, P.Eng or M.D., whether this be purely honorary or symbolic, or associated with credentials attesting to specific competence, learning, or skills;
labor union and club memberships;
persons allowed access to specific areas during special events, such as concerts and shows;
citizenship, as in the case of passports and birth certificates.

== See also ==
Access badge
Access control
Common Access Card
Digital credential
Keycard
Magnetic stripe
Credit CARD Act of 2009 card
Physical security
Proximity card
Smart card
Swipe card
Online credentials for learningDynamics:
Credentialism and educational inflation
Dago dazzler


=
= References ==
The list of equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces can be subdivided into: infantry weapons, vehicles, aircraft, watercraft, and clothing.

==
Small arms ==
== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Infantry fighting vehicles ===


===
Armored personnel carriers ===


===
Artillery ===


===
Anti-aircraft ===
Long and Medium air defense is under the authority of the Air Defense Forces of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Engineering vehicles ===


===
Utility vehicles ===


===
Cargo vehicles ===


===
Electronic warfare and communication ===
Communication equipment
Jammers
Eavesdropping equipment


===
Radars ==
=
Radar for long and medium air defense are under Radiolocation Forces authority of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Helicopters ===


===
Unmanned aerial vehicles and autonomous vehicles ===


===
Field kitchen units ===


==
See also ==
Ukrainian Ground Forces
Equipment of the National Guard of Ukraine
Equipment of the Ukrainian Air Force
List of armoured fighting vehicles of Ukraine


==
References ==
Modern equipment of the Turkish Land Forces.
Totals in these tables do not necessary accurately reflect combat attrition sustained during the ongoing Syrian-Turkish clashes and Kurdish–Turkish conflict.

==
Infantry weapons ==


===
Handguns ===


===
Shotguns ===


===
Submachine guns and personal defence weapons ===


=== Assault and battle rifles ===


===
Sniper and anti-materiel rifles ===


===
Machine guns ===


===
Anti-armor weapons ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


===
MANPADS ===


=== Grenades and mines ===


===
Mortars ===


===
Protective gear ===
== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Armored vehicles ===


===
Rockets and artillery ===


===
Anti-aircraft ===
Most of the Anti-aircraft equipment is in the inventory of Turkish Air Force.
===
Engineering vehicles and equipment ===


===
Utility vehicles ===


===
Cargo vehicles ===


===
Unmanned ground vehicles ===


===
Radar systems ===
These are radars in Turkish Land Forces command.
For other radars see List of active weapons of the Turkish Air Force.

===
Electronic warfare ===


==
Aircraft ==
These are aircraft in Turkish Land Forces command.
For other aircraft see List of active aircraft of the Turkish Air Force page.

===
Unmanned aircraft vehicles ===


===
Helicopters ===


===
Fixed wing aircraft ===


==
Future procurements ==


==
See also ==
Military equipment of Turkey
List of modern weapons of the Turkish Air Force
Equipment of the Turkish Naval Forces
Equipment of the Turkish Gendarmerie
Equipment of the Turkish Coast Guard


==
References ==


==
External links ==
See the Turkish Government, Undersecretariat for Defense Industries website for an official list of Turkish military procurement projects.
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to technology: collection of tools, including machinery, modifications, arrangements and procedures used by humans.
Engineering is the discipline that seeks to study and design new technology.
Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments.

== Components of technology ==
Knowledge
Engineering
Process
Science
Skill
Tools
Utensil
Equipment
Invention
Machinery
Structures (buildings, roads, bridges, canals, dams, etc.)

Man-made systems (see system)
Infrastructure
Public utility
==
Branches of technology ==
Aerospace – flight or transport above the surface of the Earth.

Space exploration – the physical investigation of the space more than 100 km above the Earth by either manned or unmanned spacecraft.

Applied physics – physics which is intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge or a connection between "pure" physics and engineering.

Agriculture – cultivation of plants, animals, and other living organisms.

Fishing – activity of trying to catch fish.
Fish are normally caught in the wild.
Techniques for catching fish include hand gathering, spearing, netting, angling and trapping.

Fisheries – a fishery is an entity engaged in raising or harvesting fish which is determined by some authority to be a fishery.
According to the FAO, a fishery is typically defined in terms of the "people involved, species or type of fish, area of water or seabed, method of fishing, class of boats, purpose of the activities or a combination of the foregoing features".

Fishing industry –  industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products.
It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors.

Forestry – art and science of tree resources, including plantations and natural stands.
The main goal of forestry is to create and implement systems that allow forests to continue a sustainable provision of environmental supplies and services.

Organic gardening and farming
Sustainable agriculture
Communication –
Books –
Telecommunication – the transfer of information at a distance, including signaling, telegraphy, telephony, telemetry, radio, television, and data communications.

Radio – Aural or encoded telecommunications.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

Technology of television –
Television broadcasting – Visual and aural telecommunications.

Computing – any goal-oriented activity requiring, benefiting from, or creating computers.
Computing includes designing and building hardware and software systems; processing, structuring, and managing various kinds of information; doing scientific research on and with computers; making computer systems behave intelligently; creating and using communications and entertainment media; and more.

Computer engineering –  discipline that integrates several fields of electrical engineering and computer science required to develop computer systems, from designing individual microprocessors, personal computers, and supercomputers, to circuit design.

Computers – general purpose devices that can be programmed to carry out a finite set of arithmetic or logical operations.
Since a sequence of operations can be readily changed, computers can solve more than one kind of problem.

Computer science – the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and of practical techniques for their implementation and application in computer systems.

Artificial intelligence – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Natural language processing –
Object recognition –
in computer vision, this is the task of finding a given object in an image or video sequence.

Cryptography – the technology to secure communications in the presence of third parties.

Human-computer interaction
Information technology – the acquisition, processing, storage and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numerical information by a microelectronics-based combination of computing and telecommunications.

Software engineering – the systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Programming – the process of designing, writing, testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code of computer programs.

Software development – development of a software product, which entails computer programming (process of writing and maintaining the source code),
but also encompasses a planned and structured process from the conception of the desired software to its final manifestation.

Web design and web development –
C++ – one of the most popular programming languages with application domains including systems software, application software, device drivers, embedded software, high-performance server and client applications, and entertainment software such as video games.

Perl – high-level, general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming language.

Used for text processing, CGI scripting, graphics programming, system administration, network programming, finance, bioinformatics, and more.

Software – one or more computer programs and data held in the storage of the computer for one or more purposes.
In other words, software is a set of programs, procedures, algorithms and its documentation concerned with the operation of a data processing system.

Free software – software that can be used, studied, and modified without restriction.

Search engines – information retrieval systems designed to help find information stored on a computer system.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

World Wide Web –
Computer industry
Apple Inc. – manufacturer and retailer of computers, hand-held computing devices, and related products and services.

Google – Google Inc. and its Internet services including Google Search.

Construction – building or assembly of any physical structure.

Design – the art and science of creating the abstract form and function for an object or environment.

Architecture – the art and science of designing buildings.

Electronics – Electronics comprises the physics, engineering, technology and applications that deal with the emission, flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter.

Energy –
In physics, energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on, or to heat, the object.

Energy development – ongoing effort to provide abundant, efficient, and accessible energy resources through knowledge, skills, and construction.

Energy storage – the storage of a form of energy that can then be used later.

Nuclear technology – the technology and application of the spontaneous and induced reactions of atomic nuclei.

Wind energy – wind energy is the use of wind to provide the mechanical power through wind turbines to turn electric generators and traditionally to do other work, like milling or pumping.

Solar energy – Solar energy is radiant light and heat from the Sun that is harnessed using a range of ever-evolving technologies such as solar heating, photovoltaics, solar thermal energy, solar architecture, molten salt power plants and artificial photosynthesis.

Engineering – the application of science, mathematics, and technology to produce useful goods and systems.

Chemical engineering – the technology and application of chemical processes to produce useful materials.

Computer engineering – Computer engineering (CE) is a branch of engineering that integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software.

Control engineering – Control engineering or control systems engineering is an engineering discipline that applies automatic control theory to design systems with desired behaviors in control environments.

Electrical engineering – the technology and application of electromagnetism, including electricity, electronics, telecommunications, computers, electric power, magnetics, and optics.

Climate engineering –  the large-scale manipulation of a specific process central to controlling Earth
’s climate for the purpose of obtaining a specific benefit.

Software engineering – the technology and application of a systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Firefighting – act of extinguishing fires.
A firefighter fights fires to prevent destruction of life, property and the environment.
Firefighting is a professional technical skill.

Forensic science – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health
Biotechnology – applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Ergonomics – the study of designing equipment and devices that fit the human body, its movements, and its cognitive abilities.

Hydrology – The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Industry – production of an economic good or service.

Automation – use of machinery to replace human labor.

Industrial machinery –
Machines – devices that perform or assist in performing useful work.

Manufacturing – use of machines, tools and labor to produce goods for use or sale.
The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.

Robotics – deals with the design, construction, operation, structural disposition, manufacture and application of robots.

Object recognition
Information science –
Cartography – the study and practice of making maps.
Combining science, aesthetics, and technique, cartography builds on the premise that reality can be modeled in ways that communicate spatial information effectively.

Library science – technology related to libraries and the information fields.

Military science – the study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Mining – extraction of mineral resources from the earth.

Nanotechnology –
The study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with structures sized between 1 and 100 nanometre in at least one dimension, and involves developing materials or devices possessing at least one dimension within that size.

Prehistoric technology – technologies that emerged before recorded history (i.e., before the development of writing).

Quantum technology  –
Sustainability – capacity to endure.
In ecology, the word describes how biological systems remain diverse and productive over time.
Long-lived and healthy wetlands and forests are examples of sustainable biological systems.
For humans, sustainability is the potential for long-term maintenance of well being, which has environmental, economic, and social dimensions.

Transport – the transfer of people or things from one place to another.

Rail transport –
means of conveyance of passengers and goods by way of wheeled vehicles running on rail tracks consisting of steel rails installed on sleepers/ties and ballast.

Vehicles – mechanical devices for transporting people or things.

Automobiles – human-guided powered land-vehicles.

Bicycles – human-powered land-vehicles with two or more wheels.

Motorcycles – single-track, engine-powered, motor vehicles.
They are also called motorbikes, bikes, or cycles.

Vehicle components
Tires – ring-shaped coverings that fit around wheel rims


==
Technology by region ==
Science and technology in Africa
Science and technology in Algeria
Science and technology in Angola
Science and technology in Morocco
Science and technology in South Africa
Science and technology in Asia
Science and technology in Bangladesh
Science and technology in China
Science and technology in India
Science and technology in Indonesia
Science and technology in Iran
Science and technology in Israel
Science and technology in Japan
Science and technology in Malaysia
Science and technology in Pakistan
Science and technology in the Philippines
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Turkey
Science and technology in Europe
Science and technology in Albania
Science and technology in Belgium
Science and technology in Brussels
Science and technology in Flanders
Science and technology in Wallonia
Science and technology in Bulgaria
Science and technology in France
Science and technology in Germany
Science and technology in Hungary
Science and technology in Iceland
Science and technology in Italy
Science and technology in Portugal
Science and technology in Romania
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Spain
Science and technology in Switzerland
Science and technology in Ukraine
Science and technology in the United Kingdom
Science and technology in North America
Science and technology in Canada
Science and technology in the United States
Science and technology in Jamaica
Science and technology in South America
Science and technology in Argentina
Science and technology in Colombia
Science and technology in Venezuela


==
History of technology ==
History of technology
Timelines of technology
Man vs. Technology
Technology museum –


===
History of technology by period ===
Prehistoric technology (outline)
Control of fire by early humans
Ancient technology – c. 800 BCE – 476 CE
Ancient Egyptian technology –
Obelisk making technology in ancient Egypt –
Ancient Greek technology – c. 800 BCE – 146 BCE
Ancient Roman technology – c. 753 BCE – 476 CE
Science and technology of the Han dynasty – 206 BCE – 220
CE
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty – 618–907
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
960–1279 CE
Medieval technology – 5th to 15th century
Byzantine technology – 5th to 15th century
Islamic Golden Age – 8th to 13th century
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire – 14th to 20th century
Industrial revolution – 18th to 19th century
Second Industrial Revolution – 1820–1914
Technology during World War I – 1914–1918
Technology during World War II – 1939–1945
Allied technological cooperation during World War II –
American military technology during World War II –
German military technology during World War II –
1970s in science and technology
1980s in science and technology
1990s in science and technology
2000s in science and technology
2010s in science and technology


====
Technological ages ====
Stone Age –
Bronze Age –
Iron Age –
The Renaissance –
Industrial Age –
Information Age –


===
Media about the history of technology ===
Connections – documentary television series and 1978 book ("Connections" based on the series) created, written and presented by science historian James Burke.
It took an interdisciplinary approach to the history of science and invention and demonstrated how various discoveries, scientific achievements, and historical world events were built from one another successively in an interconnected way to bring about particular aspects of modern technology.
There were 3 seasons produced, and they aired in 1978, 1994, and 1997.

The Day the Universe Changed –
documentary television series written and presented by science historian James Burke, originally broadcast in 1985 by the BBC.
The series' primary focus is on the effect of advances in science and technology on western society in its philosophical aspects.
Ran for one season, in 1986.
===
History of technology by region ===
History of science and technology in the Mediterranean
Ancient Greek technology –
Ancient Roman technology –
Timeline of Polish science and technology –
History of science and technology in Africa –
History of science and technology in Asia
History of science and technology in China –
Science and technology of the Han dynasty –
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty –
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
History of science and technology in the People's Republic of China –
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent –
Science and technology in ancient India –
History of science and technology in Korea –
Science and Technology in the Ottoman Empire –
Science and technology in the Soviet Union –
History of science and technology in North America
United States technological and industrial history –
History of science and technology in Mexico –
Technological and industrial history of Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 20th-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 21st-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of the People's Republic of China –
Technological and industrial history of the United States –


===
History of technology by field ===
History of invention
History of aerospace
History of artificial intelligence
History of agriculture
History of agricultural science
History of architecture, timeline
History of biotechnology
History of cartography
History of chemical engineering
History of communication
History of computing, timeline
History of computer science
History of computing hardware
History of the graphical user interface
History of hypertext, timeline
History of the Internet, Internet phenomena
History of the World Wide Web
History of operating systems
History of programming languages,
timeline
History of software engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of energy development
History of engineering
History of industry
History of library and information science
History of microscopy
History of manufacturing
History of the factory
History of mass production
History of materials science, timeline
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of motor and engine technology
History of military science
History of transport, timeline
History of biotechnology –
Timeline of biotechnology –
History of display technology –
History of film technology –
History of information technology auditing –
History of military technology –
History of nanotechnology –
History of science and technology –
History of web syndication technology –
Timeline of agriculture and food technology –
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology –
Timeline of communication technology –
Timeline of diving technology –
Timeline of heat engine technology –
Timeline of hypertext technology –
Timeline of lighting technology –
Timeline of low-temperature technology –
Timeline of materials technology –
Timeline of medicine and medical technology –
Timeline of microscope technology –
Timeline of motor and engine technology –
Timeline of particle physics technology –
Timeline of photography technology –
Timeline of rocket and missile technology –
Timeline of telescope technology –
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and
observing technology –
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology –
Timeline of time measurement technology –
Timeline of transportation technology –


==
Hypothetical technology ==
Potential technology of the future includes:
Hypothetical technology –
Femtotechnology – hypothetical term used in reference to structuring of matter on the scale of a femtometer, which is 10−15 m.
This is a smaller scale in comparison to nanotechnology and picotechnology which refer to 10−9 m and 10−12 m respectively.
Work in the femtometer range involves manipulation of excited energy states within atomic nuclei (see nuclear isomer) to produce metastable (or otherwise stabilized) states with unusual properties.

==
Philosophy of technology ==
Philosophy of technology –
Appropriate technology –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Jacques Ellul –
Paradigm –
Posthumanism –
Precautionary principle –
Singularitarianism –
Techno-progressivism –
Technocentrism –
Technocracy –
Technocriticism –
Technological determinism –
Technological evolution –
Technological nationalism –
Technological singularity –
Technology readiness level –
Technorealism –
Theories of technology –
Transhumanism –


==
Management of technology ==
Human enhancement –
Science and technology –
Strategy of Technology –
Technology management –
Technology integration –
Technology intelligence –
Technology life cycle –
Technology roadmap –


===
Advancement of technology ===
DARPA
Emerging technologies
List of emerging technologies
Horizon scanning
Hypothetical technology
Innovation
Invention
Inventor
Research and development
Technological superpowers
Technological transitions
==
Politics of technology ==
Politics and technology

AI takeover
Accelerating change
Format war
Information privacy
IT law
PEST analysis
Robot rights
Technological singularity
Technological sovereignty


==
Economics of technology ==
Energy accounting
Nanosocialism
Post-scarcity economy
Technocracy
Technocapitalism
Technological diffusion
Technology acceptance model
Technology lifecycle
Technology transfer


==
Technology education ==
Technology education


==
Technology organizations ==


===
Science and technology think tanks ===
Applied
Biomathematics
Battelle Memorial Institute
Cicada 3301
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Edge Foundation,
Inc.
Eudoxa
Federation of American Scientists
Free Software Foundation
GTRI Office of Policy Analysis and Research
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
Institute for Science and International Security
Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels
Keck Institute for Space Studies
Kestrel Institute
Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology
Moore Center for Theoretical Cosmology and Physics
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
Piratbyrån
RAND Corporation
Regional Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Res4Med
Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science
Swecha
Wau Holland Foundation


==
Technology media ==
For historical treatments, see Media about the history of technology, aboveTechnology journalism –


===
Books on technology ===
Engines of Creation –


===
Technology periodicals ===
Engadget –
TechCrunch –
Wired –


===
Websites ===
The Verge


===
Fictional technology ===
Fictional technology –
In Death technology –
Technology in Star Trek –
Technology in Star Wars –
Technology in science fiction –
Technology of Robotech –
List of technology in the Dune universe –


==
Persons influential in technology ==
List of engineers
List of inventors
List of scientists


==
See also ==
Outline of applied science


==
Further reading ==
Ambrose, Stanley H. (2 March 2001). "
Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution" (PDF).
Science.
291 (5509)
: 1748–53.
Bibcode:2001Sci...
291.1748A.
doi:10.1126/science.1059487.
PMID 11249821.
S2CID 6170692.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007.
Retrieved 10 March 2007.

Huesemann, M.H., and J.A. Huesemann (2011).
Technofix:
Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, ISBN 0865717044.

Kremer, Michael (1993). "
Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990".
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
108 (3): 681–716.
doi:10.2307/2118405.
JSTOR 2118405..
Kevin Kelly.
What Technology Wants.
New York, Viking Press, 14 October 2010, hardcover, 416 pages.
ISBN 978-0670022151
Mumford, Lewis.
(
2010).
Technics and Civilization.
University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226550273.

Rhodes, Richard.
(
2000).
Visions of Technology: A Century of Vital Debate about Machines, Systems, and the Human World.
Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0684863111.

Teich, A.H. (2008).
Technology and the Future.
Wadsworth Publishing, 11th edition, ISBN 0495570524.

Wright, R.T. (2008).
Technology.
Goodheart-Wilcox Company, 5th edition, ISBN 1590707184.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Technology newsBBC on technology
Bloomberg on technology
MIT Technology Review
New York Times technology section
Wired

Acoustic resonance technology –
Advanced steam technology –
Applications of nanotechnology –
Architectural technology –
Assisted reproductive technology –
Assistive technology –
Assistive technology and sports –
Automatic box-opening technology –
Barcode technology in healthcare –
Baseball telecasts technology –
Bead probe technology –
Beam lead technology –
Bio-fermentation technology –
Biomedical technology –
Biotechnology –
Biotechnology in pharmaceutical manufacturing –
Bleeding edge technology –
Braille technology –
Brain technology –
CASY cell counting technology –
Calm technology –
Ceramic mixing technology –
BOINC client–server technology –
Chirotechnology –
Circuit rider (technology) –
Civic technology –
Clean coal technology –
Clean technology –
Close coupled field technology –
Clothing technology –
Coal upgrading technology –
Community technology –
Computer technology for developing areas –
Construction collaboration technology –
Contesting technology –
Cultural technology –
Cycling probe technology –
Cytotechnology –
DNA nanotechnology –
Dance technology – application of modern information technology in activities related to dance: in dance education, choreography, performance, and research.

Demand flow technology –
Design technology –
Digital newspaper technology –
Digital scent technology –
Domestic technology –
Downhole oil–water separation technology –
Dual-use technology –
Dynamic video memory technology –
Ecotechnology –
Educational technology –
Electric transportation technology –
Electrical engineering technology –
Electrofluidic display technology –
Electron beam technology –
Electrothermal-chemical technology –
Enabling technology –
Energy applications of nanotechnology –
Energy security and renewable technology –
Energy technology –
Entertainment technology –
Environmental biotechnology –
Environmental technology –
Expandable tubular technology –
Field-induced polymer electroluminescent technology –
Food technology –
Frame technology (software engineering) –
G-Technology –
General purpose technology –
Genetic use restriction technology –
Germinal choice technology –
Gerontechnology –
Goal-line technology –
Green nanotechnology –
Greenfish recirculation technology –
Group technology –
Gustatory technology –
Haptic technology –
Headspace technology –
Health information technology –
Health technology –
Heart nanotechnology –
High-technology swimwear fabric –
Holiday lighting technology –
Honda advanced technology –
Human performance technology –
Hurdle technology –
Hybridoma technology –
Hyper-interactive teaching technology –
Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention –
Imaging technology –
Immersive technology –
Induction plasma technology –
Industrial technology –
Information and communications technology –
Information and communications technology in Kosovo –
Information processing technology and aging –
Information technology –
Intelligent Interweaving technology –
Internet services technology –
IsaKidd refining technology –
Keyboard technology –
Language technology –
Large-screen television technology –
Lithic technology –
Logovisual technology –
Low carbon technology –
Low technology –
Marine technology –
Mature technology –
Mechanical engineering technology –
Media technology –
Membrane technology –
Metamaterials surface antenna technology –
Microblade technology –
Microtechnology –
Military technology –
Mobile technology –
Molecular nanotechnology –
Music instrument technology –
Music technology –
NX technology –
Nana technology –
Nanobiotechnology –
Nanotechnology –
Near-infrared signature management technology –
Neurotechnology –
Non-profit technology –
Nuclear technology –
Omniview technology –
Open-source-appropriate technology –
Orphaned technology –
Orthodontic technology –
Particle technology –
Performance acceleration technology –
Persuasive technology –
Phage-ligand technology –
Pharmacopeia biotechnology –
Phonetic search technology –
Photoimageable thick-film technology –
Phytotechnology –
Picotechnology –
Plasma deep drilling technology –
Point-to-point laser technology –
Positioning technology –
Presentation technology –
Primatte chromakey technology –
Process analytical technology –
Pull technology –
Pulsion technology –
Pumpable ice technology –
Push technology –
Quantum technology –
Radio access technology –
Rapid transit technology –
Reproductive technology –
Resolution enhancement technology –
Rotary technology –
Rubber technology –
Search engine technology –
Self-drying concrete technology –
Semantic technology –
Site-specific recombinase technology –
Social technology –
Soft energy technology –
Space technology –
Speech technology –
Stealth technology –
Subsea (technology) –
Surface-mount technology –
Suspension array technology –
Tamper-evident technology –
Telepresence technology –
Tennis technology –
Terahertz spectroscopy and technology –
Terotechnology –
Thick film technology –
Thick-film dielectric electroluminescent technology –
Through-hole technology –
Time release technology –
Travel technology –
Trenchless technology –
Use of technology in treatment of mental disorders –
Vehicle safety technology –
Video sensor technology –
Visual technology –
Wearable technology –
Wet nanotechnology –
Wire rope spooling technology –
Workflow technology –
X-Wind technology –
Xpress technology –
Advanced technology –
Appropriate technology –
Alternative technology –
Antechnology –
Al Gore and information technology –
Assistive technology service provider –
Best available technology –
Biotechnology and genetic engineering in Bangladesh –
Biotechnology consulting –
Biotechnology industry in China –
Brazilian science and technology –
Buddhist influences on print technology –
Bullying in information technology –
Chief technology officer –
Community technology center –
Comparison of display technology –
Competitions and prizes in biotechnology –
Consumer adoption of technological innovations –
Corporate governance of information technology –
Counterparty (technology) –
Critique of technology –
Democratization of technology –
Differential technological development –
Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions –
Drexler–Smalley
debate on molecular nanotechnology –
Economic and Technological Development Zones –
Educational technology in Saudi Arabia –
Ethics of technology –
Environmental impact of nanotechnology –
Etiquette in technology –
Fail-safes in nanotechnology –
Feminism and technology –
Glossary of legal terms in technology –
Goans in science and technology –
Health impact of nanotechnology –
Health technology assessment –
Hydrogen energy vision and technology roadmap –
Impact of nanotechnology –
Industrial applications of nanotechnology –
Information technology architecture –
Information technology audit –
Information technology consulting –
Information technology controls –
Information technology in Bangladesh –
Information technology in India –
Information technology in Morocco –
Information technology in Pakistan –
Information technology management –
Information technology operations –
Information technology outsourcing –
Information technology planning –
Information technology security audit –
Information technology specialist –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Investment-specific technological progress –
List of DNA nanotechnology research groups –
List of United States technological universities –
List of advertising technology companies –
List of archaic technological nomenclature –
List of atheists in science and technology –
List of biotechnology companies –
List of computer technology code names –
List of cultural, intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions –
List of information technology acronyms –
List of institutions using the term "institute of technology" or "polytechnic" –
List of nanotechnology organizations –
List of philosophers of technology –
List of science and technology articles by continent –
List of steam technology patents –
List of technology centers –
List of the largest information technology companies –
Marx's notebooks on the history of technology –
Medical technology assessment –
Mobile technology in Africa –
Muslim women in science and technology –
Nanotechnology education –
Nanotechnology in fiction –
Next generation of display technology –
Operations and technology management –
Participatory technology development –
Radio and television technology in Turkey –
Regulation of nanotechnology –
Religious response to assisted reproductive technology –
Response time (technology) –
Science, technology and society –
Science, technology, society and environment education –
Sexism in the technology industry –
Social construction of technology –
Social shaping of technology –
Societal impact of nanotechnology –
Technological alliance –
Technological apartheid –
Technological applications of superconductivity –
Technological change –
Technological convergence –
Technological determinism –
Technological dualism –
Technological escalation –
Technological evolution –
Technological fix –
Technological history of the Roman military –
Technological innovation system –
Technological momentum –
Technological nationalism –
Technological paradigm –
Technological rationality –
Technological revolution –
Technological self-efficacy –
Technological singularity –
Technological somnambulism –
Technological studies –
Technological theory of social production –
Technological transitions –
Technological unemployment –
Technological utopianism –
Technology acceptance model –
Technology adoption lifecycle –
Technology alignment –
Technology and Construction Court –
Technology and Culture –
Technology and Entertainment Software –
Technology and Livelihood Education –
Technology and society –
Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life:
A Philosophical Inquiry –
Technology assessment –
Technology aware design –
Technology brokering –
Technology company –
Technology demonstration –
Technology doping –
Technology dynamics –
Technology education –
Technology evangelist –
Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes –
Technology for peace –
Technology forecasting –
Technology fusion –
Technology gap –
Technology governance –
Technology policy –
Technology readiness level –
Technology roadmap –
Technology scouting –
Technology shock –
Technology stack –
Technology strategy –
Technology support net –
Technology trajectory –
Technology-enhanced active learning –
Technology transfer –
Technology transfer in computer science –
Technology treadmill –
Technology tree –
Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology –
The Beatles' recording technology –Technology CAD –
Techno-lodge
Techno-organic virus
Techno-progressivism
Techno-thriller
Technoavia
Technobabble
Technobots
Technoboy
Technocapitalism
Technocentrism
Technoclash
Technocosmos
Technocracy
Technocracy movement
Technocrane
Technocriticism
Technoculture
Technodelic
Technodiktator
Technodon
Technodrome
Technoethics
Technoetic
Technofile
Technoflash
Technogaianism
Technogamia
Technogel
Technogenesis
Technographic segmentation
Technogym
Technogypsie
Technolangue/Easy
Technoliberalism
Technolibertarianism
Technologic
Technologie
Technologist
Technomage
Technomancer
Technomancy
Technomarket
Technomate
Technometrics
Technomimetics
Technomyrmex
Technomyrmex albipes
Technomyrmex gorgona
Technopaganism
Technoparade
Technopark
Technophilia
Technophobia
Technophoby
Technopol
Technopole
Technopolis
Technopoly
Technoport
Technopromexport
Technora
Technorama
Technorati
Technorealism
Technoromanticism
Technos
Technos
acxel
Technosaurus
Technoscience
Technoself
Technoseum
Technosexual
Technosignature
Technosoft
Technosol
Technosphere
Technostress
Technostructure
Technothlon
Technotise
Technotronic
Technovore
Technozion
