This is a list of equipment used by the Venezuelan Army.

==
Artillery ==


== Vehicles ==


==
Aircraft ==
==
Infantry weapons ==


==
References ==
The United States Military Government in Cuba (Spanish:
Gobierno militar estadounidense en Cuba or  Gobierno militar americano en Cuba), was a provisional military government in Cuba that was established in the aftermath of the Spanish–American War in 1898 when Spain ceded Cuba to the United States.

This period was also referred to as the First Occupation of Cuba, to distinguish it from a second occupation from 1906 to 1909.
United States Army forces involved in the garrisoning of the island during this time were honored with the Army of Cuban Occupation Medal after its establishment in 1915.

==
Timeline ==
189815 February: The USS Maine explodes in Havana harbor.

20 April: President McKinley signs a congressional joint resolution declaring war against Spain.
It includes the Teller Amendment asserting U.S. intentions in declaring war on Spain exclude exercising "sovereignty, jurisdiction or control" over Cuba, "except for pacification thereof".

10 December
: Spain and the United States sign the Treaty of Paris.18991 January:
Military government installed by the United States.

11 April:
Spanish–American War officially ends.190121
February
: Constitution of the Republic of Cuba is adopted.

31 December:
Estrada Palma is elected the first president of the Republic of Cuba.190220
May: The 1901 constitution takes effect.
Birth of the Republic of Cuba.

==
Platt Amendment ==
The Platt Amendment defined the terms by which the United States would cease its occupation of Cuba.
The amendment, placed into an army appropriations bill was designed to give back control of Cuba to the Cuban people.
It had eight conditions to which the Cuban Government needed to adhere to before full sovereignty would be transferred.
The main conditions of the amendment prohibited Cuba from signing any treaty allowing foreign powers to use the island for military purposes.
The United States also maintained the right to interfere with Cuban independence in order to maintain a certain level of protection of life, though the extent of this intrusion was not defined.
Most significant, the amendment forced the Cuban Government to sign a treaty officially binding the amendment to law.

The United States reasoning behind the amendment was based on the significant commercial interests held on the island.
Spain had previously been unable to preserve U.S. interests and maintain law and order.
At the end of military occupation, the amendment served as the primary method of ensuring a permanent presence.
Due to the previously enacted Teller Amendment, The United States was forced to grant Cuba its independence after Spanish rule ended.
Since the Platt Amendment was successfully incorporated into the constitution in Cuba, influence was maintained without direct U.S. involvement in the country.

== See also ==
American imperialism


=
=
References ==
Military technology is the application of technology for use in warfare.
It comprises the kinds of technology that are distinctly military in nature and not civilian in application, usually because they lack useful or legal civilian applications, or are dangerous to use without appropriate military training.

The line is porous; military inventions have been brought into civilian use throughout history, with sometimes minor modification if any, and civilian innovations have similarly been put to military use.

Military technology is often researched and developed by scientists and engineers specifically for use in battle by the armed forces.
Many new technologies came as a result of the military funding of science.

Armament engineering is the design, development, testing and lifecycle management of military weapons and systems.
It draws on the knowledge of several traditional engineering disciplines, including mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, mechatronics, electro-optics, aerospace engineering, materials engineering, and chemical engineering.

==
History ==
This section is divided into the broad cultural developments that affected military technology.

===
Ancient technology ===
The first use of stone tools may have begun during the Paleolithic Period.
The earliest stone tools are from the site of Lomekwi, Turkana, dating from 3.3 million years ago.
Stone tools diversified through the Pleistocene Period, which ended ~12,000 years ago.

The earliest evidence of warfare between two groups is recorded at the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, where human skeletons with major traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including an embedded obsidian bladelet on a skull, are evidence of inter-group conflict between groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers 10,000 years ago.
Humans entered the Bronze Age as they learned to smelt copper into an alloy with tin to make weapons.
In Asia where copper-tin ores are rare, this development was delayed until trading in bronze began in the third millennium BCE.
In the Middle East and Southern European regions, the Bronze Age follows the Neolithic period, but in other parts of the world, the Copper Age is a transition from Neolithic to the Bronze Age.
Although the Iron Age generally follows the Bronze Age, in some areas the Iron Age intrudes directly on the Neolithic from outside the region, with the exception of Sub-Saharan Africa where it was developed independently.
The first large-scale use of iron weapons began in Asia Minor around the 14th century BCE and in Central Europe around the 11th century BCE followed by the Middle East (about 1000 BCE) and India and China.
The Assyrians are credited with the introduction of horse cavalry in warfare and the extensive use of iron weapons by 1100 BCE.
Assyrians were also the first to use iron-tipped arrows.

=== Post-classical technology ===
The Wujing Zongyao (Essentials of the Military Arts), written by Zeng Gongliang, Ding Du, and others at the order of Emperor Renzong around 1043 during the Song dynasty illustrate the eras focus on advancing intellectual issues and military technology due to the significance of warfare between the Song and the Liao, Jin, and Yuan to their north.

The book covers topics of military strategy, training, and the production and employment of advanced weaponry.

Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbors to the north.
The flamethrower found its origins in Byzantine-era Greece, employing Greek fire (a chemically complex, highly flammable petrol fluid) in a device with a siphon hose by the 7th century.

The earliest reference to Greek Fire in China was made in 917, written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms.

In 919, the siphon projector-pump was used to spread the 'fierce fire oil' that could not be doused with water, as recorded by Lin Yu in his Wuyue Beishi, hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire
(see also Pen Huo Qi).
Lin Yu mentioned also that the 'fierce fire oil' derived ultimately from one of China's maritime contacts in the 'southern seas', Arabia Dashiguo.
In the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919, the naval fleet of the Wenmu King from Wuyue defeated a Huainan army from the Wu state; Wenmu's success was facilitated by the use of 'fire oil' ('huoyou') to burn their fleet, signifying the first Chinese use of gunpowder in a battle.
The Chinese applied the use of double-piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder (with an upstroke and downstroke), lit at the end by a slow-burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame.
This device was featured in description and illustration of  the Wujing Zongyao military manuscript of 1044.
In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976, early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975.
Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy, but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction.

Although the destructive effects of gunpowder were described in the earlier Tang dynasty by a Daoist alchemist, the earliest developments of the gun barrel and the projectile-fire cannon were found in late Song China.
The first art depiction of the Chinese 'fire lance' (a combination of a temporary-fire flamethrower and gun) was from a Buddhist mural painting of Dunhuang, dated circa 950.
These 'fire-lances' were widespread in use by the early 12th century, featuring hollowed bamboo poles as tubes to fire sand particles (to blind and choke), lead pellets, bits of sharp metal and pottery shards, and finally large gunpowder-propelled arrows and rocket weaponry.

Eventually, perishable bamboo was replaced with hollow tubes of cast iron, and so too did the terminology of this new weapon change, from 'fire-spear' huo qiang to 'fire-tube' huo tong.

This ancestor to the gun was complemented by the ancestor to the cannon, what the Chinese referred to since the 13th century as the 'multiple bullets magazine erupter' bai zu lian zhu pao, a tube of bronze or cast iron that was filled with about 100 lead balls.
The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, dating to 1128,
that portrays a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, firing flames and a cannonball.
However, the oldest existent archaeological discovery of a metal barrel handgun is from the Chinese Heilongjiang excavation, dated to 1288.
The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
Written later by Jiao Yu in his Huolongjing (mid-14th century), this manuscript recorded an earlier Song-era cast-iron cannon known as the 'flying-cloud thunderclap eruptor' (fei yun pi-li pao).
The manuscript stated that:
As noted before, the change in terminology for these new weapons during the Song period were gradual.
The early Song cannons were at first termed the same way as the Chinese trebuchet catapult.
A later Ming dynasty scholar known as Mao Yuanyi would explain this use of terminology and true origins of the cannon in his text of the Wubei Zhi, written in 1628:
The 14th-century Huolongjing was also one of the first Chinese texts to carefully describe to the use of explosive land mines, which had been used by the late Song Chinese against the Mongols in 1277, and employed by the Yuan dynasty afterwards.
The innovation of the detonated land mine was accredited to one Luo Qianxia in the campaign of defense against the Mongol invasion by Kublai Khan, Later Chinese texts revealed that the Chinese land mine employed either a rip cord or a motion booby trap of a pin releasing falling weights that rotated a steel flint wheel, which in turn created sparks that ignited the train of fuses for the land mines.

Furthermore, the Song employed the earliest known gunpowder-propelled rockets in warfare during the late 13th century, its earliest form being the archaic Fire Arrow.
When the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng fell to the Jurchens in 1126, it was written by Xia Shaozeng that 20,000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchens in their conquest.

An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ("Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques"), written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng Kongliang and Yang Weide, described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder packets near the head of the arrow.
Going back yet even farther, the Wu Li Xiao Shi (1630, second edition 1664) of Fang Yizhi stated that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song (r. 960–976) in 960.

===
Modern technology ===


====
Armies ====
The Islamic gunpowder empires introduced numerous developed firearms, cannon and small arms.
During the period of Proto-industrialization, newly invented weapons were seen to be used in Mughal India.

Rapid development in military technology had a dramatic impact on armies and navies in the industrialized world in 1740-1914.
For land warfare, cavalry faded in importance, while infantry became transformed by the use of highly accurate more rapidly loading rifles, and the use of smokeless powder.
Machine guns were developed in the 1860s in Europe.
Rocket artillery and the Mysorean rockets, both pioneered by Indian Muslim Tipu Sultan, became more powerful as new high explosives (based on nitroglycerin) arrived during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, and the French introduced much more accurate rapid-fire field artillery.
Logistics and communications support for land warfare dramatically improved with use of railways and telegraphs.
Industrialization provided a base of factories that could be converted to  produce munitions, as well as uniforms, tents, wagons and essential supplies.
Medical facilities were enlarged and reorganized based on improved hospitals and the creation of modern nursing,  typified by Florence Nightingale in Britain during the Crimean War of 1854-56.
====
Naval ====
Naval warfare was transformed by many innovations, most notably the coal-based steam engine, highly accurate long-range naval guns, heavy steel armour for battleships, mines, and the introduction of the torpedo, followed by the torpedo boat and the destroyer.
Coal after 1900 was eventually displaced by more efficient oil, but meanwhile navies with an international scope had to depend on a network of coaling stations to refuel.
The British Empire provided them in abundance, as did the French Empire to a lesser extent.

War colleges developed, as military theory became a specialty; cadets and senior commanders were taught the theories of Jomini, Clausewitz and Mahan, And engaged in tabletop war games.
Around 1900, entirely new innovations such as submarines and airplanes appeared, and were quickly adapted to warfare by 1914.
The British HMS Dreadnought (1906) incorporated so much of the latest technology in weapons, propulsion and armour that it at a stroke made all other battleships obsolescent.

====
Organization and finance ====
New financial tools were developed to fund the rapidly increasing costs of warfare, such as popular bond sales and income taxes, and the funding of permanent research centers.

Many 19th century innovations were largely invented and promoted by lone individuals with small teams of assistants, such as David Bushnell and the submarine, John Ericsson and the battleship, Hiram Maxim and the machine gun, and Alfred Nobel and high explosives.
By 1900 the military began to realize that they needed to rely much more heavily on large-scale research centers, which needed government funding.

They brought in leaders of organized innovation such as Thomas Edison in the U.S. and chemist Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Germany.

==
Postmodern technology ==
The postmodern stage of military technology emerged in the 1940s, and one with recognition thanks to the high priority given during the war to scientific and engineering research and development regarding nuclear weapons, radar, jet engines, proximity fuses, advanced submarines, aircraft carriers, and other weapons.
The high-priority continues into the 21st century.
It involves the military application of advanced scientific research regarding nuclear weapons, jet engines, ballistic and guided missiles, radar, biological warfare, and the use of electronics, computers and software.

===
Space ===
During the Cold War, the world's two great superpowers — the Soviet Union and the United States of America — spent large proportions of their GDP on developing military technologies.

The drive to place objects in orbit stimulated space research and started the Space Race.

In 1957, the USSR launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1.

By the end of the 1960s, both countries regularly deployed satellites.
Spy satellites were used by militaries to take accurate pictures of their rivals' military installations.

As time passed the resolution and accuracy of orbital reconnaissance alarmed both sides of the iron curtain.

Both the United States and the Soviet Union began to develop anti-satellite weapons to blind or destroy each other's satellites.

Laser weapons, kamikaze style satellites, as well as orbital nuclear explosion were researched with varying levels of success.

Spy satellites were, and continue to be, used to monitor the dismantling of military assets in accordance with arms control treaties signed between the two superpowers.
To use spy satellites in such a manner is often referred to in treaties as "national technical means of verification".

The superpowers developed ballistic missiles to enable them to use nuclear weaponry across great distances.
As rocket science developed, the range of missiles increased and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) were created, which could strike virtually any target on Earth in a timeframe measured in minutes rather than hours or days.

In order to cover large distances ballistic missiles are usually launched into sub-orbital spaceflight.

As soon as intercontinental missiles were developed, military planners began programmes and strategies to counter their effectiveness.

===
Mobilization ===
A significant portion of military technology is about transportation, allowing troops and weaponry to be moved from their origins to the front.
Land transport has historically been mainly by foot, land vehicles have usually been used as well, from chariots to tanks.

When conducting a battle over a body of water, ships are used.
There are historically two main categories of ships: those for transporting troops, and those for attacking other ships.

Soon after the invention of aeroplanes, military aviation became a significant component of warfare, though usually as a supplementary role.
The two main types of military aircraft are bombers, which attack land- or sea-based targets, and fighters, which attack other aircraft.

Military vehicles are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces.

List of military vehicles
List of armoured fighting vehicles
List of tanksMilitary aircraft includes any use of aircraft by a country's military, including such areas as transport, training, disaster relief, border patrol, search and rescue, surveillance, surveying, peacekeeping, and (very rarely) aerial warfare.

List of aircraft
List of aircraft weaponsWarships are watercraft for combat and transportation in and on seas and oceans.

Submarines
Complex masting and sail systems found on warships during the Age of Sail
List of historical ship and boat types
List of aircraft carriers
List of submarine classes


===
Defence ===
Fortifications are military constructions and buildings designed for defence in warfare.
They range in size and age from the Great Wall of China to a Sangar.

List of fortifications
List of forts


===
Sensors and communication ===
Sensors and communication systems are used to detect enemies, coordinate movements of armed forces and guide weaponry.
Early systems included flag signaling, telegraph and heliographs.

Laser guidance
Missile guidance
Norden Bombsight
Proximity fuse
Radar
Satellite guidance in guidance weapons


==
Future technology ==
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is an agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of new technologies for use by the military.

DARPA leads the development of military technology in the United States and today, has dozens of ongoing projects; everything from humanoid robots, to bullets that are able to change path before reaching their target.
China has a similar agency.

===
Emerging territory ===
Current militaries continue to invest in new technologies for the future.
Such technologies include cognitive radar , 5g cellular networks, microchips, semiconductors, and large scale analytic engines.
Additionally, many militaries seek to improve current laser technology.
For example, Israeli Defense Forces utilize laser technology to disable small enemy machinery, but seek to move to more large scale capabilities in the coming years.
Militaries across the world continue to perform research on autonomous technologies which allow for increased troop mobility or replacement of live soldiers.
Autonomous vehicles and robots are expected to play a role in future conflicts; this has the potential to decrease loss of life in future warfare.
Observers of transhumanism note high rates of technological terms in military literature, but low rates for explicitly transhuman-related terms.
Today's hybrid style of warfare also calls for investments in information technologies.
Increased reliance on computer systems has incentivized nations to push for increased efforts at managing large scale networks and having access to large scale data.
New strategies of cyber and hybrid warfare includes, network attacks, media analysis, and media/ grass-roots campaigns on medias such as blog posts


====
Cyberspace ====
In 2011, the US Defense Department declared cyberspace a new domain of warfare; since then DARPA has begun a research project known as "Project X" with the goal of creating new technologies that will enable the government to better understand and map the cyber territory.

Ultimately giving the Department of Defense the ability to plan and manage large-scale cyber missions across dynamic network environments.

== See also ==
List of military inventions
List of emerging military technologies
Bellifortis, late medieval treatise on military technology.

Materiel


== References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andrade, Tonio.
The Gunpowder Age: China, military innovation, and the rise of the West in world history (Princeton UP, 2016).

Black, Jeremy.
Tools of War  (2007) covers 50 major inventions.
excerpt
Boot, Max.
War made new: technology, warfare, and the course of history, 1500 to today (Penguin, 2006).

Dupuy, Trevor N.
The evolution of weapons and warfare (1984), 350pp, cover 2000 BC to late 20th century.

Ellis, John.
The Social History of the Machine Gun (1986).

Gabriel, Richard A., and Karen S. Metz.
From Sumer to Rome: The Military capabilities of ancient armies (ABC-CLIO, 1991).

Hacker, Barton (2005).
"
The Machines of War: Western Military Technology 1850–2000".
History & Technology.
21 (3)
: 255–300.
doi:10.1080/07341510500198669.
S2CID 144113139.

Levy, Jack S (1984).
"
The offensive/defensive balance of military technology: A theoretical and historical analysis".
International Studies Quarterly.
28 (2)
: 219–238.
doi:10.2307/2600696.
JSTOR 2600696.

McNeill, William H.
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 (1984).

Parker, Geoffrey.
The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West (1988).

Steele, Brett D. and Tamara Dorland.
Heirs of Archimedes: Science & the Art of War through the Age of Enlightenment (2005)
397 pp.
The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, (Russian: Вооружённые силы Российской Федерации) commonly known as the Russian Armed Forces, are the military forces of the Russian Federation.
It is divided into the Ground Forces, Navy, and Aerospace Forces.
There are also two independent arms of service: Strategic Missile Troops and the Airborne Troops.
Under the federal law of Russia, the Russian Armed Forces, along with the Federal Security Service (FSB)'s Border Troops, the National Guard, the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD), the Federal Protective Service (FSO), the Foreign Intelligence Service (SVR), the Main Directorate of the General Staff (GRU) and the Ministry of Emergency Situations (EMERCOM)
's
civil defence form Russia's military services; and are under direct control of the Security Council of Russia.

The Russian Armed Forces are one of the largest military forces in the world.
As of 2019, the military comprised almost one million active duty personnel, the fourth-largest in the world.
Additionally, there are over 2.5 million reservists, with the total number of reserve troops possibly being as high as 20 million.
It is mandatory for all male citizens aged 18–27 to be drafted for a year of service in Armed Forces.
The Russian Armed Forces are the world's second-most powerful military, owning the largest stockpile of nuclear weapons in the world.
The military budget of the Russian Federation was $65.1 billion in 2019, the fourth-highest in the world.
It possesses the second-largest fleet of ballistic missile submarines, and is one of the only three nations operating strategic bombers, with the world's most powerful ground force, the second-most powerful air force, and the third-most powerful naval fleet.

==
Service branches ==
Armed forces under the Ministry of Defence are divided into:

the three "branches of Armed Forces" (вида вооружённых сил): the Ground Forces, Aerospace Forces, and Navy
the two "separate troop branches" (Отдельные рода войск): the Strategic Missile Forces and Airborne Forces
the "special forces of Armed Forces" (Спецназ вооружённых сил): the Special Operations Forces
the Logistical Support, which has a separate status of its ownThere are additionally two further "separate troop branches", the National Guard and the Border Service.
These retain the legal status of "Armed Forces", while falling outside of the jurisdiction of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The National Guard is formed on the basis of the former Internal Troops of Russia.
The new structure has been detached from the Ministry of Internal Affairs into a separate agency, directly subordinated to the President of Russia.
The Border Service is a paramilitary organization of the Federal Security Service - the country's main internal intelligence agency.
Both organizations have significant wartime tasks in addition to their main peacetime activities and operate their own land, air and maritime units.

The number of personnel is specified by decree of the President of Russia.
On 1 January 2008, a number of 2,019,629 units, including military of 1,134,800 units, was set.
In 2010 the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) estimated that the Russian Armed Forces numbered about 1,027,000 active troops and in the region of 2,035,000 reserves (largely ex-conscripts).
As opposed to personnel specified by decree, actual personnel numbers on the payroll was reported by the Audit Chamber of Russia as 766,000 in October 2013.
As of December 2016, the armed forces are at 93 percent of the required manpower, up from 82 percent reported in December 2013.According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, between 2005-2009 and 2010–2014, Russian exports of major weapons increased by 37 percent; Russia spent $66.4 billion on arms in 2015, then $69.2 billion in 2016, having taken 3rd place (after the U.S. and China).

According to the Russian Defence Ministry, share of modern weapons in the Armed Forces reached from 26 to 48 percent among different kinds of troops in December 2014.
This was raised to 30.5–70.7% as of July 2015.
The average was 70.1 per cent over the end of 2020.

==
History ==
The Soviet Union officially dissolved on 25 December 1991, leaving the Soviet military in limbo.
For the next year and a half various attempts to keep its unity and to transform it into the military of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) failed.
Over time, some units stationed in the newly independent republics swore loyalty to their new national governments, while a series of treaties between the newly independent states divided up the military's assets.
Apart from assuming control of the bulk of the former Soviet Internal Troops and the KGB Border Troops, seemingly the only independent defence move the new Russian government made before March 1992 involved announcing the establishment of a National Guard.
Until 1995, it was planned to form at least 11 brigades numbering 3,000 to 5,000 each, with a total of no more than 100,000.
National Guard military units were to be deployed in 10 regions, including in Moscow (three brigades), (two brigades), and a number of other important cities and regions.
By the end of September 1991 in Moscow the National Guard was about 15,000 strong, mostly consisting of former Soviet Armed Forces servicemen.
In the end, President Yeltsin tabled a decree "On the temporary position of the Russian Guard", but it was not put into practice.
After signing the Belavezha Accords on 21 December 1991, the countries of the newly formed CIS signed a protocol on the temporary appointment of Marshal of Aviation Yevgeny Shaposhnikov as Minister of Defence and commander of the armed forces in their territory, including strategic nuclear forces.
On 14 February 1992 Shaposhnikov formally became Supreme Commander of the CIS Armed Forces.
On 16 March 1992 a decree by Boris Yeltsin created The Armed Forces of the Russian Federation the operational control of Allied High Command and the Ministry of Defence, which was headed by President.
Finally, on 7 May 1992, Yeltsin signed a decree establishing the armed forces and Yeltsin assumed the duties of the Supreme Commander.
In May 1992, General Colonel Pavel Grachev became the Minister of Defence, and was made Russia's first Army General on assuming the post.
By August or December 1993
CIS military structures had become CIS military cooperation structures with all real influence lost.
In the next few years, Russian forces withdrew from central and eastern Europe, as well as from some newly independent post-Soviet republics.

While in most places the withdrawal took place without any problems, the Russian Armed Forces remained in some disputed areas such as the Sevastopol naval base in the Crimea as well as in Abkhazia, South Ossetia and in Transnistria.
The Armed Forces have several bases in foreign countries, especially on territory of the former Soviet Republics.

A new military doctrine, promulgated in November 1993, implicitly acknowledged the contraction of the old Soviet military into a regional military power without global ambitions.
In keeping with its emphasis on the threat of regional conflicts, the doctrine called for a smaller, lighter, and more mobile Russian military, with a higher degree of professionalism and with greater rapid-deployment capability.
Such change proved extremely difficult to achieve.
Under Pavel Grachev (Defence Minister from 1992 to 1996)
little military reform took place, though there was a plan to create more deployable mobile forces.
Later Defence Minister Rodionov (in office 1996-1997) had good qualifications but did not manage to institute lasting change.
Only under Defence Minister Igor Sergeyev (in office 1997-2001) did a certain amount of limited reform begin, though attention focused upon the Strategic Rocket Forces.

=== 2008 military reform ===
In response to poor and unsatisfactory performance of Russian forces overall in the Russo-Georgian War in August 2008, significant reforms were announced in late 2008 by Defence Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov and major structural reorganisation began in 2009.
Key elements of the reforms announced in October 2008 included reducing the armed forces to a strength of one million by 2012 (planned end-date was 2016); reducing the number of officers; centralising officer training from 65 military schools into 10 "systemic" military training centres; reducing the size of the central command; introducing more civilian logistics and auxiliary staff; elimination of cadre-strength formations; reorganising the reserves; reorganising the army into a brigade system; and reorganising air forces into an air-base system instead of regiments.
On 17 October 2012 the head of the State Duma's Defence Committee told RIA Novosti that Russia planned to boost annual defense spending by 59 percent to almost 3 trillion rubles ($83.3 billion) in 2015 up from $61 billion in 2012. "
Targeted national defence spending as a percentage of GDP will amount to 3.2 percent in 2013, 3.4 percent in 2014 and 3.7 percent in 2015", Defence Committee chairman Vladimir Komoedov is quoted as saying in the committee's conclusion on the draft budget for 2013–2015.The number of military units is to be reduced in accordance with the table:
An essential part of the military reform involves downsizing.
At the beginning of the reform the Russian Army had about 1,200,000 active personnel.
Largely, the reductions fall among the officers.
Personnel are to be reduced according to the table:
The schedule envisaged reducing the total numbers in the officer corps from 335 thousand to 150 thousand, but in early February 2011 Defence Minister Anatoly Serdyukov announced the decision to increase officers by 70,000 - to 220 thousand to counteract this.
==
Structure ==
The Defence Ministry of the Russian Federation serves as the administrative body of the Armed Forces.
Since Soviet times, the General Staff has acted as the main commanding and supervising body of the Russian armed forces: U.S. expert William Odom said in 1998, that 'the Soviet General Staff without the MoD is conceivable, but the MoD without the General Staff is not.'
However, currently the General Staff's role is being reduced to that of the Ministry's department of strategic planning, the Minister himself, currently Sergey Shoygu may now be gaining further executive authority over the troops.
Other departments include the personnel directorate as well as the Rear of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, Railway Troops, Signal Troops and Construction Troops.
The Chief of the General Staff is currently General of the Army Valery Gerasimov.

The Russian military is divided into three services: the Russian Ground Forces, the Russian Navy, and the Russian Aerospace Forces.
In addition there are two independent arms of service: the Strategic Missile Troops and the Russian Airborne Troops.

The Armed Forces as a whole are traditionally referred to as the Army (armiya), except in some cases, the Navy is specifically singled out.

===
Military districts ===
Since late 2010 the Ground Forces as well as the Aerospace Forces and Navy are distributed among four military districts: Western Military District, Southern Military District, Central Military District, and the Eastern Military District which also constitute four Joint Strategic Commands — West, South, Central, and East.
Previously from 1992 to 2010, the Ground Forces were divided into six military districts: Moscow, Leningrad, North Caucausian, Privolzhsk-Ural, Siberian and Far Eastern, with the seventh military district: Kaliningrad formed in 1997; in service until 2010.
Russia's four naval fleets and one flotilla were organizations on par with the Ground Forces' Military Districts.
These seven MDs were merged into the four new MDs, which now also incorporate the aerospace forces and naval forces.
There is one remaining Russian military base, the 102nd Military Base, in Armenia left of the former Transcaucasus Group of Forces and is incorporated into the Southern Military District.

In mid-2010 a reorganisation was announced which consolidated military districts and the navy's fleets into four Joint Strategic Commands (OSC).

In 2014 the Northern Fleet was reorganized in separate Joint Strategic Command.

Geographically divided, the five commands are:

Joint Strategic Command West - Western Military District (HQ in St. Petersburg), includes the Baltic Fleet;
Joint Strategic Command North - Northern Fleet Joint Strategic Command (HQ in Severomorsk), includes the Northern Fleet;
Joint Strategic Command South - Southern Military District (HQ in Rostov-on-Don) includes the Black Sea Fleet and Caspian Flotilla;
Joint Strategic Command Center - Central Military District (HQ in Yekaterinburg);
Joint Strategic Command East - Eastern Military District (HQ in Khabarovsk), includes the Pacific Fleet.
The plan was put in place on 1 December 2010 and mirrors a proposed reorganisation by former Chief of the General Staff Army General Yuri Baluyevsky for a Regional Command East which was not implemented.
The four commands were set up by a decree of President Medvedev on 14 July 2010.
In July 2011, an Operational-Strategic Command of Missile-Space Defence has also been established on the basis of the former Special Purpose Command of the Russian Air Force.
A Presidential decree of January 2011 named commanders for several of the new organisational structures.
Russian military command posts, according to globalsecurity.org, include Chekhov/Sharapovo about 80 kilometres (50 mi)
south of Moscow, for the General Staff and President, Chaadayevka near Penza, Voronovo in Moscow, and a facility at Lipetsk all for the national leadership, Yamantau in the Urals, and command posts for the Strategic Rocket Forces at Kuntsevo in Moscow (primary) and Kosvinsky Mountain in the Urals (alternate).
It is speculated that many of the Moscow bunkers are linked by the special underground Moscow Metro 2 line.

Russian security bodies not under the control of the Ministry of Defence include the Internal Troops of the Ministry of Internal Affairs (now the National Guard of Russia's National Guard Forces Command), the Border Guard Service of Russia (part of the Federal Security Service), the Kremlin Regiment and the rest of the Federal Protective Service, and the Ministry of Emergency Situations, the country's civil defence service since 1995 and successor to earlier civil defence units.

===
Naval fleets ===
The Navy consists of four fleets and one flotilla:
Northern Fleet (HQ at Severomorsk) forms own Joint Strategic Command.

Baltic Fleet (HQ at Kaliningrad in the exclave of Kaliningrad Oblast) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command West.

Black Sea Fleet (HQ at Sevastopol, disputed region of Crimea) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South.

Pacific Fleet (HQ at Vladivostok) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command East.

Caspian Flotilla (HQ at Astrakhan) subordinated to Joint Strategic Command South.
The Kaliningrad Special Region, under the command of the Commander Baltic Fleet, comprises Ground & Coastal Forces, formerly the 11th Guards Army and now the 11th Army Corps with a motor rifle division HQ (formed in 2021) and subordinate units, as well as naval aviation regiments employing Sukhoi Su-27 'Flankers' and other combat aircraft.
As noted, both the Baltic Fleet and the 11th Army Corps in Kaliningrad are subordinate to Strategic Command West.

Similarly, the Northeast Group of Troops and Forces, headquartered at Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, comprises all Russian Armed Forces components in the Kamchatka Krai and the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug [district] and is subordinate to the Commander Pacific Fleet headquartered in Vladivostok.

==
Personnel ==
Conscription is still used in Russia; the term of service being 12 months; and eligible age is between 18 and 33 years old.
Deferments are provided to undergraduate and graduate students, men solely the impact supporting disabled relatives, parents of at least two children and — upon Presidential proclamation — to some employees of military-oriented enterprises.
Men holding a Ph.D., as well as sons and brothers of servicemen killed or disabled during their military service, are released from conscription.

There were widespread problems with hazing in the Army, known as dedovshchina, where first-year draftees are bullied by second-year draftees, a practice that appeared in its current form after the change to a two-year service term in 1967.
According to Anna Politkovskaya, in 2002, "a complete battalion, more than five hundred men, had been killed not by enemy fire but by beatings".
To combat this problem, a new decree was signed in March 2007, which cut the conscription service term from 24 to 18 months.
The term was cut further to one year on 1 January 2008.Thirty percent of Russian Armed Forces' personnel were contract servicemen at the end of 2005.
For the foreseeable future, the Armed Forces will be a mixed contract/conscript force.
The Russian Armed Forces need to maintain a mobilization reserve to have manning resources capable of reinforcing the permanent readiness forces if the permanent readiness forces cannot deter or suppress an armed conflict on their own.
Professional soldiers now outnumber their conscript counterparts in the Russian Army for the first time in Russian history, Defence Minister Sergei Shoigu told Russian media on 28 April 2015.
Nearly 400,000 contractors serve in the Russian Army as of March 2019.
According to Defence Minister Shoigu, in every regiment and brigade, two battalions are formed by contractors, while one is formed by recruits, who are not involved in combat missions.
Currently, there are 136 tactical battalion groups in the armed forces formed by contractors.
The number of conscripts amounts to 225,000 and the number of contractors amounts to 405,000 as of March 2020 and exceeds the number of conscripts by 1.8 times as of the end of the year.
Recruitment into the Russian military are also open to non-Russian citizens of the Commonwealth of Independent States, of which Russia is the largest member.
By December 2003, the Russian parliament had approved a law in principle to permit the Armed Forces to employ foreign nationals on contract by offering them Russian citizenship after several years service yet, up to 2010, foreigners could only serve in Russia's armed forces after getting a Russian passport.
Under a 2010 Defence Ministry plan, foreigners without dual citizenship would be able to sign up for five-year contracts and will be eligible for Russian citizenship after serving three years.
The change could open the way for CIS citizens to get fast-track Russian citizenship, and counter the effects of Russia's demographic crisis on its army recruitment.
Each soldier in duty receives an Identity Card of the Russian Armed Forces.

Awards and decorations of the Armed Forces are covered at the Awards and Emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation.

On 17 November 2011, General Nikolai Makarov said that Russia had reached a crisis in the conscript service where there simply were not sufficient able bodied men to draft and was forced to halve its conscription.
Military draft dodging declined 66% since 2012 and as of March 2019.
It is reported that about 80% of the young people who were drafted into the ranks of the Russian Armed Forces in the autumn of 2018 were found fit for military service.
According to the head of the mobilization, in recent years, the fitness of future recruits has increased by 7%.In March 2013, Defence Minister Sergey Shoygu promised that all army quarters would have showers by the end of the year.
RIA also said that the shower plans were the latest in a series of creature-comfort improvements the Defence Ministry had recently announced.
In mid-January, Shoygu said he would rid the army of its antiquated "footwraps," or portyanki, and
a few days later the designer of Russia's new army uniform said that the ear-flap hats traditionally worn in winter would be replaced with more modern headgear.
The Russian military's ushanka hats were improved between 2013 and 2015, when the Russian armed forces were being equipped with new uniforms.
The new version of the traditional - and somewhat stereotypical - hat features better heat insulation and longer ear flaps.
Russian military officers with top secret security clearance are now being issued domestically developed, ultra-secure, cryptographically protected Atlas M-663S cellphones, Russia's Izvestia newspaper has reported in early 2018.
A new uniform for hot climates was introduced in mid-2018.

==
Reserve components ==
According to the article 51.2 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service", Russian Armed Forces have reserve (Russian: запас; transliteration: zapas) which includes 2 components:
Mobilization human reserve (Russian: мобилизационный людской резерв; transliteration: mobilizatsionnyy lyudskoy reserv)
Mobilization human resource (Russian:
мобилизационный людской ресурс; transliteration:
mobilizatsionnyy lyudskoy resurs)By default, at the end of active duty each military personnel is enrolled in mobilization human resource; this applies equally to conscripts and volunteers regardless of ranks.
Furthermore, graduates of civilian institutions of higher education, who have graduated the military training centers of their almae matres, trained under reserve officer program, is enrolled in mobilization human resource after their promotion to officer's rank (unlike graduates of such centers, trained under active duty officer program, who are due to be enrolled for active duty after their promotion to officer's rank).
Moreover, mobilization human resource is replenished with males who reached the age of 27 years old and, herewith, was not in military service for any reasons.

Enrolling in mobilization human reserve is voluntary and implies the special contract; this possibility is available for each persons, who is in mobilization human resource already.
The initial contract is concluded for 3 years period.
Military personnel of mobilization human reserve (reservists) perform part-time duties in military units.
As a rule, in peaceful time reservists perform their duties 2-3 days per month and also during annual military camp training for a duration from 20 to 30 days.
The persons who are in mobilization human resource (non-reservists) may be enlisted to military camp trainings in peaceful time.
According to the article 54 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service", the duration of each training can not exceed 2 months, herewith the total duration of such trainings for the entire period of being in mobilization human resource can not exceed 12 months, and person may be enlisted to such trainings no more than once every three years.
Reservists are subject to mobilization in wartime first of all.
Non-reservists are subject to mobilization secondarily.
Mobilization of non-reservists is carried out taking into account the age category under the article 53 of Federal Law of 28 March, 1998, No.53-FZ "About military duty and military service": in order from first category to third category.
The first category includes: 1) the persons at the any military rank below that of a commissioned officer (enlisted personnel) and not reached the age of 35 years old; 2) the persons at the any rank from junior lieutenant to captain (captain-lieutenant in naval service) inclusively (junior commissioned officers) and not reached the age of 50 years old; 3) the persons at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively and not reached the age of 55 years old; 4) the persons at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) and not reached the age of 60 years old; 5) the persons at the rank of major general (counter admiral in naval service) or higher (supreme officers) and not reached the age of 65 years old.
The second category includes: 1) enlisted personnel in age from 35 but less than 45; 2) junior commissioned officers in the age from 50 but less than 55; 3) commissioned officers at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively in the age from 55 but less than 60; 4) commissioned officers at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) in the age from 60 but less than 65; 5) supreme officers in age from 65 but less than 70.
The third category includes: 1) enlisted personnel in the age from 45 but less than 50; 2) junior commissioned officers in the age from 55 but less than 60; 3) commissioned officers at the any rank from major (captain 3rd rank in naval service) to lieutenant colonel (captain 2nd rank in naval service) inclusively in the age from 60 but less than 65; 4)
all females in the age less than 45 for enlisted personnel and less than 50 for commissioned officers.
The person who has reached the age limit, established for the third category (the second category for persons at the rank of colonel (captain 1st rank in naval service) or higher), is retired and is not subject to mobilization.

==
Budget ==
Between 1991 and 1997 newly independent Russia's defence spending fell by a factor of eight in real prices.
In 1998, when Russia experienced a severe financial crisis, its military expenditure in real terms reached its lowest point— barely one-quarter of the USSR's in 1991, and two-fifths of the level of 1992, the first year of Russia's independent existence.

In the early 2000s, defence spending increased by at least a minimum of one-third year-on-year, leading to overall defence expenditure almost quadrupling over the past six years, and according to Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, this rate is to be sustained through 2010.
Official government military spending for 2005 was US$32.4 billion, though various sources, have estimated Russia's military expenditures to be considerably higher than the reported amount.
Estimating Russian military expenditure is beset with difficulty; the annual IISS Military Balance has underscored the problem numerous times within its section on Russia.
The IISS Military Balance comments - 'By simple observation..
[the military budget] would appear to be lower than is suggested by the size of the armed forces or the structure of the military–industrial complex, and thus neither of the figures is particularly useful for comparative analysis'.
By some estimates, overall Russian defence expenditure is now at the second highest in the world after the USA.
According to Alexander Kanshin, Chairman of the Public Chamber of Russia on affairs of veterans, military personnel, and their families, the Russian military is losing up to US$13 billion to corruption every year.
On 16 September 2008 Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin announced that in 2009, Russia's defence budget would be increased to a record amount of $50 billion.
On 16 February 2009 Russia's deputy defence minister said state defence contracts would not be subject to cuts this year despite the ongoing financial crisis, and that there would be no decrease in 2009.
The budget would still be 1,376 billion roubles and in the current exchange rates this would amount to $41.5 billion.

However, later that month, due to the world financial crisis, the Russian Parliament's Defence Committee stated that the Russian defence budget would instead be slashed by 15 percent, from $40 billion to $34 billion, with further cuts to come.
On 5 May 2009, First Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Ivanov said that the defence budget for 2009 will be 1.3 trillion rubles (US$39.4 billion).
322 billion rubles are allocated to purchase weapons, and the rest of the fund will be spent on construction, fuel storage and food supply.

According to the head of the Defence Committee of the State Duma Vladimir Komoyedov, Russia plans to spend 101.15 billion rubles on nuclear weapons in 2013–2015.
"
The budget provisions under 'The Nuclear Weapons Complex' section in 2013-2015 will amount to 29.28 billion rubles, 33.3 billion rubles and 38.57 billion rubles respectively," Komoyedov said, Vechernaya Moskva reports.

Komoyedov added that in 2012 the spending on nuclear weapons made up 27.4 billion rubles.
The draft law "On the Federal Budget for 2013 and for the planning period of 2014 and 2015" will be discussed in the first reading on 19 October 2012, The Voice of Russia reports.
In a meeting in Sochi in November 2013, President Putin said the country's defence budget will reach 2.3 trillion roubles, stressing the huge amount in comparison to the 2003 budget, which stood on 600 billion rubles.

The Russian government's published 2014 military budget is about 2.49 trillion rubles (approximately US$69.3 billion), the fourth largest in the world behind the US, China and Saudi Arabia.
The official budget is set to rise to 3.03 trillion rubles (approximately US$83.7 billion) in 2015, and 3.36 trillion rubles (approximately US$93.9 billion) in 2016.
As of 2014, Russia's military budget is higher than any other European nation, and approximately 1/7th (14 percent) of the US military budget.
In 2015, SIPRI found that Russia was the world's second biggest exporter of major weapons for the period 2010–14, increasing exports by 37 per cent.
India, China and Algeria accounted for almost 60 percent of total Russian exports.
Asia and Oceania received 66 percent of Russian arms exports in 2010–14, Africa 12 percent and the Middle East 10 percent.
In 2017, Russia was reported to have slashed its defense spending by 20%, due to calls by Vladimir Putin to spend money on other initiatives such as healthcare and education.
The cut decreased Russia's military spending to $66.3 billion, in which Russia slumped to being the fourth-highest military spender.
Russia's 2019 defense budget was US$48 billion.

===
Procurement ===
About 70 percent of the former Soviet Union's defence industries are located in the Russian Federation.
Many defence firms have been privatised; some have developed significant partnerships with firms in other countries.

The recent steps towards modernization of the Armed Forces have been made possible by Russia's economic resurgence based on oil and gas revenues as well a strengthening of its own domestic market.
Currently, the military is in the middle of a major equipment upgrade, with the government in the process of spending about $200 billion (what equals to about $400 billion in PPP dollars) on development and production of military equipment between 2006 and 2015 under the State Armament Programme for 2007-2015 (GPV — госпрограмма вооружения).
Mainly as a result of lessons learned during the Russo-Georgian War, the State Armament Programme for 2011-2020 was launched in December 2010.
Prime Minister Putin announced that 20–21.5 trillion rubles (over $650 billion) will be allocated to purchase new hardware in the next 10 years.
The aim is to have a growth of 30% of modern equipment in the army, navy and air force by 2015, and of 70% by 2020.

In some categories, the proportion of new weapon systems will reach 80% or even 100%.
At this point, the Russian MoD plans to purchase, among others, up to 250 ICBMs, 800 aircraft, 1,200 helicopters, 44 submarines, 36 frigates, 28 corvettes, 18 cruisers, 24 destroyers, 6 aircraft carriers, and 62 air defence battalions.
Several existing types will be upgraded.
The share of modern and advanced weapons in some branches of the Russian Armed Forces currently amounts over 60 percent, the Defence Ministry reported 31 July 2015.In total since 2012 and as of 2017, the Armed Forces received more than 30,000 units of new and modernized weapons and equipment, including more than 50 warships, 1,300 aircraft, over 1,800 drones, 4,700 tanks and armored combat vehicles compared to two warships, 151 aircraft and 217 tanks received in 2007–2011.
The Russian army also receives 150-250 aircraft per year and over 300 short-range UAVs.
The Russian Federation is also producing satellite-guided weapons, drones (including combat and kamikaze ones and quadrocopters) and EW systems to counter them, cruise missiles, unmanned vehicles, exoskeletons and military robots and other military equipment.
As of 2011, Russia's chief military prosecutor said that 20 percent of the defence budget was being stolen or defrauded yearly.
In 2018, RF Armed Forces adopted 35 types of weapons and military equipment and completed state tests of 21 more.
The Russian Ministry of Defence (MoD) was procured the YeSU TZ (Yedinaya Sistema Upravleniya Takticheskogo Zvena) battlefield management system that same year.
The YeSU TZ battlefield management system incorporates 11 subsystems that control artillery, electronic warfare systems, ground vehicles, air defence assets, engineering equipment, and logistics support, among other things.
Russian military introduce Big Data decision-making technology.
Twelve missile regiments have been rearmed with Yars ICBMs, 10 missile brigades with Iskander tactical ballistic missile systems, 13 aviation regiments with MiG-31BM, Su-35S, Su-30SM, and Su-34
combat aircraft, three army aviation brigades and six helicopter regiments with Mi-28N and Ka-52
combat helicopters, 20 surface-to-air missile (SAM) regiments with S-400 Triumf SAM systems, 23 batteries with Pantsir-S self-propelled anti-aircraft gun-missile systems, and 17 batteries with Bal and Bastion mobile coastal defence missile systems [MCDMSs] since 2012 and as of March 2019.Since 2012 and as of March 2020, the Ground Forces have received more than 12,000 pieces of weapon systems and equipment and rearmed all missile brigades with the Iskander tactical ballistic missile system.
Aerospace Force and naval aviation have received over 1,400 aircraft and helicopters and the Navy more than 190 ships, vessels and boats.
Since 2012 and as of December 2020, the number of long-range land-, sea-, and air-launched cruise missiles increased by 37 times.
The number of their carriers was also increased by 13 times.

==
Nuclear weapons ==
As of January 2017, the Federation of American Scientists estimated that Russia has approximately 1,765 deployed strategic warheads, and another 2,700 non-deployed strategic and deployed and non-deployed tactical warheads, plus an additional 2,510 warheads awaiting dismantlement.
Russia's Strategic Rocket Forces controls its land-based nuclear warheads, while the Navy controls the submarine based missiles and the Aerospace Forces the air-launched warheads.
Russia's nuclear warheads are deployed in four areas:
Land-based immobile (silos), like
R-36 and its replacement RS-28 Sarmat.

Land-based mobile, like RT-2PM2 Topol-M and new RS-24 Yars.

Submarine based, like R-29RMU2 Layner and RSM-56 Bulava.

Air-launched warheads of the Russian Air Forces' Long Range Aviation CommandThe military doctrine of Russia sees NATO expansion as one of the threats for the Russian Federation and reserves
the right to use nuclear weapons in response to a conventional aggression that can endanger the existence of the state.
In keeping with this, the country's nuclear forces received adequate funding throughout the late 1990s.

The number of intercontinental ballistic missiles and warheads on active duty has declined over the years, in part in keeping with arms limitation agreements with the U.S. and in part due to insufficient spending on maintenance, but this is balanced by the deployment of new missiles as proof against missile defences.
Russia has developed the new RT-2PM2 Topol-M (SS-27) missiles that are stated to be able to penetrate any missile defence, including the planned U.S. National Missile Defence.
The missile can change course in both air and space to avoid countermeasures.
It is designed to be launched from land-based, mobile TEL units.
Russian nuclear forces are confident that they can carry out a successful retaliation strike if attacked.
Because of international awareness of the danger that Russian nuclear technology might fall into the hands of terrorists or rogue officers who it was feared might want to use nuclear weapons to threaten or attack other countries, the federal government of the United States and many other countries provided considerable financial assistance to the Russian nuclear forces in the early 1990s.
Many friendly countries gave huge amounts of money in lieu for Russian Arms purchase deals which kept Russian Agencies functioning.
This money went in part to finance decommissioning of warheads under international agreements, such the Cooperative Threat Reduction programme, but also to improve security and personnel training in Russian nuclear facilities.

In the late evening of 11 September 2007 the fuel-air explosive AVBPM or "Father of All Bombs" was successfully field-tested.
According to the Russian military, the new weapon will replace several smaller types of nuclear bombs in its arsenal.

== See also ==
Military academies in Russia
Awards and emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation
Uniforms of the Russian Armed Forces


== Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
"How are the mighty fallen".
The Economist.
2–8 July 2005.
pp.
45–46.

Russia Creates Unique Rifle That Can Shoot at Four Kilometres RNS, November 2016
Austin, Greg; Alexey Muraviev (2000).
The Armed Forces of Russia in Asia.
London, New York: I. B. Tauris.
ISBN 1-86064-485-6.

Keir Giles, Military Service in Russia:
No New Model Army, Conflict Studies Research Centre, May 2007
International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance, various editions
Odom, William E. (1998).
The Collapse of the Soviet Military.
Yale University Press.
ISBN 0-300-07469-7.

"The United States leads upward trend in arms exports, Asian and Gulf states arms imports up, says SIPRI".
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI.
16 March 2015.
Retrieved 13 April 2017.

==
Further reading ==
Bowen, Andrew (2017).
"
Coercive Diplomacy and the Donbas: Explaining Russian Strategy in Eastern Ukraine".
Journal of Strategic Studies.
42
(3–4): 312–343.
doi:10.1080/01402390.2017.1413550.
S2CID 158522112.

Galeotti, Mark, 'Organised crime and Russian security forces: mafiya, militia and military', Journal of Conflict, Security and Development, issue 1:2, 2001.

Ivanov, Henry, 'Country Briefing: Russia—Austere deterrence', Jane's Defence Weekly, 28 April 2006
Lehrke, Jesse Paul (2013).
The Transition to National Armies in the Former Soviet Republics, 1988-2005.
Routledge.
ISBN 978-1-135-10886-1.

Pynnöniemi, K., 'Russia's Defence Reform:
Assessing the real "Serdyukov heritage"', FIIA Briefing Paper 126, 26 March 2013, The Finnish Institute of International Affairs.

Turbiville, G., 'Organized crime and the Russian armed forces', Transnational Organized Crime, vol.
1, issue 4, 1995, pp.
55–73;
Waters, T., 'Crime in the Russian military', CSRC Paper C90, (Camberley: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 1996).

==
External links ==
Russian Ministry of Defense (in English)
Russia's Military Analysis
A very comprehensive online database of modern Russian arms and military technologies.
Website also has discussion forums, videos and more.

Russia Military Guide Includes satellite photos of bases.

Russian Military Capabilities in a 10 year perspective
(PDF) 2013 study by the Swedish Defence Research Agency
Russia's military modernisation - Putin's new model army by The Economist, 24 May 2014
Just How Dangerous is Russia's Military?
by The National Interest 15 July 2016 by Nikolas Gvosdev
Что такое
современная армия России
[What is the modern army of Russia].
Vlast (in Russian).
Kommersant.
7 (610).
21 February 2005.
Archived from the original on 14 November 2007.
Retrieved 20 September 2008.

Russia's New Army study from 2011 by the Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies
Russia's Military: Assessment, Strategy, and Threat
report by the Center on Global Interests
Russia's shiny new weapons
an article about Russian drones by Mark Galeotti, 10 January 2014
Eight sovereign states have publicly announced successful detonation of nuclear weapons.
Five are considered to be nuclear-weapon states (NWS) under the terms of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
In order of acquisition of nuclear weapons these are the United States, Russia (the successor state to the Soviet Union), the United Kingdom, France, and China.

Since the NPT entered into force in 1970, three states that were not parties to the Treaty have conducted overt nuclear tests, namely India, Pakistan, and North Korea.
North Korea had been a party to the NPT but withdrew in 2003.

Israel is also generally understood to have nuclear weapons, but does not acknowledge it, maintaining a policy of deliberate ambiguity, and is not known definitively to have conducted a nuclear test.
Israel is estimated to possess somewhere between 75 and 400 nuclear warheads.
One possible motivation for nuclear ambiguity is deterrence with minimum political cost.
States that formerly possessed nuclear weapons are South Africa (developed nuclear weapons but then disassembled its arsenal before joining the NPT) and the former Soviet republics of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine, whose weapons were repatriated to Russia.

According to Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), the worldwide total inventory of nuclear weapons as of 2019 stood at 13,865, of which 3,750 were deployed with operational forces.
In early 2019, more than 90% of the world's 13,865 nuclear weapons were owned by Russia and the United States.

==
Statistics and force configuration ==
The following is a list of states that have admitted the possession of nuclear weapons or are presumed to possess them, the approximate number of warheads under their control, and the year they tested their first weapon and their force configuration.
This list is informally known in global politics as the "Nuclear Club".
With the exception of Russia and the United States (which have subjected their nuclear forces to independent verification under various treaties) these figures are estimates, in some cases quite unreliable estimates.
In particular, under the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty thousands of Russian and U.S. nuclear warheads are inactive in stockpiles awaiting processing.
The fissile material contained in the warheads can then be recycled for use in nuclear reactors.

From a high of 70,300 active weapons in 1986, as of 2019 there are approximately 3,750 active nuclear warheads and 13,890 total nuclear warheads in the world.
Many of the decommissioned weapons were simply stored or partially dismantled, not destroyed.
It is also noteworthy that since the dawn of the Atomic Age, the delivery methods of most states with nuclear weapons has evolved with some achieving a nuclear triad, while others have consolidated away from land and air deterrents to submarine-based forces.

== Recognized nuclear-weapon states ==
These five states are known to have detonated a nuclear explosive before 1 January 1967 and are thus nuclear weapons states under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
They also happen to be the UN Security Council's permanent members with veto power on UNSC resolutions.

===
United States ===
The United States developed the first nuclear weapons during World War II in cooperation with the United Kingdom and Canada as part of the Manhattan Project, out of the fear that Nazi Germany would develop them first.
It tested the first nuclear weapon on 16 July 1945 ("Trinity") at 5:30 am, and remains the only country to have used nuclear weapons in war, devastating the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
The project expenditure through 1 October 1945 was reportedly $1.845-$2 billion, in current dollars, roughly 0.8 percent of the US GDP in 1945 and equivalent to about $23 billion in 2019.It was the first nation to develop the hydrogen bomb, testing an experimental prototype in 1952 ("Ivy Mike") and a deployable weapon in 1954 ("Castle Bravo").
Throughout the Cold War it continued to modernize and enlarge its nuclear arsenal, but from 1992 on has been involved primarily in a program of Stockpile stewardship.
The U.S. nuclear arsenal contained 31,175 warheads at its Cold War height (in 1966).
During the Cold War, the United States built approximately 70,000 nuclear warheads, more than all other nuclear-weapon states combined.

===
Russia (successor to the Soviet Union) ===
The Soviet Union tested its first nuclear weapon ("RDS-1") in 1949.
This crash project was developed partially with information obtained via espionage during and after World War II.
The Soviet Union was the second nation to have developed and tested a nuclear weapon.
The direct motivation for Soviet weapons development was to achieve a balance of power during the Cold War.
It tested its first megaton-range hydrogen bomb ("RDS-37") in 1955.
The Soviet Union also tested the most powerful explosive ever detonated by humans, ("Tsar Bomba"), with a theoretical yield of 100 megatons, intentionally reduced to 50 when detonated.
After its dissolution in 1991, the Soviet weapons entered officially into the possession of the Russian Federation.
The Soviet nuclear arsenal contained some 45,000 warheads at its peak (in 1986); the Soviet Union built about 55,000 nuclear warheads since 1949.

===
United Kingdom ===
The United Kingdom tested its first nuclear weapon ("Hurricane") in 1952.
The UK had provided considerable impetus and initial research for the early conception of the atomic bomb, aided by Austrian, German and Polish physicists working at British universities who had either fled or decided not to return to Nazi Germany or Nazi controlled territories.
The UK collaborated closely with the United States and Canada during the Manhattan Project, but had to develop its own method for manufacturing and detonating a bomb as U.S. secrecy grew after 1945.
The United Kingdom was the third country in the world, after the United States and the Soviet Union, to develop and test a nuclear weapon.
Its programme was motivated to have an independent deterrent against the Soviet Union, while also maintaining its status as a great power.
It tested its first hydrogen bomb in 1957 (Operation Grapple), making it the third country to do so after the United States and Soviet Union.
The UK maintained a fleet of V bomber strategic bombers and ballistic missile submarines (SSBNs) equipped with nuclear weapons during the Cold War.
It currently maintains a fleet of four Vanguard-class ballistic missile submarines equipped with Trident II missiles.
In 2016, the UK House of Commons voted to renew the British nuclear weapons system with the Dreadnought-class submarine, without setting a date for the commencement of service of a replacement to the current system.

===
France ===
France tested its first nuclear weapon in 1960 ("Gerboise Bleue"), based mostly on its own research.
It was motivated by the Suez Crisis diplomatic tension vis-à-vis both the Soviet Union and its allies, the United States and United Kingdom.
It was also relevant to retain great power status, alongside the United Kingdom, during the post-colonial Cold War (see: Force de frappe).
France tested its first hydrogen bomb in 1968 ("Opération Canopus").
After the Cold War, France has disarmed 175 warheads with the reduction and modernization of its arsenal that has now evolved to a dual system based on submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) and medium-range air-to-surface missiles (Rafale fighter-bombers).
However new nuclear weapons are in development and reformed nuclear squadrons were trained during Enduring Freedom operations in Afghanistan.
France signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992.
In January 2006, President Jacques Chirac stated a terrorist act or the use of weapons of mass destruction against France would result in a nuclear counterattack.
In February 2015, President François Hollande stressed the need for a nuclear deterrent in "a dangerous world".
He also detailed the French deterrent as "fewer than 300" nuclear warheads, three sets of 16 submarine-launched ballistic missiles and 54 medium-range air-to-surface missiles and urged other states to show similar transparency.

===
China ===
China tested its first nuclear weapon device ("596") in 1964 at the Lop Nur test site.
The weapon was developed as a deterrent against both the United States and the Soviet Union.
Two years later, China had a fission bomb capable of being put onto a nuclear missile.
It tested its first hydrogen bomb ("Test No.
6") in 1967, a mere 32 months after testing its first nuclear weapon (the shortest fission-to-fusion development known in history).
China is the only NPT nuclear-weapon state to give an unqualified negative security assurance with its "no first use" policy.
China signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1992.
As of 2016, China fielded SLBMs onboard its JL-2 submarines.
As of July 2019, China has an estimated total inventory of 290 warheads.

==
States declaring possession of nuclear weapons ==


===
India ===
India is not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
India adopted "no first use" policy in 1998.
India tested what it called a "peaceful nuclear explosive" in 1974 (which became known as "Smiling Buddha").
The test was the first test developed after the creation of the NPT, and created new questions about how civilian nuclear technology could be diverted secretly to weapons purposes (dual-use technology).
India's secret development caused great concern and anger particularly from nations that had supplied its nuclear reactors for peaceful and power generating needs, such as Canada.
Indian officials rejected the NPT in the 1960s on the grounds that it created a world of nuclear "haves" and "have-nots", arguing that it unnecessarily restricted "peaceful activity" (including "peaceful nuclear explosives"), and that India would not accede to international control of their nuclear facilities unless all other countries engaged in unilateral disarmament of their own nuclear weapons.
The Indian position has also asserted that the NPT is in many ways a neo-colonial regime designed to deny security to post-colonial powers.
Even after its 1974 test, India maintained that its nuclear capability was primarily "peaceful", but between 1988 and 1990 it apparently weaponized two dozen nuclear weapons for delivery by air.
In 1998 India tested weaponized nuclear warheads ("Operation Shakti"), including a thermonuclear device.
In July 2005, U.S. President George W. Bush and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh announced plans to conclude an Indo-US civilian nuclear agreement.
This came to fruition through a series of steps that included India's announced plan to separate its civil and military nuclear programs in March 2006, the passage of the India–United States Civil Nuclear Agreement by the U.S. Congress in December 2006, the conclusion of a U.S.–India nuclear cooperation agreement in July 2007, approval by the IAEA of an India-specific safeguards agreement, agreement by the Nuclear Suppliers Group to a waiver of export restrictions for India, approval by the U.S. Congress and culminating in the signature of U.S.–India agreement for civil nuclear cooperation in October 2008.
The U.S. State Department said it made it "very clear that we will not recognize India as a nuclear-weapon state".
The United States is bound by the Hyde Act with India and may cease all cooperation with India if India detonates a nuclear explosive device.
The US had further said it is not its intention to assist India in the design, construction or operation of sensitive nuclear technologies through the transfer of dual-use items.
In establishing an exemption for India, the Nuclear Suppliers Group reserved the right to consult on any future issues which might trouble it.
As of January 2020, India was estimated to have a stockpile of around 150 warheads.

===
Pakistan ===
Pakistan also is not a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Pakistan covertly developed nuclear weapons over decades, beginning in the late 1970s.
Pakistan first delved into nuclear power after the establishment of its first nuclear power plant near Karachi with equipment and materials supplied mainly by western nations in the early 1970s.
Pakistani President Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto promised in 1971 that if India could build nuclear weapons then Pakistan would too, according to him: "We will develop Nuclear stockpiles, even if we have to eat grass.
"It is believed that Pakistan has possessed nuclear weapons since the mid-1980s.
The United States continued to certify that Pakistan did not possess such weapons until 1990, when sanctions were imposed under the Pressler Amendment, requiring a cutoff of U.S. economic and military assistance to Pakistan.
In 1998, Pakistan conducted its first six nuclear tests at the Ras Koh Hills in response to the five tests conducted by India a few weeks before.

In 2004, the Pakistani metallurgist Abdul Qadeer Khan, a key figure in Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, confessed to heading an international black market ring involved in selling nuclear weapons technology.
In particular, Khan had been selling gas centrifuge technology to North Korea, Iran, and Libya.
Khan denied complicity by the Pakistani government or Army, but this has been called into question by journalists and IAEA officials, and was later contradicted by statements from Khan himself.
As of early 2013, Pakistan was estimated to have had a stockpile of around 140 warheads, and in November 2014 it was projected that by 2020 Pakistan would have enough fissile material for 200 warheads.

===
North Korea ===
North Korea was a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, but announced a withdrawal on 10 January 2003, after the United States accused it of having a secret uranium enrichment program and cut off energy assistance under the 1994 Agreed Framework.
In February 2005, North Korea claimed to possess functional nuclear weapons, though their lack of a test at the time led many experts to doubt the claim.
In October 2006, North Korea stated that, in response to growing intimidation by the United States, it would conduct a nuclear test to confirm its nuclear status.
North Korea reported a successful nuclear test on 9 October 2006 (see 2006 North Korean nuclear test).
Most U.S. intelligence officials believed that the test was probably only partially successful with a yield of less than a kiloton.
North Korea conducted a second, higher yield test on 25 May 2009 (see 2009 North Korean nuclear test) and a third test with still higher yield on 12 February 2013 (see 2013 North Korean nuclear test).
North Korea claimed to have conducted its first hydrogen-bomb test on 5 January 2016, though measurements of seismic disturbances indicate that the detonation was not consistent with a hydrogen bomb.
On 3 September 2017, North Korea detonated a device which caused a magnitude 6.1 tremor, consistent with a low-powered thermonuclear detonation; NORSAR estimates the yield at 250 kilotons of TNT.
In 2018, North Korea announced a halt in nuclear weapons tests and made a conditional commitment to denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula; however in December 2019
it indicated it no longer considered itself bound by the moratorium.

==
States indicated to possess nuclear weapons ==


===
Israel ===
Israel is widely believed to have been the sixth country in the world to develop nuclear weapons, but has not acknowledged its nuclear forces.
It had "rudimentary, but deliverable," nuclear weapons available as early as 1966.
Israel is not a party to the NPT.
Israel engages in strategic ambiguity, saying it would not be the first country to "introduce" nuclear weapons into the region, but refusing to otherwise confirm or deny a nuclear weapons program or arsenal.
This policy of "nuclear opacity" has been interpreted as an attempt to get the benefits of deterrence with a minimal political cost.
According to the Natural Resources Defense Council and the Federation of American Scientists, Israel likely possesses around 75–200 nuclear weapons.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute estimates that Israel has approximately 80 intact nuclear weapons, of which 50 are for delivery by Jericho II medium-range ballistic missiles and 30 are gravity bombs for delivery by aircraft.
SIPRI also reports that there was renewed speculation in 2012 that Israel may also have developed nuclear-capable submarine-launched cruise missiles.

==
Launch authority ==
The decision to use nuclear weapons is always restricted to a single person or small group of people.
The United States of America and France require their respective presidents to approve the use of nuclear weapons.
In the US, the Presidential Emergency Satchel is always handled by a nearby aide unless the President is near a command center.
The decision rests with the monarch and the prime minister in the United Kingdom.
Information from China is unclear but is "the launch of nuclear weapons is commonly believed to rest with the Standing Committee of the Politburo of the Central Committee.
"
Russia grants such power to the President but may also require approval from the Minister of Defense and the Chief of the General Staff.
The Supreme Leader of North Korea has authority in North Korea.
India, Pakistan and Israel have committees for such a decision.

==
Nuclear weapons sharing ==
Under NATO nuclear weapons sharing, the United States has provided nuclear weapons for Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Turkey to deploy and store.
This involves pilots and other staff of the "non-nuclear" NATO states practicing, handling, and delivering the U.S. nuclear bombs, and adapting non-U.S. warplanes to deliver U.S. nuclear bombs.
However, since all U.S. nuclear weapons are protected with Permissive Action Links, the host states cannot easily arm the bombs without authorization codes from the U.S. Department of Defense.
Former Italian President Francesco Cossiga acknowledged the presence of U.S. nuclear weapons in Italy.
U.S. nuclear weapons were also deployed in Canada as well as Greece from 1963 to 1984.
However, Canada withdrew three of the four nuclear-capable weapons systems by 1972.
The single system retained, the AIR-2 Genie, had a yield of 1.5 kilotons, was designed to strike enemy aircraft as opposed to ground targets, and might not have qualified as a weapon of mass destruction given its limited yield.
Members of the Non-Aligned Movement have called on all countries to "refrain from nuclear sharing for military purposes under any kind of security arrangements.
"
The Institute of Strategic Studies Islamabad (ISSI) has criticized the arrangement for allegedly violating Articles I and II of the NPT, arguing that "these Articles do not permit the NWS to delegate the control of their nuclear weapons directly or indirectly to others.
"
NATO has argued that the weapons' sharing is compliant with the NPT because "the U.S. nuclear weapons based in Europe are in the sole possession and under constant and complete custody and control of the United States.
"As
of April 2019, the United States maintained around 150 nuclear weapons in Europe, as reflected in the table to the right.

==
States formerly possessing nuclear weapons ==
Nuclear weapons have been present in many nations, often as staging grounds under control of other powers.
However, in only one instance has a nation given up nuclear weapons after being in full control of them.
The fall of the Soviet Union left several former Soviet republics in physical possession of nuclear weapons, though not operational control which was dependent on Russian-controlled electronic Permissive Action Links and the Russian command and control system.

===
South Africa ===
South Africa produced six nuclear weapons in the 1980s, but dismantled them in the early 1990s.

In 1979, there was a detection of a putative covert nuclear test in the Indian Ocean, called the Vela incident.
It has long been speculated that it was a test by Israel, in collaboration with and with the support of South Africa, though this has never been confirmed.
South Africa could not have constructed such a nuclear bomb until November 1979, two months after the "double flash" incident.

South Africa signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991.

===
Former Soviet Republics ===
Belarus had 81 single warhead missiles stationed on its territory after the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991.
They were all transferred to Russia by 1996.
In May 1992, Belarus acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Kazakhstan inherited 1,400 nuclear weapons from the Soviet Union, and transferred them all to Russia by 1995.
Kazakhstan has since acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.

Ukraine has acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Ukraine inherited "as many as 3,000" nuclear weapons when it became independent from the Soviet Union in 1991, making its nuclear arsenal the third-largest in the world.
By 1994, Ukraine had agreed to dispose of all nuclear weapons within its territory, with the condition that its borders were respected, as part of the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances.

The warheads were removed from Ukraine by 1996 and disassembled in Russia.
Despite Russia's subsequent and internationally disputed annexation of Crimea in 2014, Ukraine reaffirmed its 1994 decision to accede to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon state.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==
Globalsecurity.org –
World Special Weapons Guide
The Nuclear Weapon Archive
Nuclear Notebook from Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Europe:
A review of post-Cold War policy, force levels, and war planning NRDC, February 2005
Tracking Nuclear Proliferation Online NewsHour with Jim Lehrer
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute's data on world nuclear forces
Nuclear Proliferation International History Project
For more on the history of nuclear proliferation see the Woodrow Wilson Center's Nuclear Proliferation International History Project website.

Proliferation Watch:
US Intelligence Assessments of Potential Nuclear Powers, 1977–2001
A Military Junta or Junta Militar ruled Brazil from August 31 to October 30, 1969, between the sudden illness of President Artur da Costa e Silva and the swearing-in of Emílio Garrastazu Médici as his successor.

At that time, Brazil was in the peak of a military dictatorship, and the Brazilian Armed Forces were unwilling to allow even their civilian supporters to have any real share of power.
Pedro Aleixo, Costa e Silva's civilian vice-president, should have become acting president under the Constitution of 1967, but was prevented from taking office.

The Junta was composed of the three armed forces ministers:
Army Minister General Aurélio de Lira Tavares, Navy Minister Admiral Augusto Hamann Rademaker Grünewald and Air Force Minister Brigadier Márcio de Souza e Mello.
They ruled under the provisions of the highly repressive Fifth Institutional Act (AI-5).
==
History ==
In August 1969, President Costa e Silva suffered a debilitating episode of cerebral thrombosis.

The president's condition was hidden from Vice-President Pedro Aleixo (who should have become acting president under the constitution), from the press and from the Brazilian people for a few days, as the upper echelons of the Armed Forces decided what to do about the crisis.
On August 31, 1969, the three armed forces ministers seized executive power, with the approval of the rest of the military elite, and issued the Institutional Act number 12 (AI-12), to formalize the establishment of a Military Junta.

The operative text of AI-12 was preceded by a proclamation to the Brazilian people.

The three junta members announced that Costa e Silva was gravely ill, and that the High Command of the Armed Forces considered that the domestic situation (especially in view of the recess of the National Congress and other measures imposed by AI-5) was incompatible with the transfer of executive authority to a civilian.

Accordingly, the leadership of the Government and the Supreme Command of the Armed Forces should be discharged by the armed forces ministers themselves, jointly, until the recovery of the President.
Accordingly, the AI-12 declared Costa e Silva under "temporary impediment" and established that, during that impediment, the three armed forces ministers would jointly discharge all the powers and duties of the presidency.

Therefore, during the initial stage of the existence of the Military Junta, Costa e Silva legally remained President of the Republic, with the Junta discharging his powers and duties while he was incapacitated.
This solution, however, was criticized even by civilian supporters of the regime, and the existence of a triumvirate was deemed potentially unstable.
Also, the physicians attending the incapacitated President were of the opinion that he would never recover from the physical and mental consequences of the stroke and that accordingly he would never be able to resume the powers and duties of the office.
It was also claimed that during intervals of lucidity, Costa e Silva had told military personnel and members of his family that he desired to be replaced president.
The High Command of the Armed Forces also considered that a permanent replacement of Costa e Silva and Aleixo was in the interests of the regime.

Those factors led the Military Junta to issue on October 14, 1969 the Institutional Act number 16 (AI-16).
By that Act, Costa e Silva was formally removed from office.
The vice presidency was declared vacant as well, thus removing Aleixo from the scene.
The National Congress was called out of its two-year recess, and charged with the task of electing a new President and Vice-President.
In reality, the role of the Legislature (which had been purged of several opposition members under the provisions of AI-5) was merely to rubber-stamp the names chosen by the military elites that controlled the regime.
The military's party, the National Renewal Alliance (ARENA), had an overwhelming majority in both houses, meaning its candidate could not have possibly been defeated even if the opposition Brazilian Democratic Movement had put forward a candidate.
The elections were set to take place on October 25.

AI-16 also established that the new President and Vice-President would be inaugurated on October 30, 1969, and that their term of office would last until March 1974.
AI-16 further decreed that, until the election and inauguration of the new President and Vice-President, the Military Junta would remain in place discharging the fullness of the authority of the presidency.
Accordingly, the Military Junta remained in existence until the inauguration of General Emílio Médici as President of the Republic on October 30, 1969.

There was no chairman of the junta, and all official acts of the Junta were jointly signed by its three members.
While General Lyra Tavares, as representative of the Army, the most powerful branch of the Armed Forces in the operation of the regime, is believed to have been the main decisionmaker within the Junta, no formal precedence was assigned to its members, so as to preserve the principle of equality of the branches of the Military.
In official documents of the Junta, its members were always mentioned in the order of antiquity of each branch of the Armed Forces.
Thus, the representative of the Navy was always mentioned first, followed by that of the Army, and then by that of the Air Force, which led some to believe that Admiral Rademaker was first among equals in the workings of the Junta.

The junta's most important achievement was a series of amendments to the 1967 Constitution which made it even more authoritarian than before.

==
The Three Stooges ==
During the redemocratization process, the then president of the National Constituent Assembly (1987–1988), Ulysses Guimarães, a staunch opponent of the military regime, famously referred to the Military Junta of 1969 as The Three Stooges.

== See also ==
List of Presidents of Brazil,
History of Brazil (1964-1985)


==
References ==
This is a list of countries by military expenditure in a given year.

Military expenditure figures are presented in United States dollars based on either constant or current exchange rates.

==
Total military spending ==
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI)
2019
fact
sheetThe first list is based on the SIPRI fact sheet which includes a list of the world's top 15 military spenders in 2019, based on current market exchange rates.
The second list is based on the 2021 edition of "The Military Balance" published by the (IISS) using average market exchange rates.

==
Military spending by GDP ==
This first list is a list of countries by military expenditure share of GDP—more specifically, a list of the top 15 countries by percentage share in recent years—the amount spent by a nation on its military as a share of its GDP.

The second list presents this as a share of the general government expenditure.
The first list is sourced from the SIPRI for the year 2019 and from Military Balance 2017 published by International Institute for Strategic Studies for the year 2016.
The second list is sourced only from the SIPRI for the year 2019.

None of the following analyze Cuba, Eritrea, Libya, North Korea, or Syria, because although they likely would make the list, there is not enough information available to properly determine an exact statistic for their military spending as a percentage of GDP.

===
As a share of GDP ===


===
As a share of government spending (2019) ===


== Notes ==


== See also ==
Arms industry
Military budget
List of countries by past military expenditure
List of countries by military expenditure per capita
List of countries by Global Militarization Index
Military budget of the United States


==
References ==


==
External links ==
SIPRI military expenditure database (sipri.org)
A mortar is usually a simple, lightweight, man-portable, muzzle-loaded weapon, consisting of a smooth-bore (although some models use a rifled barrel) metal tube fixed to a base plate (to spread out the recoil) with a lightweight bipod mount and a sight.
They launch explosive shells (technically called bombs) in high-arcing ballistic trajectories.
Mortars are typically used as indirect fire weapons for close fire support with a variety of ammunition.

==
History ==
Mortars have been used for hundreds of years.

The earliest mortars were used in Korea in a 1413 naval battle when Korean gunsmiths developed the wan'gu (gourd-shaped mortar) (완구, 碗口).
The earliest version of the wan'gu dates back to 1407.
Choi Hae-san (최해산, 崔海山) (1380–1443), the son of Choe Mu-seon(최무선)
(1325–1395), is generally credited with inventing the wan'gu.
The first use in siege warfare was at the 1453 siege of Constantinople by Mehmed the Conqueror.
An Italian account of the 1456 siege of Belgrade by Giovanni da Tagliacozzo states that the Ottoman Turks used seven mortars that fired "stone shots
one Italian mile high".
The time of flight of these was apparently long enough that casualties could be avoided by posting observers to give warning of their trajectories.

Early mortars, such as the Pumhart von Steyr, were large and heavy and could not be easily transported.
Simply made, these weapons were no more than iron bowls reminiscent of the kitchen and apothecary mortars from whence
they drew their name.
An early transportable mortar was invented by Baron Menno van Coehoorn in 1701.
This mortar fired an exploding shell, which had a fuse that was lit by the hot gases when fired.
The Coehorn mortar gained quick popularity, necessitating a new form of naval ship, the bomb vessel.
Mortars played a significant role in the Venetian conquest of Morea, and in the course of this campaign an ammunition depot in the Parthenon was blown up.
An early use of these more mobile mortars as field artillery (rather than siege artillery) was by British forces in the suppression of the Jacobite rising of 1719 at the Battle of Glen Shiel.
High angle trajectory mortars held a great advantage over standard field guns in the rough terrain of the West Highlands of Scotland.

The mortar had fallen out of general use in Europe by the Napoleonic era, and interest in the weapon was not revived until the beginning of the 20th century.
Mortars were heavily used by both sides during the American Civil War.
At the Siege of Vicksburg, General Ulysses S. Grant reported making mortars "by taking logs of the toughest wood that could be found, boring them out for six- or twelve-pound shells and binding them with strong iron bands.
These answered as Coehorns, and shells were successfully thrown from them into the trenches of the enemy".
During the Russo-Japanese War, Lieutenant General Leonid Gobyato of the Imperial Russian Army applied the principles of indirect fire from closed firing positions in the field and, with the collaboration of General Roman Kondratenko, he designed the first mortar that fired navy shells.

The German Army studied the Siege of Port Arthur, where heavy artillery had been unable to destroy defensive structures like barbed wire and bunkers.
As a result, they developed a short-barreled rifled muzzle-loading mortar called the Minenwerfer.
Heavily used during World War I, they were made in three sizes; 7.58 cm (2.98 in), 17 cm (6.7 in) and 25 cm (9.8 in).

== Types ==


===
Stokes mortar ===
It was not until the Stokes mortar was devised by Sir Wilfred Stokes in 1915 during the First World War that the modern mortar transportable by one person was born.
In the conditions of trench warfare, there was a great need for a versatile and easily portable weapon that could be manned by troops under cover in the trenches.
Stokes' design was initially rejected in June 1915 because it was unable to use existing stocks of British mortar ammunition, and it took the intervention of David Lloyd George (at that time Minister of Munitions) and Lieutenant Colonel J. C. Matheson of the Trench Warfare Supply Department (who reported to Lloyd George) to expedite manufacture of the Stokes mortar.
The weapon proved to be extremely useful in the muddy trenches of the Western Front, as a mortar round could be aimed to fall directly into trenches, where artillery shells, because of their low angle of flight, could not possibly go.
The Stokes mortar was a simple muzzle-loaded weapon, consisting of a smoothbore metal tube fixed to a base plate (to absorb recoil) with a lightweight bipod mount.
When a mortar bomb was dropped into the tube, an impact sensitive primer in the base of the bomb would make contact with a firing pin at the base of the tube, and detonate, firing the bomb towards the target.
The Stokes mortar could fire as many as 25 bombs per minute and had a maximum range of 800 yards (730 m), firing the original cylindrical unstabilised projectile.
A modified version of the mortar, which fired a modern fin-stabilised streamlined projectile and had a booster charge for longer range, was developed after World War I; this was in effect a new weapon.
By World War II, it could fire as many as 30 bombs per minute and had a range of over 2,500 yards (2,300 m) with some shell types.
The French developed an improved version of the Stokes mortar as the Brandt Mle 27, further refined as the Brandt Mle 31; this design was widely copied with and without license.
These weapons were the prototypes for all subsequent light mortar developments around the world.

===
Mortar carrier ===
Mortar carriers are vehicles which carry a mortar as a primary weapon.
Numerous vehicles have been used to mount mortars, from improvised civilian trucks used by insurgents, to modified Infantry fighting vehicles, such as variants of the M3 half-track and M113 armored personnel carrier, to vehicles specifically intended to carry a mortar.
Simpler vehicles carry a standard infantry mortar while in more complex vehicles the mortar is fully integrated into the vehicle and cannot be dismounted from the vehicle.
Mortar carriers cannot be fired while on the move, and some must be dismounted to fire.

There are numerous armoured fighting vehicles and even main battle tanks that can be equipped with a mortar, either outside or inside of the cabin.
The Israeli Merkava tank uses a 60 mm mortar as a secondary armament.
The Russian army uses the 2S4 Tyulpan self-propelled 240 mm heavy mortar which is one of the largest mortars in current use.

===
Gun-mortars ===
Gun-mortars are breech-loaded mortars usually equipped with a hydraulic recoil mechanism, and sometimes equipped with an autoloader.
They are usually mounted on an armored vehicle and are capable of direct fire.
The archetypes are the Brandt Mle CM60A1 and Brandt 60 mm LR, which combine features of modern infantry mortars together with those of modern cannon.
Such weapons are most commonly smoothbore, firing fin-stabilised rounds, using relatively small propellant charges in comparison to projectile weight.
They have short barrels in comparison to guns and are much more lightly built than guns of a similar calibre – all characteristics of infantry mortars.
This produces a hybrid weapon capable of engaging area targets with indirect high-angle fire, and also specific targets such as vehicles and bunkers with direct fire.
Such hybrids are much heavier and more complicated than infantry mortars, superior to rocket-propelled grenades in the anti-armour and bunker-busting role, but have a reduced range compared to modern gun-howitzers and inferior anti-tank capability compared to modern anti-tank guided weapons.
However, they do have a niche in, for example, providing a multi-role anti-personnel, anti-armour capability in light mobile formations.
Such systems, like the Soviet 120 mm 2S9 Nona, are mostly self-propelled (although a towed variant exists).
The AMOS (Advanced Mortar System) is an example of an even more advanced gun mortar system.
It uses a 120 mm automatic twin-barrelled, breech-loaded mortar turret, which can be mounted on a variety of armored vehicles and attack boats.
A modern example of a gun-mortar is the 2B9 Vasilek.

===
Spigot mortar ===
A spigot mortar consists mainly of a solid rod or spigot, onto which a hollow tube in the projectile fits—inverting the normal tube-mortar arrangement.
At the top of the tube in the projectile, a cavity contains propellant, such as cordite.
There is usually a trigger mechanism built into the base of the spigot, with a long firing pin running up the length of the spigot activating a primer inside the projectile and firing the propellant charge.
The advantage of a spigot mortar is that the firing unit (baseplate and spigot) is smaller and lighter than a conventional tube mortar of equivalent payload and range.
It is also somewhat simpler to manufacture.
Further, most spigot mortars have no barrel in the conventional sense, which means ammunition of almost any weight and diameter can be fired from the same mortar.

The disadvantage is that while most mortar bombs have a streamlined shape towards the back that fits a spigot mortar application well, using that space for the spigot mortar tube takes volume and mass away from the payload of the projectile.
If a soldier is carrying only a few projectiles, the projectile weight disadvantage is not significant.
However, the weight of a large quantity of the heavier and more complex spigot projectiles offsets the weight saved.

A near-silent mortar can operate using the spigot principle.
Each round has a close-fitting sliding plug in the tube that fits over the spigot.
When the round is fired, the projectile is pushed off the spigot, but before the plug clears the spigot it is caught by a constriction at the base of the tube.
This traps the gases from the propelling charge and hence the sound of the firing.
After World War II the Belgium Fly-K silent spigot mortar was accepted into French service as the TN-8111.

Spigot mortars are generally out of favor in modern usage, replaced by small conventional mortars.
Military applications of spigot mortars include:
The 290 mm petard mortar used on the Churchill AVRE by Britain in World War II.

The 320 mm Type 98 mortar used by Japan in World War II to some psychological effect in the battles of Iwo Jima and Okinawa
The Blacker Bombard and PIAT anti-tank launchers used by Britain in World War II.

The Hedgehog launcher, used from the deck of a ship, used 24 spigot mortars which fired a diamond pattern of anti-submarine projectiles into the sea ahead of the ship.
A sinking projectile detonated if it struck a submarine, and the pattern was such that any submarine partly in the landing zone of the projectiles would be struck one or more times.
Non-military applications include the use of small-calibre spigot mortars to launch lightweight, low-velocity foam dummy targets used for training retriever dogs for bird hunting.
Simple launchers use a separate small primer cap as the sole propellant (similar or identical to the cartridges used in industrial nail guns).

=== Improvised ===
Improvised, or "home-made", mortars have been used by insurgent groups, usually to attack fortified military installations or to terrorize civilians.
They are usually constructed from heavy steel piping mounted on a steel frame.
These weapons may fire standard mortar rounds, purpose made shells, re-purposed gas cylinders filled with explosives and shrapnel, or any other type of improvised explosive, incendiary or chemical munitions.
These were called "Barrack Busters" by the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA).
They are known as "Hell Cannons" in the Syrian Civil War, where observers have noted that they are "wildly inaccurate" and responsible for hundreds of civilian deaths.

==
Modern ==


===
Design ===
Most modern mortar systems consist of four main components: a barrel, a base plate, a bipod and a sight.
Modern mortars normally range in calibre from 60 mm (2.36 in) to 120 mm (4.72 in).
However, both larger and smaller mortars have been produced.
The modern mortar is a muzzle-loaded weapon and relatively simple to operate.
It consists of a tube into which the gunners drop a mortar round.
When the round reaches the base of the tube it hits a fixed firing pin that fires the round.
The tube is generally set at an angle of between 45 and 85 degrees to the ground, with the higher angle producing a shorter horizontal trajectory.
Some mortars have a moving firing pin, operated by a lanyard or trigger mechanism.

===
Ammunition ===

Ammunition for mortars generally comes in two main varieties: fin-stabilized and spin-stabilized.
Examples of the former have short fins on their posterior portion, which control the path of the bomb in flight.
Spin-stabilized mortar bombs rotate as they travel along and leave the mortar tube, which stabilizes them in much the same way as a rifle bullet.
Both types of rounds can be either illumination (infrared or visible illumination), smoke, high explosive and training rounds.
Mortar bombs are often referred to, incorrectly, as "mortars".
Operators may fire spin-stabilized rounds from either a smoothbore or a rifled barrel.
Rifled mortars are more accurate but slower to load.
Since mortars are generally muzzle-loaded, mortar bombs for rifled barrels usually have a pre-engraved band, called an obturator, that engages with the rifling of the barrel.
Exceptions to this were the U.S. M2 4.2-inch mortar and M30 mortar, whose ammunition had a sub-caliber expandable ring that enlarged when fired.
This allows the projectile to slide down the barrel freely but grip the rifling when fired.
The system resembles the Minié ball for muzzle-loading rifles.
For extra range, propellant rings (augmentation charges) are attached to the bomb's fins.
The rings are usually easy to remove, because they have a major influence on the speed and thus the range of the bomb.
Some mortar rounds can be fired without any augmentation charges, e.g., the 81 mm L16 mortar.

===
Precision guided ===
The XM395 Precision Guided Mortar Munition (PGMM) is a 120 mm guided mortar round developed by Alliant Techsystems.
Based on Orbital ATK's Precision Guidance Kit for 155 mm artillery projectiles, XM395 combines GPS guidance and directional control surfaces into a package that replaces standard fuses, transforming existing 120 mm mortar bodies into precision-guided munitions.
The XM395 munition consists of a GPS-guided kit fitted to standard 120 mm smoothbore mortar rounds that includes the fitting of a nose and tail subsystem containing the maneuvering parts.
The Strix mortar round is a Swedish endphase-guided projectile fired from a 120 mm mortar currently manufactured by Saab Bofors Dynamics.
STRIX is fired like a conventional mortar round.
The round contains an infrared imaging sensor that it uses to guide itself onto any tank or armoured fighting vehicle in the vicinity where it lands.
The seeker is designed to ignore targets that are already burning.
Launched from any 120 mm mortar, STRIX has a normal range of up to 4.5 km.
The addition of a special sustainer motor increases the range to 7.5 km.

The GMM 120 (Guided Mortar Munition 120; known as Patzmi; also referred to as Morty) is a GPS and/or laser-guided mortar munition, which was developed by Israel Military Industries.
The Russian KM-8 Gran is also laser-guided.

==
Compared to artillery ==
Modern mortars and their ammunition are generally much smaller and lighter than artillery, such as guns and howitzers, which allows light and medium (typically, 60 mm and 81 mm/82 mm) mortars to be considered light weapons; i.e. capable of transport by personnel without vehicle assistance.
They are short-range weapons and often more effective than artillery for many purposes within their shorter range.
In particular, because of its high, parabolic trajectory with a near vertical descent, the mortar can land bombs on nearby targets, including those behind obstacles or in fortifications, such as light vehicles behind hills or structures, or infantry in trenches or spider holes.
This also makes it possible to launch attacks from positions lower than the target of the attack.
(
For example, long-range artillery could not shell a target 1 km away and 30 metres (100 ft) higher, a target easily accessible to a mortar.)

In trench warfare, mortars can fire directly into the enemy trenches, which is very hard or impossible to accomplish with artillery because of its much flatter trajectory.
Mortars are also highly effective when used from concealed positions, such as the natural escarpments on hillsides or from woods, especially if forward observers are being employed in strategic positions to direct fire, an arrangement where the mortar is in relatively close proximity both to its forward observer and its target, allowing for fire to be quickly and accurately delivered with lethal effect.
Mortars suffer from instability when used on snow or soft ground, because the recoil pushes them into the ground or snow unevenly.
A Raschen bag addresses this problem.

Fin-stabilised mortar bombs do not have to withstand the rotational forces placed upon them by rifling or greater pressures, and can therefore carry a higher payload in a thinner skin than rifled artillery ammunition.
Because of the difference in available volume, a smooth-bore mortar of a given diameter will have a greater explosive yield than a similarly sized artillery shell of a gun or howitzer.
For example, a 120 mm mortar bomb has approximately the same explosive capability as a 155 mm artillery shell.
Also, fin-stabilised munitions fired from a smooth-bore, which do not rely on the spin imparted by a rifled bore for greater accuracy, do not have the drawback of veering in the direction of the spin.

==
Largest mortars ==
From the 17th to the mid 20th century, very heavy, relatively immobile siege mortars were used, of up to one metre calibre, often made of cast iron and with an outside barrel diameter many times that of the bore diameter.
An early example was Roaring Meg, with a 15.5-inch (390 mm) barrel diameter and firing a 220 lb (100 kg) hollow ball filled with gunpowder and used during the English Civil War in 1646.

The largest mortars ever developed were the Belgian "Monster Mortar" (24 inches; 610 mm; developed by Henri-Joseph Paixhans in 1832), Mallet's Mortar (36 inches; 914.4 mm; developed by Robert Mallet in 1857), and the "Little David" (36 inches; 914.4 mm; developed in the United States for use in World War II).
Although the latter two had a caliber of 36 inches, only the "Monster Mortar" was used in combat (at the Battle of Antwerp in 1832).
The World War II German Karl-Gerät was a 60 cm (23.6 inch) mortar and the largest to see combat in modern warfare.

==
See also ==
Carcass (projectile), used in mortars before the modern age
Chemical mortar battalion
Eprouvette, a mortar used to test the strength of gunpowder.

List of heavy mortars
List of infantry mortars
Livens Projector
Military technology


==
References ==


==
External links ==
A Guide to Modern Mortar Systems
"Field Manual 3-22.90 – Mortars" (PDF).
Department of the Army.
December 2007.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2013.
Retrieved 7 January 2013.

"Field Manual 3-22.91 – Mortar Fire Direction Procedures" (PDF).
Department of the Army.
17 July 2008.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2013.
Retrieved 7 January 2013.

"Field Manual 23-91 – Mortar Gunnery" (PDF).
Department of the Army.
1 March 2000.
Retrieved 7 January 2013.

Mallet's Mortar, the largest British mortar ever made.

Defense Update:
Modern Mobile 120 mm Mortars
Defense Update:
Advanced Mortar Munitions
How does a Mortar work?
-
Visualization (Video)
Mortars during World War
I
The Karl Morser, WW II-era
German 60 cm self-propelled mortar.

Video (streaming wmv)
International Defense Supplier, a seller of mortars
In Hinduism, an astra (Sanskrit: अस्त्र) was a supernatural weapon, presided over by a specific deity and imbued with spiritual and occult powers that caused its effect or impact.
Later the word came to denote any weapon which was used by releasing it from one's hand (e.g. an arrow), as opposed to being used while held like a sword (Shastra).
In Ramayana and Mahabharata, Arjuna had more astras than any other warrior.
Various texts have stated that Arjuna possessed almost all astras except Narayanastra.

==
Astradhari ==
The bearer of the weapon is called an Astradhari (Sanskrit: अस्त्रधारी).

==
Summoning of Astra ==
To summon or use an astra required use of a specific incantation or invocation.
The deity invoked would then endow the weapon with supernatural powers, making it impossible to counter through regular means.
Specific conditions existed involving the usage of astras, the violation of which could be fatal.
Because of the power involved, the knowledge involving an astra was passed in the Guru-shishya tradition from a Guru (teacher) to a Shishya (pupil) by word of mouth alone, and only following the establishment of the student's character.
Certain astras had to be handed down from the deity involved directly, knowledge of the incantation being insufficient.

==
Astras in Hindu Epics ==
Astras come into importance mainly in the Ramayana and Mahabharata, where they are used in the great battles described in each epic.
They are depicted as used by archers such as Parashurama, Rama, Lakshman, Meghanada (Indrajit), Ravana, Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Ashwatthama, Arjuna and other warriors.

The divya ("divine")
astras were generally invoked into arrows, although they could potentially be used with anything.
Ashwatthama invoked Brahmashirsha astra using a blade of grass as his weapon.
Arjuna was capable of shooting all of his celestial weapons including Pashupatastra by the power of his mind alone.[1]


==
See also ==
Astras of Arjuna
The Ramayana
The Mahabharata
Bhagavata Purana


== References ==
This is a list of military aircraft currently in service with the Russian Air Force.

==
Aircraft ==


===
Current inventory ===


==
See also ==
List of active Russian military aircraft
List of military aircraft of the Soviet Union and the CIS
Lists of currently active military equipment by country


==
References ==
This is a list of flags used in Russia.

==
Flag of the Russian Federation ==


==
Flags of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation ==
A majority of the flags of the Russian Armed Forces mimic the flag designs of the Imperial Russian Army and Navy, while some flags are directly based on Soviet-era flags.
Most notably, the flag of the Russian Airborne troops is based on the flag of the Soviet Airborne troops, and the flag of the Russian Aerospace forces is based on the Soviet Air Force flag.
Many Russian military flags and regiment banners employ the Cross of Saint George within their design, which was heavily in use by the Imperial Russia Army up to the early 20th century.
These military banners shared many similarities to the regiment banners of the Prussian Army, which in some cases looked almost identical to each other.
Around 2006, many traditional Russian banners replaced Soviet-era regiment banners in favor of moving away from Communist oriented iconography.

===
Flags of service branches ===


===
Flags of the Ground Forces ===
Flags of the arms of the Ground Forces of the Russian Federation


===
Flags of the Aerospace Forces ===
The Aerospace Forces are a branch of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, it has three arms, the Russian Air Force, the Air Defense Forces, and the Russian Space Forces.
The Air Defense Forces does not have a flag.

===
Flags of the Rear of the Russian Armed Forces (1992–2010) ===


===
Military district flags ===


===
Banners of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation ===
Each branch of the Armed Forces has a representative banner, one for the Ground Forces, the Aerospace Forces, the Navy, and one to represent the entire Armed Forces as a whole.

===
Victory Banner ===
The Victory Banner was a historical banner raised atop of the Reichstag building in Berlin, by the Red Army, on May 1, 1945.
It signified the victory over Nazi Germany, and served as the main symbol of victory of the Soviet people.
It was amended in Russian law in 1996, but with a new design to distance the new Russian state from any usage of Communist iconography.
In 2007, following pressure from Red Army veterans, the original Victory Banner design replaced the 1996 variant, and has since then served its usage in virtually every single Victory Day parade held across Russia.

===
Command Standards ===


==
Flags of paramilitary organizations ==


===
Flags of special services ===


==
Historical flags of Russia ==


==
Historical banners of Russia ==


==
Historical standards of Russia ==


==
Flags of Russian cities ==


==
Historical flags of the short-lived states during the Russian Civil War
==
==
Historical flags of the Soviet Union
==


=
=
See also ==
Flags of the federal subjects of Russia
List of Sakha flags
List of Russian navy flags
List of Soviet navy flags
Flag of the Russian-American Company


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Flags of Russia at Wikimedia Commons
Flags of Russia:
Флаги России-VEXILLOGRAPHIA
The list of equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces can be subdivided into: infantry weapons, vehicles, aircraft, watercraft, and clothing.

==
Small arms ==
== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Infantry fighting vehicles ===


===
Armored personnel carriers ===


===
Artillery ===


===
Anti-aircraft ===
Long and Medium air defense is under the authority of the Air Defense Forces of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Engineering vehicles ===


===
Utility vehicles ===


===
Cargo vehicles ===


===
Electronic warfare and communication ===
Communication equipment
Jammers
Eavesdropping equipment


===
Radars ==
=
Radar for long and medium air defense are under Radiolocation Forces authority of the Ukrainian Air Force.
See their equipment.

===
Helicopters ===


===
Unmanned aerial vehicles and autonomous vehicles ===


===
Field kitchen units ===


==
See also ==
Ukrainian Ground Forces
Equipment of the National Guard of Ukraine
Equipment of the Ukrainian Air Force
List of armoured fighting vehicles of Ukraine


==
References ==
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to natural science:
Natural science – a major branch of science that tries to explain, and predict, nature's phenomena based on empirical evidence.
In natural science, hypothesis must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.

Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are amongst the criteria and methods used for this purpose.
Natural science can be broken into 2 main branches: life science, and physical science.
Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

==
What type of thing is natural science?
=
=
Natural science can be described as all of the following:

Branch of science – systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.

Major category of academic disciplines – an academic discipline is focused study in one academic field or profession.
A discipline incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with academic areas of study or areas of professional practice.
For example, the branches of science are commonly referred to as the scientific disciplines.
For instance, Gravitation is strongly associated with the discipline of physics, and is considered to be part of that disciplinary knowledge.

==
Branches of natural science ==


===
Physical science ===
Physical science – branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to the biological sciences.
It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences".
However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena (organic chemistry, for example).

====
Astronomy ====
Astronomy – studies the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.)
and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).

Astrobiology – study of evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe—also known as exobiology, exopaleontology, and bioastronomy
Astrodynamics – application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.

Astrophysics – study of the physical aspects of celestial objects.

Astrometry – branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestially  bodies.

Cosmology – discipline that deals with the nature of the Universe as a whole.

Extragalactic astronomy – branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
Galactic astronomy – study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.

Physical cosmology – study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.

Planetary science – scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular
those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.

Stellar astronomy – natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)


====
Physics ====
Physics – physical science that studies matter and its motion through space-time, and related concepts such as energy and force
Acoustics – study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
Agrophysics – study of physics applied to agroecosystems
Soil physics – study of soil physical properties and processes.

Atmospheric physics – study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics – study of how matter and light interact
Biophysics – study of physical processes relating to biology
Medical physics – application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.

Neurophysics – branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.

Chemical physics – branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

Computational physics – study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.

Condensed matter physics – study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.

Cryogenics – cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238
°F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.

Dynamics – study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
Econophysics – interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
Electromagnetism – branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.

Geophysics – the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
Materials physics – use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.

Mathematical physics – application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.

Mechanics – branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.

Biomechanics – study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.

Classical mechanics – one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.

Continuum mechanics – branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.

Fluid mechanics – study of fluids and the forces on them.

Quantum mechanics – branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

Thermodynamics – branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.

Nuclear physics – field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.

Optics – branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.

Particle physics – branch of physics that studies the existence and interactions of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter or radiation.

Psychophysics – quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.

Plasma physics – state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.

Polymer physics – field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.

Quantum physics – branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

Relativity – branch of physics dealing with the mechanics of objects that approach the speed of light.

Statics – branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.

Solid state physics – study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.

Vehicle dynamics – dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.

====
Chemistry ====
Chemistry – physical science of atomic matter (matter that is composed of chemical elements), especially its chemical reactions, but also including its properties, structure, composition, behavior, and changes as they relate the chemical reactions
Analytical chemistry – study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

Astrochemistry – study of the abundance and reactions of chemical elements and molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation.

Cosmochemistry – study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions
Atmospheric chemistry – branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied.
It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines
Biochemistry – study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.
Biochemistry governs all living organisms and living processes.

Agrochemistry – study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.

Bioinorganic chemistry – examines the role of metals in biology.

Bioorganic chemistry – rapidly growing scientific discipline that combines organic chemistry and biochemistry.

Biophysical chemistry –  new branch of chemistry that covers a broad spectrum of research activities involving biological systems.

Environmental chemistry – scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

Immunochemistry – branch of chemistry that involves the study of the reactions and components on the immune system.

Medicinal chemistry – discipline at the intersection of chemistry, especially synthetic organic chemistry, and pharmacology and various other biological specialties, where they are involved with design, chemical synthesis and development for market of pharmaceutical agents (drugs).

Pharmacology – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

Natural product chemistry – chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism – found in nature that usually has a pharmacological or biological activity for use in pharmaceutical drug discovery and drug design.

Neurochemistry – specific study of neurochemicals, which include neurotransmitters and other molecules such as neuro-active drugs that influence neuron function.

Computational chemistry – branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems.

Chemo-informatics – use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry.

Molecular mechanics – uses Newtonian mechanics to model molecular systems.

Flavor chemistry – someone who uses chemistry to engineer artificial and natural flavors.

Flow chemistry
– chemical reaction is run in a continuously flowing stream rather than in batch production.

Geochemistry – study of the mechanisms behind major geological systems using chemistry
Aqueous geochemistry – study of the role of various elements in watersheds, including copper, sulfur, mercury, and
how elemental fluxes are exchanged through atmospheric-terrestrial-aquatic interactions
Isotope geochemistry – study of the relative and absolute concentrations of the elements and their isotopes using chemistry and geology
Ocean chemistry –
studies the chemistry of marine environments including the influences of different variables.

Organic geochemistry – study of the impacts and processes that organisms have had on Earth
Regional, environmental and exploration geochemistry – study of the spatial variation in the chemical composition of materials at the surface of the Earth
Inorganic chemistry – branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

Nuclear chemistry – subfield of chemistry dealing with radioactivity, nuclear processes and nuclear properties.

Radiochemistry – chemistry of radioactive materials, where radioactive isotopes of elements are used to study the properties and chemical reactions of non-radioactive isotopes (often within radiochemistry the absence of radioactivity leads to a substance being described as being inactive as the isotopes are stable).

Organic chemistry – study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

Petrochemistry – branch of chemistry that studies the transformation of crude oil (petroleum) and natural gas into useful products or raw materials.

Organometallic chemistry – study of chemical compounds containing bonds between carbon and a metal.

Photochemistry – study of chemical reactions that proceed with the absorption of light by atoms or molecules..
Physical chemistry – study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

Chemical kinetics –
the study of rates of chemical processes.

Chemical thermodynamics – study of the interrelation of heat and work with chemical reactions or with physical changes of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.

Electrochemistry – branch of chemistry that studies chemical reactions which take place in a solution at the interface of an electron conductor (a metal or a semiconductor) and an ionic conductor (the electrolyte), and which involve electron transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte or species in solution.

Femtochemistry
– Femtochemistry is the science that studies chemical reactions on extremely short timescales, approximately 10−15 seconds (one femtosecond, hence the name).

Mathematical chemistry – area of research engaged in novel applications of mathematics to chemistry; it concerns itself principally with the mathematical modeling of chemical phenomena.

Mechanochemistry – coupling of the mechanical and the chemical phenomena on a molecular scale and includes mechanical breakage, chemical behaviour of mechanically stressed solids (e.g., stress-corrosion cracking), tribology, polymer degradation under shear, cavitation-related phenomena (e.g., sonochemistry and sonoluminescence), shock wave chemistry and physics, and even the burgeoning field of molecular machines.

Physical organic chemistry – study of the interrelationships between structure and reactivity in organic molecules.

Quantum chemistry – branch of chemistry
whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems.

Sonochemistry – study of the effect of sonic waves and wave properties on chemical systems.

Stereochemistry – study of the relative spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules.

Supramolecular chemistry – area of chemistry beyond the molecules and focuses on the chemical systems made up of a discrete number of assembled molecular subunits or components.

Thermochemistry – study of the energy and heat associated with chemical reactions and/or physical transformations.

Phytochemistry – strict sense of the word the study of phytochemicals.

Polymer chemistry – multidisciplinary science that deals with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers or macromolecules.

Solid-state chemistry – study of the synthesis, structure, and properties of solid phase materials, particularly, but not necessarily exclusively of, non-molecular solids
Multidisciplinary fields involving chemistry
Chemical biology – scientific discipline spanning the fields of chemistry and biology that involves the application of chemical techniques and tools, often compounds produced through synthetic chemistry, to the study and manipulation of biological systems.

Chemical engineering – branch of engineering that deals with physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.

Chemical oceanography – study of the behavior of the chemical elements within the Earth's oceans.

Chemical physics – branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

Materials science – interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.

Nanotechnology – study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale
Oenology – science and study of all aspects of wine and winemaking except vine-growing and grape-harvesting, which is a subfield called viticulture.

Spectroscopy – study of the interaction between matter and radiated energy
Surface science – Surface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid–liquid interfaces, solid–gas interfaces, solid–vacuum interfaces, and liquid–gas interfaces.

====
Earth Science ====
Earth science – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.
Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.

Atmospheric sciences –  umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.

Biogeography – study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.

Cartography – study and practice of making maps or globes.

Climatology – study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
Coastal geography – study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.

Environmental science – an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.

Ecology – scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.

Freshwater biology – scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of Limnology
Marine biology – scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
Parasitology – Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.

Population dynamics
– Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.

Environmental chemistry –
Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

Environmental soil science – Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.

Environmental geology – Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.

Toxicology – branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

Geodesy – scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
Geography – science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
Geoinformatics – science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.

Geology – study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.

Planetary geology – planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.

Geomorphology – scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
Geostatistics – branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
Geophysics – physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.

Glaciology – study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

Hydrology – study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Hydrogeology – area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).

Mineralogy – study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

Meteorology – interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.

Oceanography – branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
Paleoclimatology – study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
Paleontology – study of prehistoric life
Petrology – branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.

Limnology – study of inland waters
Seismology – scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
Soil science – study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.

Topography – study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.

Volcanology – study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.
===
Life
Science ===


====
Biology ====
Biology – study of living organisms.

Aerobiology – study of airborne organic particles
Agriculture – study of producing crops from the land, with an emphasis on practical applications
Anatomy – study of form and function, in plants, animals, and other organisms, or specifically in humans
Human anatomy – scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.

Biochemistry – study of the chemical reactions required for life to exist and function, usually a focus on the cellular level
Bioengineering – study of biology through the means of engineering with an emphasis on applied knowledge and especially related to biotechnology
Biogeography – study of the distribution of species spatially and temporally
Bioinformatics – use of information technology and statistics for the study, collection, and storage of genomic and other biological data
Biomathematics or Mathematical Biology – quantitative or mathematical study of biological processes, with an emphasis on modeling
Biomechanics – often considered a branch of medicine, the study of the mechanics of living beings, with an emphasis on applied use through prosthetics or orthotics
Biomedical research – study of the human body in health and disease
Biophysics – study of biological processes through physics, by applying the theories and methods traditionally used in the physical sciences
Biotechnology – new and sometimes controversial branch of biology that studies the manipulation of living matter, including genetic modification and synthetic biology
Botany – study of plants
Cell biology – study of the cell as a complete unit, and the molecular and chemical interactions that occur within a living cell
Conservation Biology – study of the preservation, protection, or restoration of the natural environment, natural ecosystems, vegetation, and wildlife
Chronobiology – field of biology that examines periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms and their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms.

Cryobiology – study of the effects of lower than normally preferred temperatures on living beings.

Developmental biology – study of the processes through which an organism forms, from zygote to full structure
Embryology – study of the development of embryo (from fecundation to birth).
See also topobiology.

Gerontology – study of aging processes.

Ecology – study of the interactions of living organisms with one another and with the non-living elements of their environment
Environmental Biology – study of the natural world, as a whole or in a particular area, especially as affected by human activity
Epidemiology – major component of public health research, studying factors affecting the health of populations
Evolution – any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations.

Evolutionary Biology – study of the origin and descent of species over time
Evolutionary developmental biology – field of biology that compares the developmental processes of different organisms to determine the ancestral relationship between them, and to discover how developmental processes evolved.

Paleobiology – discipline which combines the methods and findings of the natural science biology with the methods and findings of the earth science paleontology.

Paleontology – study of fossils and sometimes geographic evidence of prehistoric life
Genetics – study of genes and heredity
Genomics – discipline in genetics concerned with the study of the genomes of organisms.

Proteomics – large-scale study of proteins, particularly their structures and functions
Population genetics – study of changes in gene frequencies in
Histology – study of cells and tissues, a microscopic branch of anatomy
Integrative biology – study of whole organisms
Limnology – study of inland waters
Marine Biology – study of ocean ecosystems, plants, animals, and other living beings
Microbiology – study of microscopic organisms (microorganisms) and their interactions with other living things
Bacteriology – study of bacteria.

Virology – study of viruses and some other virus-like agents
Molecular Biology – study of biology and biological functions at the molecular level, some cross over with biochemistry
Structural biology – branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules
Morphology –
In biology, morphology is a branch of bioscience dealing with the study of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features.

Mycology – study of fungi
Oceanography – study of the ocean, including ocean life, environment, geography, weather, and other aspects influencing the ocean
Oncology – study of cancer processes, including virus or mutation oncogenesis, angiogenesis and tissues remoldings
Population biology – study of groups of conspecific organisms, including
Population ecology – study of how population dynamics and extinction
Population genetics – study of changes in gene frequencies in populations of organisms
Pathobiology or pathology – study of diseases, and the causes, processes, nature, and development of disease
Parasitology – study of parasites and parasitism
Pharmacology – study and practical application of preparation, use, and effects of drugs and synthetic medicines
Physiology – study of the functioning of living organisms and the organs and parts of living organisms
Immunology –
Immunology is the study of all aspects of the immune system in all organisms
Kinesiology – Kinesiology, also known as human kinetics, is the scientific study of human movement
Neurobiology – study of the nervous system, including anatomy, physiology and pathology
Neuroscience – interdisciplinary science that studies the nervous system
Histology –
Phytopathology – study of plant diseases (also called Plant Pathology)
Psychobiology – study of the biological bases of psychology
Sociobiology – study of the biological bases of sociology
Systematics – study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time
Cladistics – method of classifying species of organisms into groups called clades, which consist of an ancestor organism and all its descendants (and nothing else)
Phylogeny – study of evolutionary relation among groups of organisms (e.g. species, populations), which is discovered through molecular sequencing data and morphological data matrices
Taxonomy – science of identifying and naming species, and arranging them into a classification.

Zoology – study of animals, including classification, physiology, development, and behavior
Arachnology – scientific study of spiders and related animals such as scorpions, pseudoscorpions, harvestmen, collectively called arachnids.

Acarology – study of the taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks
Entomology – study of insects
Myrmecology – scientific study of ants, a branch of entomology
Coleopterology – study of beetles
Lepidopterology – study of a large order of insects that includes moths and butterflies (called lepidopterans)
Ethology – study of animal behavior
Helminthology – study of worms, especially parasitic worms
Herpetology – study of reptiles and amphibians
Ichthyology – study of fish
Malacology – branch of invertebrate zoology which deals with the study of the Mollusca (mollusks or molluscs), the second-largest phylum of animals in terms of described species after the arthropods.

Mammalogy – study of mammals
Cetology – branch of marine mammal science that studies the approximately eighty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoise in the scientific order Cetacea.

Physical anthropology – studies the physical development of the human species.

Nematology – scientific discipline concerned with the study of nematodes, or roundworms
Ornithology – study of birds


==
History of natural science ==
History of natural science
Natural philosophy


===
History of the branches of natural science ===
History of physical science – history of the branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to the biological sciences.
It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences".
However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena (organic chemistry, for example).

History of physics – history of the physical science that studies matter and its motion through space-time, and related concepts such as energy and force
History of acoustics – history of the study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
History of agrophysics – history of the study of physics applied to agroecosystems
History of soil physics – history of the study of soil physical properties and processes.

History of astrophysics – history of the study of the physical aspects of celestial objects
History of astronomy – history of the studies the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.)
and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).

History of astrodynamics – history of the application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.

History of astrometry – history of the branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies.

History of cosmology – history of the discipline that deals with the nature of the Universe as a whole.

History of extragalactic astronomy – history of the branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
History of galactic astronomy – history of the study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.

History of physical cosmology – history of the study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.

History of planetary science – history of the scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.

History of stellar astronomy – history of the natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)
History of atmospheric physics – history of the study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
History of atomic, molecular, and optical physics – history of the study of how matter and light interact
History of biophysics – history of the study of physical processes relating to biology
History of medical physics – history of the application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.

History of neurophysics – history of the branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.

History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

History of computational physics – history of the study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.

History of condensed matter physics – history of the study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.

History of cryogenics – history of the cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238
°F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.

History of dynamics – history of the study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
History of econophysics – history of the interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
History of electromagnetism – history of the branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.

History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
History of materials physics – history of the use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.

History of mathematical physics – history of the application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.

History of mechanics – history of the branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.

History of biomechanics – history of the study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.

History of classical mechanics – history of the one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.

History of continuum mechanics – history of the branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.

History of fluid mechanics – history of the study of fluids and the forces on them.

History of quantum mechanics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

History of thermodynamics – history of the branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.

History of nuclear physics – history of the field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.

History of optics – history of the branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.

History of particle physics – history of the branch of physics that studies the existence and interactions of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter or radiation.

History of psychophysics – history of the quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.

History of plasma physics – history of the state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.

History of polymer physics – history of the field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.

History of quantum physics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

Relativity –
History of statics – history of the branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.

History of solid state physics – history of the study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.

History of vehicle dynamics – history of the dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.

History of chemistry – history of the physical science of atomic matter
(matter that is composed of chemical elements), especially its chemical reactions, but also including its properties, structure, composition, behavior, and changes as they relate the chemical reactions
History of analytical chemistry – history of the study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

History of astrochemistry – history of the study of the abundance and reactions of chemical elements and molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation.

History of cosmochemistry – history of the study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions
History of atmospheric chemistry – history of the branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied.
It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines
History of biochemistry – history of the study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.
Biochemistry governs all living organisms and living processes.

History of agrochemistry – history of the study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.

History of bioinorganic chemistry – history of the examines the role of metals in biology.

History of bioorganic chemistry – history of the rapidly growing scientific discipline that combines organic chemistry and biochemistry.

History of biophysical chemistry – history of the  new branch of chemistry that covers a broad spectrum of research activities involving biological systems.

History of environmental chemistry – history of the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

History of immunochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that involves the study of the reactions and components on the immune system.

History of medicinal chemistry – history of the discipline at the intersection of chemistry, especially synthetic organic chemistry, and pharmacology and various other biological specialties, where they are involved with design, chemical synthesis and development for market of pharmaceutical agents (drugs).

History of pharmacology – history of the branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

History of natural product chemistry – history of the chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism – history of the found in nature that usually has a pharmacological or biological activity for use in pharmaceutical drug discovery and drug design.

History of neurochemistry – history of the specific study of neurochemicals, which include neurotransmitters and other molecules such as neuro-active drugs that influence neuron function.

History of computational chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems.

History of cheminformatics – history of the use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry.

History of molecular mechanics – history of the uses Newtonian mechanics to model molecular systems.

History of Flavor chemistry – history of the someone who uses chemistry to engineer artificial and natural flavors.

History of Flow chemistry –
history of the chemical reaction is run in a continuously flowing stream rather than in batch production.

History of geochemistry – history of the study of the mechanisms behind major geological systems using chemistry
History of aqueous geochemistry – history of the study of the role of various elements in watersheds, including copper, sulfur, mercury, and
how elemental fluxes are exchanged through atmospheric-terrestrial-aquatic interactions
History of isotope geochemistry – history of the study of the relative and absolute concentrations of the elements and their isotopes using chemistry and geology
History of ocean chemistry – history of the studies the chemistry of marine environments including the influences of different variables.

History of organic geochemistry – history of the study of the impacts and processes that organisms have had on Earth
History of regional, environmental and exploration geochemistry – history of the study of the spatial variation in the chemical composition of materials at the surface of the Earth
History of inorganic chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

History of nuclear chemistry – history of the subfield of chemistry dealing with radioactivity, nuclear processes and nuclear properties.

History of radiochemistry – history of the chemistry of radioactive materials, where radioactive isotopes of elements are used to study the properties and chemical reactions of non-radioactive isotopes (often within radiochemistry the absence of radioactivity leads to a substance being described as being inactive as the isotopes are stable).

History of organic chemistry – history of the study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

History of petrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies the transformation of crude oil (petroleum) and natural gas into useful products or raw materials.

History of organometallic chemistry – history of the study of chemical compounds containing bonds between carbon and a metal.

History of photochemistry – history of the study of chemical reactions that proceed with the absorption of light by atoms or molecules..
History of physical chemistry – history of the study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

History of chemical kinetics – history of the study of rates of chemical processes.

History of chemical thermodynamics – history of the study of the interrelation of heat and work with chemical reactions or with physical changes of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.

History of electrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies chemical reactions which take place in a solution at the interface of an electron conductor (a metal or a semiconductor) and an ionic conductor (the electrolyte), and which involve electron transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte or species in solution.

History of Femtochemistry – history of the Femtochemistry is the science that studies chemical reactions on extremely short timescales, approximately 10−15 seconds (one femtosecond, hence the name).

History of mathematical chemistry – history of the area of research engaged in novel applications of mathematics to chemistry; it concerns itself principally with the mathematical modeling of chemical phenomena.

History of mechanochemistry – history of the coupling of the mechanical and the chemical phenomena on a molecular scale and includes mechanical breakage, chemical behaviour of mechanically stressed solids (e.g., stress-corrosion cracking), tribology, polymer degradation under shear, cavitation-related phenomena (e.g., sonochemistry and sonoluminescence), shock wave chemistry and physics, and even the burgeoning field of molecular machines.

History of physical organic chemistry – history of the study of the interrelationships between structure and reactivity in organic molecules.

History of quantum chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry
whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems.

History of sonochemistry – history of the study of the effect of sonic waves and wave properties on chemical systems.

History of stereochemistry – history of the study of the relative spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules.

History of supramolecular chemistry – history of the area of chemistry beyond the molecules and focuses on the chemical systems made up of a discrete number of assembled molecular subunits or components.

History of thermochemistry – history of the study of the energy and heat associated with chemical reactions and/or physical transformations.

History of phytochemistry – history of the strict sense of the word the study of phytochemicals.

History of polymer chemistry – history of the multidisciplinary science that deals with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers or macromolecules.

History of solid-state chemistry – history of the study of the synthesis, structure, and properties of solid phase materials, particularly, but not necessarily exclusively of, non-molecular solids
Multidisciplinary fields involving chemistry
History of chemical biology – history of the scientific discipline spanning the fields of chemistry and biology that involves the application of chemical techniques and tools, often compounds produced through synthetic chemistry, to the study and manipulation of biological systems.

History of chemical engineering – history of the branch of engineering that deals with physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.

History of chemical oceanography – history of the study of the behavior of the chemical elements within the Earth's oceans.

History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

History of materials science – history of the interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.

History of nanotechnology – history of the study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale
History of oenology – history of the science and study of all aspects of wine and winemaking except vine-growing and grape-harvesting, which is a subfield called viticulture.

History of spectroscopy – history of the study of the interaction between matter and radiated energy
History of surface science – history of the Surface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid–liquid interfaces, solid–gas interfaces, solid–vacuum interfaces, and liquid–gas interfaces.

History of earth science – history of the all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.
Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.

History of atmospheric sciences – history of the  umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.

History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.

History of cartography – history of the study and practice of making maps or globes.

History of climatology – history of the study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
History of coastal geography – history of the study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.

History of environmental science – history of an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.

History of ecology – history of the scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.

History of freshwater biology – history of the scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of Limnology
History of marine biology – history of the scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
History of parasitology –
history of the Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.

History of population dynamics – history of the Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.

History of environmental chemistry – history of the Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

History of environmental soil science – history of the Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.

History of environmental geology – history of the Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.

History of toxicology – history of the branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

History of geodesy – history of the scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
History of geography – history of the science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
History of geoinformatics – history of the science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.

History of geology – history of the study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.

History of planetary geology – history of the planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.

History of geomorphology – history of the scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
History of geostatistics – history of the branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.

History of glaciology – history of the study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

History of hydrology – history of the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

History of hydrogeology – history of the area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).

History of mineralogy – history of the study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

History of meteorology – history of the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.

History of oceanography – history of the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
History of paleoclimatology – history of the study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
History of paleontology – history of the study of prehistoric life
History of petrology – history of the branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.

History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of seismology – history of the scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
History of soil science – history of the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.

History of topography – history of the study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.

History of volcanology – history of the study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

History of biology – history of the study of living organisms.

History of aerobiology – history of the study of airborne organic particles
History of agriculture – history of the study of producing crops from the land, with an emphasis on practical applications
History of anatomy – history of the study of form and function, in plants, animals, and other organisms, or specifically in humans
History of human anatomy – history of the scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.

History of astrobiology – history of the study of evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe—also known as exobiology, exopaleontology, and bioastronomy
History of biochemistry – history of the study of the chemical reactions required for life to exist and function, usually a focus on the cellular level
History of bioengineering – history of the study of biology through the means of engineering with an emphasis on applied knowledge and especially related to biotechnology
History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species spatially and temporally
History of bioinformatics – history of the use of information technology for the study, collection, and storage of genomic and other biological data
History of biomathematics – history of the quantitative or mathematical study of biological processes, with an emphasis on modeling
History of biomechanics – history of the often considered a branch of medicine,
the study of the mechanics of living beings, with an emphasis on applied use through prosthetics or orthotics
History of biomedical research – history of the study of the human body in health and disease
History of biophysics – history of the study of biological processes through physics, by applying the theories and methods traditionally used in the physical sciences
History of biotechnology – history of the new and sometimes controversial branch of biology that studies the manipulation of living matter, including genetic modification and synthetic biology
History of building biology – history of the study of the indoor living environment
History of botany – history of the study of plants
History of cell biology – history of the study of the cell as a complete unit, and the molecular and chemical interactions that occur within a living cell
History of conservation biology – history of the study of the preservation, protection, or restoration of the natural environment, natural ecosystems, vegetation, and wildlife
History of chronobiology – history of the field of biology that examines periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms and their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms.

History of cryobiology – history of the study of the effects of lower than normally preferred temperatures on living beings.

History of developmental biology – history of the study of the processes through which an organism forms, from zygote to full structure
History of embryology – history of the study of the development of embryo (from fecundation to birth).
See also topobiology.

History of gerontology – history of the study of aging processes.

History of ecology – history of the study of the interactions of living organisms with one another and with the non-living elements of their environment
History of environmental biology – history of the study of the natural world, as a whole or in a particular area, especially as affected by human activity
History of epidemiology – history of the major component of public health research, studying factors affecting the health of populations
History of evolution – history of the any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations.

History of evolutionary biology – history of the study of the origin and descent of species over time
History of evolutionary developmental biology – history of the field of biology that compares the developmental processes of different organisms to determine the ancestral relationship between them, and to discover how developmental processes evolved.

History of paleobiology – history of the discipline which combines the methods and findings of the natural science biology with the methods and findings of the earth science paleontology.

History of paleontology – history of the study of fossils and sometimes geographic evidence of prehistoric life
History of genetics – history of the study of genes and heredity
History of genomics – history of the discipline in genetics concerned with the study of the genomes of organisms.

History of proteomics – history of the large-scale study of proteins, particularly their structures and functions
History of population genetics – history of the study of changes in gene frequencies in
History of histology – history of the study of cells and tissues, a microscopic branch of anatomy
History of integrative biology – history of the study of whole organisms
History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of marine biology – history of the study of ocean ecosystems, plants, animals, and other living beings
History of microbiology –
history of the study of microscopic organisms (microorganisms) and their interactions with other living things
History of bacteriology – history of the study of bacteria.

History of virology – history of the study of viruses and some other virus-like agents
History of molecular biology – history of the study of biology and biological functions at the molecular level, some cross over with biochemistry
History of structural biology –
history of the branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules
History of morphology – history of the In biology, morphology is a branch of bioscience dealing with the study of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features.

History of mycology – history of the study of fungi
History of oceanography – history of the study of the ocean, including ocean life, environment, geography, weather, and other aspects influencing the ocean
History of oncology – history of the study of cancer processes, including virus or mutation oncogenesis, angiogenesis and tissues remoldings
History of population biology – history of the study of groups of conspecific organisms, including
History of population ecology – history of the study of how population dynamics and extinction
History of population genetics – history of the study of changes in gene frequencies in populations of organisms
Pathobiology or pathology – history of the study of diseases, and the causes, processes, nature, and development of disease
History of parasitology – history of the study of parasites and parasitism
History of pharmacology – history of the study and practical application of preparation, use, and effects of drugs and synthetic medicines
History of physiology – history of the study of the functioning of living organisms and the organs and parts of living organisms
History of immunology –
History of kinesiology – history of the Kinesiology, also known as human kinetics, is the scientific study of human movement
History of neurobiology – history of the study of the nervous system, including anatomy, physiology and pathology
History of neuroscience – history of the interdisciplinary science that studies the nervous system
History of histology –
History of phytopathology – history of the study of plant diseases (also called Plant Pathology)
History of psychobiology – history of the study of the biological bases of psychology
History of sociobiology – history of the study of the biological bases of sociology
History of systematics – history of the study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time
History of cladistics – history of the method of classifying species of organisms into groups called clades, which consist of an ancestor organism and all its descendants (and nothing else)
History of phylogeny – history of the study of evolutionary relation among groups of organisms (e.g. species, populations), which is discovered through molecular sequencing data and morphological data matrices
History of taxonomy – history of the science of identifying and naming species, and arranging them into a classification.

History of zoology – history of the study of animals, including classification, physiology, development, and behavior
History of arachnology – history of the scientific study of spiders and related animals such as scorpions, pseudoscorpions, harvestmen, collectively called arachnids.

History of acarology – history of the study of the taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks
History of entomology – history of the study of insects
Timeline of entomology
History of myrmecology – history of the scientific study of ants, a branch of entomology
History of coleopterology – history of the study of beetles
History of lepidopterology – history of the study of a large order of insects that includes moths and butterflies (called lepidopterans)
History of ethology – history of the study of animal behavior
History of helminthology – history of the study of worms, especially parasitic worms
History of herpetology – history of the study of reptiles and amphibians
History of ichthyology – history of the study of fish
History of malacology – history of the branch of invertebrate zoology which deals with the study of the Mollusca (mollusks or molluscs), the second-largest phylum of animals in terms of described species after the arthropods.

History of mammalogy – history of the study of mammals
History of biological anthropology – history of the studies the physical development of the human species.
Also called physical anthropology.

History of cetology – history of the branch of marine mammal science that studies the approximately eighty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoise in the scientific order Cetacea.

History of nematology – history of the scientific discipline concerned with the study of nematodes, or roundworms
History of ornithology – history of the study of birds


==
General natural science concepts ==
Discovery science
Empirical evidence
Experiment
Hypothesis
Laboratory
Nature
Occam's razor
Peer review
Physical law
Reproducibility
Scientific evidence
Scientific method
Scientific theory
Testability
Universe
Validity


==
Natural science organizations ==


==
Natural science publications ==
Physical science journals
List of astronomy journals
List of chemistry journals
List of earth and atmospheric sciences journals
List of physics journals
List of biology journals
List of botany journals
List of zoology journals


==
Persons influential in natural science ==
List of physicists
List of biophysicists
List of geophysicists
List of astronomers
List of cosmologists
List of chemists
List of biochemists
List of neurochemists
List of electrochemists
List of
earth scientists
List of Russian earth scientists
List of cartographers
List of climatologists
List of geographers
List of geologists
List of geophysicists
List of glaciologists
List of mineralogists
List of meteorologists
List of paleontologists
List of soil scientists
List of biologists
List of botanists by author abbreviation
List of carcinologists
List of coleopterists
List of ecologists
List of malacologists
List of mammalogists
List of mycologists
List of ornithologists
List of pathologists
List of zoologists by author abbreviation
List of Nobel Prize winners in physiology or medicine


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The History of Recent Science and Technology
Natural Sciences Information on the Natural Sciences degree programme at Durham University.

Natural Sciences Contains updated information on research in the Natural Sciences including biology, geography and the applied life and earth sciences.

Natural Sciences Information on the Natural Sciences degree programme at the University of Bath which includes the Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Pharmacology, Physics and Environmental Studies.

Reviews of Books About Natural Science
This site contains over 50 previously published reviews of books about natural science, plus selected essays on timely topics in natural science.

Scientific Grant Awards Database Contains details of over 2,000,000 scientific research projects conducted over the past 25 years.

Natural Sciences
Tripos Provides information on the framework within which most of the natural science is taught at the University of Cambridge.

E!Science Up-to-date science news aggregator from major sources including universities.
The National Reorganization Process (Spanish: Proceso de Reorganización Nacional, often simply el Proceso, "the Process") was the military dictatorship that ruled Argentina from 1976 to 1983.
In Argentina it is often known simply as última junta militar ("last military junta"), última dictadura militar ("last military dictatorship") or última dictadura cívico-militar ("last civil–military dictatorship"), because there have been several in the country's history.
The Argentine military seized political power during the March 1976 coup over the presidency of Isabel Perón, widow of former President Juan Domingo Perón; a time of state terrorism against civilians started, with the dictatorship labeling its own use of torture, extrajudicial murder and systematic forced disappearances as "a Dirty War".
After starting and then losing the Falklands War to the United Kingdom in 1982, the military junta faced mounting public opposition and finally relinquished power in 1983.

Almost all of the surviving junta members are currently serving sentences for crimes against humanity and genocide.

==
Background ==
The military of Argentina has always been highly influential in Argentine politics, and Argentine history is laced with frequent and prolonged intervals of military rule.
The popular Argentine leader, Juan Perón, three-time President of Argentina, was a colonel in the army who first came to political power in the aftermath of a 1943 military coup.
He advocated a new policy dubbed Justicialism, a nationalist policy which he claimed was a "Third Position," an alternative to both capitalism and communism.
After being re-elected to the office of president by popular vote, Perón was deposed and exiled by the Revolución Libertadora in 1955.

After a series of weak governments, and a seven-year military government, Perón returned to Argentina in 1973, following 18 years exile in Francoist Spain, amidst escalating political unrest, divisions in the Peronist movement, and frequent outbreaks of political violence.
His return was marked by 20 June 1973 Ezeiza massacre, after which the right-wing of the Peronist movement became dominant.

Peron was democratically elected president in 1973, but died in July 1974.
His vice president and third wife, Isabel Martínez de Perón, succeeded him, but she proved to be a weak, ineffectual ruler.
A number of revolutionary organizations – chief among them
Montoneros, a group of far-left Peronists – escalated their wave of political violence (including kidnappings and bombings) against the campaign of harsh repressive and retaliatory measures enforced by the military and the police.
In addition, right-wing paramilitary groups entered the cycle of violence, such as the Triple A death squad, founded by José López Rega, Perón's Minister of Social Welfare and a member of the P2 masonic lodge.
The situation escalated until Mrs. Perón was overthrown.
She was replaced on 24 March 1976 by a military junta led by Lieutenant General Jorge Rafael Videla.

==
Dirty War ==
Official investigations undertaken after the end of the Dirty War by the National Commission on the Disappearance of Persons documented 8,961 desaparecidos (victims of forced disappearance) and other human rights violations, noting that the correct number is bound to be higher.
Many cases were never reported, when whole families disappeared, and the military destroyed many of its records months before the return of democracy.
Among the "disappeared" were pregnant women, who were kept alive until giving birth under often primitive circumstances in the secret prisons.
The infants were generally illegally adopted by military or political families affiliated with the administration, and the mothers were generally killed.
Thousands of detainees were drugged, loaded into aircraft, stripped naked and then thrown into the Rio de la Plata or the Atlantic Ocean to drown in what became known as "death flights."

The film The Official Story (1984), which won the Oscar for the Best Foreign Film category in 1985, addresses this situation.
The Argentine secret service SIDE (Secretaría de Inteligencia del Estado) also cooperated with the DINA in Pinochet's Chile and other South American intelligence agencies.
Eight South American nations supported endeavours to eradicate left-leaning terrorist groups on the continent, known as Operation Condor.
It is estimated to have caused the deaths of more than 60,000 people.
SIDE also trained – for example in the Honduran Lepaterique base – the Nicaraguan Contras who were fighting the Sandinista government there.

The regime shut down the legislature and restricted both freedom of the press and freedom of speech, adopting severe media censorship.
The 1978 World Cup, which Argentina hosted and won, was used as a means of propaganda and to rally its people under a nationalist pretense.

Corruption, a failing economy, growing public awareness of the harsh repressive measures taken by the regime, and the military defeat in the Falklands War, eroded the public image of the regime.
The last de facto president, Reynaldo Bignone, was forced to call for elections by the lack of support within the Army and the steadily growing pressure of public opinion.
On 30 October 1983, elections were held, and democracy was formally restored on 10 December with President Raúl Alfonsín being sworn into office.

==
Economic policies ==
As Argentina's new de facto president, Videla faced a collapsing economy racked by soaring inflation.
He largely left economic policies in the hands of Minister José Alfredo Martínez de Hoz, who adopted a free trade and deregulatory economic policy.
Martínez de Hoz took measures to restore economic growth, reversing Peronism in favour of a free market economy.
His economic measures were moderately successful.
He enjoyed the personal friendship of David Rockefeller, who facilitated Chase Manhattan Bank and International Monetary Fund loans of nearly US$1 billion after of his arrival.
He eliminated all price controls and the exchange controls regime.
The black market and shortages disappeared.
He freed exports (removed existing prohibitions and quotas and export taxes were repealed) and imports (removed existing prohibitions, quotas, and licenses and gradually reduced import tariffs).During his tenure, the foreign debt increased fourfold, and disparities between the upper and lower classes became much more pronounced.
The period ended in a tenfold devaluation and one of the worst financial crisis in Argentine history.
Viola appointed Lorenzo Sigaut as Finance Minister, and it became clear that Sigaut were looking for ways to reverse some of the economic policies of Videla's minister José Alfredo Martínez de Hoz.
Notably, Sigaut abandoned the sliding exchange rate mechanism and devalued the peso, after boasting that "they who gamble on the dollar, will lose".
Argentines braced for a recession after the excesses of the sweet money years, which destabilized Viola's position.
He appointed conservative economist and publisher Roberto Alemann as Economy Minister.
Alemann inherited an economy in deep recession in the aftermath of José Alfredo Martínez de Hoz's economic policies of the late 1970s.
Alemann slashed spending, began selling off government-owned industries (with only minor success), enacted a tight monetary policy, and ordered salaries frozen (amid 130% inflation).The Central Bank Circular 1050, which tied mortgage rates to the value of the US dollar locally, was maintained, however, leading to further deepening of the crisis; GDP fell by 5%, and business investment by 20% over the weakened levels of 1981.Bignone chose Domingo Cavallo to head the Argentine Central Bank.
Cavallo inherited a foreign debt installment guarantee program that shielded billions of private debt from the collapse of the peso, costing the treasury billions.
He instituted controls over the facility, such as the indexation of payments, but this move and the rescission of Circular 1050 threw the banking sector against him; Cavallo and Dagnino Pastore were replaced in August.
The President of the Central Bank, Julio González del Solar, undid many of these controls, transferring billions more in private foreign debt to the Central Bank, though he stopped short of reinstating the hated "1050."Six years of intermittent wage freezes had left real wages close to 40% lower than during Perón's tenure, leading to growing labor unrest.
Bignone's decision to restore limited rights of speech and right to assembly, including the right to strike, led to increased strike activity.
Saúl Ubaldini, leader of the General Confederation of Labour, Argentina's largest labor union, was particularly active.
The new Economy Minister, Jorge Wehbe, a banking executive with previous experience in the post, reluctantly granted two large, mandatory wage increases in late 1982.

==
Foreign policy ==


===
U.S. support ===
The United States provided military assistance to the junta and, at the start of the Dirty War, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger gave them a "green light" to engage in political repression of real or perceived opponents.
The US Congress approved a request by the Ford Administration, to grant $50,000,000 in security assistance to the junta.
In 1977 and 1978 the United States sold more than $120,000,000 in spare military parts to Argentina, and in 1977 the US Department of Defense granted $700,000 to train 217 Argentine military officers.
But the new president Jimmy Carter in 1978 secured a congressional cutoff of all US arms transfers for the human rights violations.

U.S Argentina relations improved dramatically with Ronald Reagan, which asserted that the previous Carter Administration had weakened US diplomatic relationships with Cold War allies in Argentina, and reversed the previous administration's official condemnation of the junta's human rights practices.
The re-establishment of diplomatic ties allowed for CIA collaboration with the Argentine intelligence service in arming and training the Nicaraguan Contras against the Sandinista government.
Argentina also provided security advisors, intelligence training and some material support to forces in Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras to suppress local rebel groups as part of a U.S.-sponsored program called Operation Charly.

===
Military intervention in Central America ===
After attaining power in 1976, the National Reorganization Process formed close ties with the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle in Nicaragua among other right-wing dictatorships in Latin America.
In 1977 at a meeting of the Conference of American Armies (CAA) held in the Nicaraguan capital city of Managua, junta members
General Roberto Viola and Admiral Emilio Massera secretly pledged unconditional support of Somoza regime in its fight against left-wing subversion and agreed to send advisors and material support to Nicaragua to assist President Somoza's National Guard.
Pursuant with these military agreements, Somoza's Guardsmen were sent to police and military academies in Argentina to undergo training
and Argentina began to send arms and advisors to Nicaragua to bolster the National Guard, in addition to similar services being provided by the United States.
According to an Argentine advisor with the Nicaraguan National Guard, the intelligence techniques used by the Somoza regime consisted of essentially the same "unconventional" methods which had been used in Argentina's Dirty War (torture, forced disappearance, extrajudicial killings).
Argentina's aid programs increased proportionate to the growth of the popular movement against the Somoza regime and the degree of isolation of the Somoza regime.
Following the suspension of U.S. military aid and training in 1979, Argentina became one of the Somoza regime's principal sources of arms alongside Israel, Brazil and South Africa.
In addition to providing arms and training to Somoza's National Guard, the Argentine junta also executed a number of Condor operations on Nicaraguan soil during the late-1970s, benefitting from close rapport between Argentine secret services and the Nicaraguan regime.
The military in Argentina sent agents of the Batallón de Inteligencia 601 and the SIDE to Nicaragua in 1978 with the aim of apprehending and eliminating Argentine guerrillas fighting within the ranks of the Sandinistas.
A special commando team from Argentina worked in conjunction with Somoza's OSN (Office of National Security) and its Argentine advisors with the objective of capturing exiled squadrons from the ERP and the Montoneros.
Following the overthrow of Anastasio Somoza Debayle by the Sandinista Front, Argentina played a central role in the formation of the Contras.
Shortly after the Sandinista victory in July 1979, agents from Argentine intelligence began to organize exiled members of Somoza's National Guard residing in Guatemala into an anti-Sandinista insurgency.
Following the election of U.S. President Ronald Reagan, the Argentine government sought arrangements for the Argentine military to organize and train the contras in Honduras in collaboration with the Honduran government and the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.
Shortly thereafter, Argentina oversaw the relocation of Contra bases from Guatemala to Honduras.
There, some Argentine Special force units, such as Batallón de Inteligencia 601, began to train the Nicaraguan Contras, particularly at Lepaterique base alongside some members of the Honduran security forces.
In August 1981, a CIA official met with Honduran military staff, Argentine military and intelligence advisors, and the Contra leadership and expressed his support for the contra operations.
On November 1, 1981, the Director of the CIA William Casey met with the Chief of Staff of the Argentine military; the two purportedly agreed that Argentina would oversee the contras and the United States would provide money and weapons.

In late-1981, President Reagan authorized the U.S. to support the contras by giving them money, arms, and equipment.
This aid was transported and distributed to the Contras by way of Argentina.
With new weapons and logistical support, the scale of Contra attacks increased and the ranks of the Contras swelled as recruitment became more feasible.
By the end of 1982, the Contras were conducting attacks deeper inside Nicaragua than before.
In the immediate aftermath of the Nicaraguan Revolution in 1979, the National Reorganization Process dispatched a large Argentine military mission to Honduras.
At the time, General Gustavo Álvarez Martínez, a former student of Argentina's Colegio Militar de la Nación (class of 1961) and graduate of the School of the Americas, was commander of a branch of the Honduran security forces known as the Fuerza de Seguridad Publica (FUSEP).
Álvarez Martínez was a proponent of the "Argentine Method," viewing it as an effective tool against subversion in the hemisphere, and sought increased Argentine military influence in Honduras.
Argentina's military program in Honduras expanded after 1981 when General Gustavo Álvarez Martínez, offered his country to the CIA and the Argentine military as a base for conducting operations opposing the Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
By the end of 1981, 150 Argentine military advisors were active in Honduras training members of the Honduran security forces and providing training to the Nicaraguan Contras based in Honduras.
According to the NGO Equipo Nizkor, though the Argentine mission in Honduras was downgraded after the Falklands War, Argentine officers remained active in Honduras until 1984, some of them until 1986, well after the 1983 election of Raúl Alfonsín.
Battalion 316's name indicated the unit's service to three military units and sixteen battalions of the Honduran army.
This unit was charged with the task of carrying out political assassinations and torture of suspected political opponents of the government, effectively implementing the "Argentine Method" in Honduras.
At least 184 suspected government opponents including teachers, politicians, and union bosses were assassinated by Battalion 316 during the 1980s.
Argentina played a role in supporting the Salvadoran government during the El Salvador Civil War.
As early as 1979, the National Reorganization Process supported the Salvadoran government militarily with intelligence training, weapons and counterinsurgency advisors.
This support continued until well after the United States had established itself as the principle supplier of weapons to the Salvadoran security forces.
According to secret documents from the Argentine military, the purpose of this aid was to strengthen inter-military relations between Argentina and El Salvador and "contribute to hardening [El Salvador's] position in the widening struggle against subversion, alongside other countries in the region.
"In
fall of 1981, the administration of U.S. President Ronald Reagan requested that the high command of the Argentine military increase its assistance to El Salvador.
The Argentine government ratified an agreement by which U.S. intelligence would provide the Argentine government with intelligence and logistics support for an arms interdiction program to stem the flow of military supplies to the FMLN from Cuba and Nicaragua.
In addition to agreeing to coordinate arms interdiction operations, the Argentine General Directorate of Military Industries (DGFM) supplied El Salvador with light and heavy weapons, ammunition and military spare parts worth U.S.$20 million in February 1982.The military junta in Argentina
was a prominent source of both material aid and inspiration to the Guatemalan military during the Guatemalan Civil War, especially during the final two years of the Lucas government.
Argentina's involvement had initially began in 1980, when the Videla regime dispatched army and naval officers to Guatemala, under contract from President Fernando Romeo Lucas Garcia, to assist the security forces in counterinsurgency operations.
Argentine involvement in Guatemala expanded when, in October 1981, the Guatemalan government and the Argentine military junta formalized secret accords which augmented Argentine participation in government counterinsurgency operations.
As part of the agreement, two-hundred Guatemalan officers were dispatched to Buenos Aires to undergo advanced military intelligence training, which included instruction in interrogation.

===
Alleged French support ===
In 2003, French journalist Marie-Monique Robin documented that Valéry Giscard d'Estaing's government secretly collaborated with Videla's junta in Argentina and with Augusto Pinochet's regime in Chile.
Green deputies Noël Mamère, Martine Billard and Yves Cochet passed a resolution in September 2003 for a Parliamentary Commission to be convened on the "role of France in the support of military regimes in Latin America from 1973 to 1984," to be held before the Foreign Affairs Commission of the National Assembly and presided over by Edouard Balladur.
Apart from Le Monde, newspapers remained silent about this request.
Deputy Roland Blum, who was in charge of the commission, refused to let Marie-Monique Robin testify.

In December 2003, his staff published a 12-page document that said no agreement had been signed between France and Argentina about military forces.
But, Marie-Monique Robin had sent them a copy of the document she found showing such an agreement.
When Minister of Foreign Affairs Dominique de Villepin traveled to Chile in February 2004, he claimed that no cooperation between France and the military regimes had occurred.

==
Legal moves by Baltasar Garzón and Peter Tatchell ==
Spanish judge Baltasar Garzón unsuccessfully attempted to question former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger as a witness in his investigations into the Argentine disappearances during one of Kissinger's visits to Britain, and Peter Tatchell was unable to have Kissinger arrested during the same visit for alleged war crimes under the Geneva Conventions Act.

==
Aftermath ==
Following a decree of President Alfonsín mandating prosecution of the leaders of the Proceso for acts committed during their tenure, they were tried and convicted in 1985.
(
Juicio a las Juntas).
In 1989, President Carlos Menem pardoned them during his first year in office, which was highly controversial.
He said the pardons were part of healing the country.
The Argentine Supreme Court declared amnesty laws unconstitutional in 2005.
As a result, the government resumed trials against military officers who had been indicted for actions during the Dirty War.
Adolfo Scilingo, an Argentine naval officer during the junta, was tried for his role in jettisoning drugged and naked political dissidents from military aircraft to their deaths in the Atlantic Ocean during the junta years.
He was convicted in Spain in 2005 of crimes against humanity and sentenced to 640 years in prison.
The sentence was later raised to 1084 years.

Cristian Von Wernich, a Catholic priest and former chaplain of the Buenos Aires Province Police, was arrested in 2003 on accusations of torture of political prisoners in illegal detention centers.
He was convicted at trial, and on 9 October 2007, the Argentine court sentenced him to life in prison.

On March 25, 2013, Federal Criminal Oral Court No.
1 of La Plata rendered decision on a public trial for crimes committed during the civilian-military dictatorship in Argentina (1976–1983) in the network of clandestine detention, torture and extermination centers ("clandestine centers") known as the "Camps Circuit".
By conventional view, genocide requires intention to destroy a group in whole or in part.
Where the intention is to destroy a group in part, that part must be "substantial", either in the numerical sense, or in the sense of being important to the physical survival of the group.
The facts being prosecuted involves attacks against "subversive elements", which does not appear, on first sight, to be a "substantial" part of the group defined by nationality, by sheer numerical representation.
This decision is significant in adopting the theory, originating from genocide scholar Daniel Feierstein, that the targeted victims are significant to the national group, as their destruction fundamentally altered the social fabric of the nation.
A major trial, nicknamed "the ESMA mega-trial", of 63 people accused of crimes against humanity (lesa humanidad) during the 1976–1983 dictatorship, including those involved in death flights, was reaching its close in July 2015.
830 witnesses and 789 victims were heard.
There had been two previous trials after the Supreme Court struck down an amnesty the military dictatorship had granted its members; in the first the one accused committed suicide before a verdict was reached; in a 2009 trial twelve defendants were sentenced to life imprisonment.

In December 2018, two former executives of a local Ford Motor Company plant near Buenos Aires, Pedro Muller and Hector Sibilla, were convicted for their involvement in the abduction and torture of 24 workers during the reign of the military junta.
Lawyers involved in the case say this is the first time former executives of a multinational corporation operating in Argentina under the military junta have been convicted of crimes against humanity.

==
Commemoration ==
In 2002, the Argentine Congress declared the date of 24 March as the Day of Remembrance for Truth and Justice, in commemoration for the victims of the dictatorship.
In 2006, thirty years after the coup d'état that started the Proceso, the Day of Memory was declared a national public holiday.
The anniversary of the coup was remembered by massive official events and demonstrations throughout the country.

==
Presidents of Argentina, 1976–1983 ==
Jorge Rafael Videla29 March 1976 – 29 March 1981.

Roberto Eduardo Viola29 March – 11 December 1981.

Carlos Lacoste (Interim)11 – 22 December 1981.

Leopoldo Galtieri22 December 1981 – 18 June 1982.

Alfredo Oscar Saint Jean (Interim)18 June – 1 July 1982.

Reynaldo Bignone1 July 1982 – 10 December 1983.

==
Military juntas ==
During the Process, there were four successive military juntas, each consisting of the heads of the three branches of the Argentine Armed Forces:


==
See also ==
H.I.J.O.S. –
Hijos e Hijas
por la Identidad y la Justicia contra el Olvido y el Silencio
History of Argentina
Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo
Theory of the two demons


==
References ==


==
Books ==


==
External links ==
HIJOS Association.
Sons and daughters of the victims from the dictatorship trying to find their roots and history
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights report on Argentina
Horacio Verbitsky, OpenDemocracy.net, 28 July 2005, "
Breaking the silence: the Catholic Church in Argentina and the 'dirty war'"
The Dirty War in Argentina – George Washington University's National Security Archive page on the Dirty War, featuring numerous recently declassified documents which clearly demonstrate Kissinger's knowledge and complacency in the junta's human rights abuses
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to formal science:
Formal science – branches of knowledge that are concerned with formal systems, such as those under the branches of: logic, mathematics, computer science, statistics, and some aspects of linguistics.
Unlike other sciences, the formal sciences are not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the real world, but instead with the properties of formal systems based on definitions and rules.

==
Branches of formal science ==


===
Logic ===


===
Mathematics ===
Mathematics – search for fundamental truths in pattern, quantity, and change.
(
See also Branches of Mathematics and AMS Mathematics Subject Classification)
Algebra – one of the main branches of mathematics, it concerns the study of structure, relation and quantity.

Group theory – studies the algebraic structures known as groups.

Group representation – describe abstract groups in terms of linear transformations of vector spaces
Ring theory – study of ring–algebraic structures in which addition and multiplication are defined and have similar properties to those familiar from the integers
Field theory – branch of mathematics which studies the properties of fields
Linear algebra – branch of mathematics concerning finite or countably infinite dimensional vector spaces, as well as linear mappings between such spaces.

Vector space – mathematical structure formed by a collection of vectors: objects that may be added together and multiplied ("scaled") by numbers, called scalars in this context.

Multilinear algebra – extends the methods of linear algebra
Lie algebra – algebraic structure whose main use is in studying geometric objects such as Lie groups and differentiable manifolds
Associative algebra – associative ring that has a compatible structure of a vector space over a certain field K or, more generally, of a module over a commutative ring R.
Non-associative algebra – K-vector space (or more generally a module)
A equipped with a K-bilinear map
Universal algebra – field of mathematics that studies algebraic structures themselves, not examples ("models") of algebraic structures
Homological algebra – branch of mathematics which studies homology in a general algebraic setting
Category theory – area of study in mathematics that examines in an abstract way the properties of particular mathematical concepts, by formalising them as collections of objects and arrows (also called morphisms, although this term also has a specific, non-category-theoretical sense), where these collections satisfy some basic conditions
Lattice theory – partially ordered set in which any two elements have a unique supremum (also called a least upper bound or join) and a unique infimum (also called a greatest lower bound or meet).

Order theory – branch of mathematics which investigates our intuitive notion of order using binary relations.

Differential algebra – algebras equipped with a derivation, which is a unary function that is linear and satisfies the Leibniz product rule.

Analysis – branch of pure mathematics that includes the theories of differentiation, integration and measure, limits, infinite series, and analytic functions
Real analysis – branch of mathematical analysis dealing with the set of real numbers and functions of a real variable.

Calculus – branch of mathematics focused on limits, functions, derivatives, integrals, and infinite series.

Complex analysis – branch of mathematical analysis that investigates functions of complex numbers
Functional analysis – branch of mathematical analysis, the core of which is formed by the study of vector spaces endowed with some kind of limit-related structure (e.g. inner product, norm, topology, etc.)
and the linear operators acting upon these spaces and respecting these structures in a suitable sense
Operator theory – branch of functional analysis that focuses on bounded linear operators, but which includes closed operators and nonlinear operators.

Non-standard analysis – branch of classical mathematics that formulates analysis using a rigorous notion of an infinitesimal number.

Harmonic analysis – branch of mathematics concerned with the representation of functions or signals as the superposition of basic waves, and
the study of and generalization of the notions of Fourier series and Fourier transforms.

p-adic analysis – branch of number theory that deals with the mathematical analysis of functions of p-adic numbers.

Ordinary differential equations – ordinary differential equation (ODE) is an equation in which there is only one independent variable and one or more derivatives of a dependent variable with respect to the independent variable, so that all the derivatives occurring in the equation are ordinary derivatives.

Partial differential equations – differential equation that contains unknown multivariable functions and their partial derivatives.

Probability theory – branch of mathematics concerned with probability, the analysis of random phenomena.

Measure theory – systematic way to assign a number to each suitable subset of that set, intuitively interpreted as its size.

Ergodic theory – branch of mathematics that studies dynamical systems with an invariant measure and related problems.

Stochastic process – collection of random variables
; this is often used to represent the evolution of some random value, or system, over time.

Geometry – branch of mathematics concerned with questions of shape, size, relative position of figures, and the properties of space.
Geometry is one of the oldest mathematical sciences.

Topology – major area of mathematics concerned with properties that are preserved under continuous deformations of objects, such as deformations that involve stretching, but no tearing or gluing.

General topology – branch of topology which studies properties of topological spaces and structures defined on them.

Algebraic topology – branch of mathematics which uses tools from abstract algebra to study topological spaces
Geometric topology – study of manifolds and maps between them, particularly embeddings of one manifold into another.

Differential topology – field dealing with differentiable functions on differentiable manifolds
Algebraic geometry – branch of mathematics which combines techniques of abstract algebra, especially commutative algebra, with the language and the problems of geometry
Differential geometry – mathematical discipline that uses the techniques of differential calculus and integral calculus, as well as linear algebra and multilinear algebra, to study problems in geometry
Projective geometry – study of geometric properties that are invariant under projective transformations
Affine geometry – study of geometric properties which remain unchanged by affine transformations
Non-Euclidean geometry – either of two specific geometries that are, loosely speaking, obtained by negating the Euclidean parallel postulate, namely hyperbolic and elliptic geometry.

Convex geometry – branch of geometry studying convex sets, mainly in Euclidean space.

Discrete geometry – branch of geometry that studies combinatorial properties and constructive methods of discrete geometric objects.

Trigonometry – branch of mathematics that studies relationships involving lengths and angles of triangles
Number theory – branch of pure mathematics devoted primarily to the study of the integers
Analytic number theory – branch of number theory that uses methods from mathematical analysis to solve problems about the integers
Algebraic number theory – major branch of number theory which studies algebraic structures related to algebraic integers
Geometric number theory – studies
convex bodies and integer vectors in n-dimensional space
Logic and Foundations of mathematics – subfield of mathematics with close connections to the foundations of mathematics, theoretical computer science and philosophical logic.

Set theory – branch of mathematics that studies sets, which are collections of objects
Proof theory – branch of mathematical logic that represents proofs as formal mathematical objects, facilitating their analysis by mathematical techniques
Model theory – study of (classes of) mathematical structures (e.g. groups, fields, graphs, universes of set theory) using tools from mathematical logic
Recursion theory – branch of mathematical logic and computer science that originated in the 1930s with the study of computable functions and Turing degrees
Modal logic – type of formal logic primarily developed in the 1960s that extends classical propositional and predicate logic to include operators expressing modality
Intuitionistic logic – symbolic logic system differing from classical logic in its definition of the meaning of a statement being true
Applied mathematics – branch of mathematics that concerns itself with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry.

Mathematical statistics – study of statistics from a mathematical standpoint, using probability theory as well as other branches of mathematics such as linear algebra and analysis
Probability – likelihood or chance that something is the case or will happen
Econometrics – application of mathematics and statistical methods to economic data
Actuarial science – discipline that applies mathematical and statistical methods to assess risk in the insurance and finance industries.

Demography – statistical study of human populations and sub-populations.

Approximation theory – study of how functions can best be approximated with simpler functions, and with quantitatively characterizing the errors introduced thereby.

Numerical analysis – study of algorithms that use numerical approximation (as opposed to general symbolic manipulations) for the problems of mathematical analysis (as distinguished from discrete mathematics).

Optimization (Mathematical programming) – selection of a best element from some set of available alternatives.

Operations research – study of the application of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions
Linear programming – mathematical method for determining a way to achieve the best outcome (such as maximum profit or lowest cost) in a given mathematical model for some list of requirements represented as linear relationships
Dynamical systems – concept in mathematics where a fixed rule describes the time dependence of a point in a geometrical space
Chaos theory – study of the behavior of dynamical systems that are highly sensitive to initial conditions, an effect which is popularly referred to as the butterfly effect.

Fractal geometry – mathematical set that has a fractal dimension that usually exceeds its topological dimension and may fall between the integers.

Mathematical physics – development of mathematical methods for application to problems in physics
Quantum field theory – theoretical framework for constructing quantum mechanical models of systems classically parametrized (represented) by an infinite number of degrees of freedom,
that is, fields and (in a condensed matter context) many-body systems.

Statistical mechanics – branch of physics that applies probability theory, which contains mathematical tools for dealing with large populations, to the study of the thermodynamic behavior of systems composed of a large number of particles.

Information theory – branch of applied mathematics and electrical engineering involving the quantification of information.

Cryptography – study of means of obscuring information, such as codes and ciphers
Combinatorics – branch of mathematics concerning the study of finite or countable discrete structures
Coding theory – study of the properties of codes and their fitness for a specific application
Graph theory – study of graphs, mathematical structures used to model pairwise relations between objects from a certain collection
Game theory – study of strategic decision making.
More formally, it is "the study of mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers."
===
Statistics ===
Statistics – collection, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data.

Computational statistics – interface between statistics and computer science.

Data mining – process that results in the discovery of new patterns in large data sets
Regression – estimates the conditional expectation of the dependent variable given the independent variables – that is, the average value of the dependent variable when the independent variables are held fixed.

Simulation – Simulation is the imitation of the operation of a real-world process or system over time.
The act of simulating something first requires that a model be developed; this model represents the key characteristics or behaviors of the selected physical or abstract system or process.
The model represents the system itself, whereas the simulation represents the operation of the system over time.

Bootstrap (statistics) – method for assigning measures of accuracy to sample estimates (Efron and Tibshirani 1993).

Design of experiments – design of any information-gathering exercises where variation is present, whether under the full control of the experimenter or not
Block design – set together with a family of subsets (repeated subsets are allowed at times) whose members are chosen to satisfy some set of properties that are deemed useful for a particular application.

Analysis of variance – collection of statistical models, and their associated procedures, in which the observed variance in a particular variable is partitioned into components attributable to different sources of variation.

Response surface methodology – explores the relationships between several explanatory variables and one or more response variables.

Engineering statistics – Engineering statistics combines engineering and statistics
Spatial statistics – any of the formal techniques which study entities using their topological, geometric, or geographic properties.

Social statistics – use of statistical measurement systems to study human behavior in a social environment
Statistical modelling – formalization of relationships between variables in the form of mathematical equations
Biostatistics – application of statistics to a wide range of topics in biology.

Epidemiology – study of the distribution and patterns of health-events, health-characteristics and their causes or influences in well-defined populations.

Multivariate analysis – observation and analysis of more than one statistical variable at a time.

Structural equation model – statistical technique for testing and estimating causal relations using a combination of statistical data and qualitative causal assumptions.

Time series – sequence of data points, measured typically at successive time instants spaced at uniform time intervals.

Reliability theory – describes the probability of a system completing its expected function during an interval of time.

Quality control – process by which entities review the quality of all factors involved in production.

Statistical theory – provides a basis for the whole range of techniques, in both study design and data analysis, that are used within applications of statistics.

Decision theory – identifies the values, uncertainties and other issues relevant in a given decision, its rationality, and the resulting optimal decision.

Mathematical statistics – study of statistics from a mathematical standpoint, using probability theory as well as other branches of mathematics such as linear algebra and analysis.

Probability – likelihood or chance that something is the case or will happen.

Sample Survey – process of selecting a sample of elements from a target population in order to conduct a survey.

Sampling theory – study of the collection, organization, analysis, and interpretation of data.

Survey methodology – field that studies the sampling of individuals from a population with a view towards making statistical inferences about the population using the sample.

===
Systems science ===
Systems science – interdisciplinary field of science that studies the nature of complex systems in nature, society, and science.

Chaos theory – field of study in mathematics, with applications in several disciplines including physics, engineering, economics, biology, and philosophy
; studies the behavior of dynamical systems that are highly sensitive to initial conditions.

Complex systems and Complexity Theory – studies how relationships between parts give rise to the collective behaviors of a system and how the system interacts and forms relationships with its environment.

Cybernetics – interdisciplinary study of the structure of regulatory systems.

Biocybernetics – application of cybernetics to biological science, composed of biological disciplines that benefit from the application of cybernetics: neurology, multicellular systems and others.

Engineering cybernetics – field of cybernetics, which deals with the question of control engineering of mechatronic systems as well as chemical or biological systems.

Management cybernetics – field of cybernetics concerned with management and organizations.

Medical cybernetics – branch of cybernetics which has been heavily affected by the development of the computer, which applies the concepts of cybernetics to medical research and practice.

New Cybernetics – study of self-organizing systems according to Peter Harries-Jones (1988), "looking beyond the issues of the "first", "old" or "original" cybernetics and their politics and sciences of control, to the autonomy and self-organization capabilities of complex systems".

Second-order cybernetics – investigates the construction of models of cybernetic systems.

Control theory – Control theory is an interdisciplinary branch of engineering and mathematics that deals with the behavior of dynamical systems.
The external input of a system is called the reference.
When one or more output variables of a system need to follow a certain reference over time, a controller manipulates the inputs to a system to obtain the desired effect on the output of the system.

Control engineering – engineering discipline that applies control theory to design systems with desired behaviors.

Control systems – device, or set of devices to manage, command, direct or regulate the behavior of other devices or system.

Dynamical systems – concept in mathematics where a fixed rule describes the time dependence of a point in a geometrical space.

Operations research – study of the use of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions.

Systems dynamics – approach to understanding the behaviour of complex systems over time.

Systems analysis – study of sets of interacting entities, including computer systems analysis.

Systems theory –
interdisciplinary study of systems in general, with the goal of elucidating principles that can be applied to all types of systems at all nesting levels in all fields of research.

Developmental systems theory – overarching theoretical perspective on biological development, heredity, and evolution
General systems theory – interdisciplinary study of systems in general, with the goal of elucidating principles that can be applied to all types of systems at all nesting levels in all fields of research.

Linear time-invariant systems – investigates the response of a linear and time-invariant system to an arbitrary input signal.

Mathematical system theory – area of mathematics used to describe the behavior of complex dynamical systems, usually by employing differential equations or difference equations.

Systems biology – several related trends in bioscience research, and a movement that draws on those trends.

Systems ecology – interdisciplinary field of ecology, taking a holistic approach to the study of ecological systems, especially ecosystems.

Systems engineering – interdisciplinary field of engineering focusing on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed over their life cycles.

Systems neuroscience – subdiscipline of neuroscience and systems biology that studies the function of neural circuits and systems.

Systems psychology – branch of applied psychology that studies human behaviour and experience in complex systems.
===
Computer science ===
Computer science (outline) – study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and their implementation and application in computer systems.
(
See also Branches of Computer Science and ACM Computing Classification System)
Theory of computation – branch that deals with whether and
how efficiently problems can be solved on a model of computation, using an algorithm
Automata theory – study of mathematical objects called abstract machines or automata and the computational problems that can be solved using them.

Formal languages – set of strings of symbols.

Computability theory – branch of mathematical logic and computer science that originated in the 1930s with the study of computable functions and Turing degrees.

Computational complexity theory – branch of the theory of computation in theoretical computer science and mathematics that focuses on classifying computational problems according to their inherent difficulty, and relating those classes to each other
Concurrency theory –
In computer science, concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other
Algorithms – step-by-step procedure for calculations
Randomized algorithms – algorithm which employs a degree of randomness as part of its logic.

Distributed algorithms – algorithm designed to run on computer hardware constructed from interconnected processors
Parallel algorithms – algorithm which can be executed a piece at a time on many different processing devices, and then put back together again at the end to get the correct result.

Data structures – particular way of storing and organizing data in a computer so that it can be used efficiently.

Computer architecture –
In computer science and engineering, computer architecture is the practical art of selecting and interconnecting hardware components to create computers that meet functional, performance and cost goals and the formal modeling of those systems.

VLSI design – process of creating integrated circuits by combining thousands of transistors into a single chip
Operating systems – set of software that manages computer hardware resources and provides common services for computer programs
Computer communications (networks) – collection of hardware components and computers interconnected by communication channels that allow sharing of resources and information
Information theory – branch of applied mathematics and electrical engineering involving the quantification of information
Internet – global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet protocol suite (often called TCP/IP, although not all applications use TCP) to serve billions of users worldwide.

World wide web – part of the Internet; system of interlinked hypertext documents accessed via the Internet.

Wireless computing  – any type of computer network that is not connected by cables of any kind.

Mobile computing – form of human–computer interaction by which a computer is expected to be transported during normal usage.

Computer security – branch of computer technology known as information security as applied to computers and networks.

reliability – system design approach and associated service implementation that ensures a prearranged level of operational performance will be met during a contractual measurement period.

Cryptography – practice and study of hiding information.

Fault-tolerant computing – property that enables a system (often computer-based) to continue operating properly in the event of the failure of (or one or more faults within)
some of its components
Distributed computing – field of computer science that studies distributed systems
Grid computing – federation of computer resources from multiple administrative domains to reach a common goal
Parallel computing – form of computation in which many calculations are carried out simultaneously, operating on the principle that large problems can often be divided into smaller ones, which are then solved concurrently ("in parallel").

High-performance computing – computer at the frontline of current processing capacity, particularly speed of calculation
Quantum computing – device for computation that makes direct use of quantum mechanical phenomena, such as superposition and entanglement, to perform operations on data
Computer graphics – graphics created using computers and, more generally, the representation and manipulation of image data by a computer with help from specialized software and hardware.

Image processing – any form of signal processing for which the input is an image, such as a photograph or video frame; the output of image processing may be either an image or a set of characteristics or parameters related to the image
Scientific visualization – interdisciplinary branch of science according to Friendly (2008) "primarily concerned with the visualization of three-dimensional phenomena (architectural, meteorological, medical, biological, etc.)
,
where the emphasis is on realistic renderings of volumes, surfaces, illumination sources, and so forth, perhaps with a dynamic (time) component".

Computational geometry – branch of computer science devoted to the study of algorithms which can be stated in terms of geometry
Software engineering – application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software; that is the application of engineering to software
Formal methods – particular kind of mathematically based techniques for the specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems
Formal verification – act of proving or disproving the correctness of intended algorithms underlying a system with respect to a certain formal specification or property, using formal methods of mathematics
Programming languages – artificial language designed to communicate instructions to a machine, particularly a computer
Programming paradigms – fundamental style of computer programming
Object-oriented programming – programming paradigm using "objects" – data structures consisting of data fields and methods together with their interactions – to design applications and computer programs
Functional programming – programming paradigm that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data
Program semantics – field concerned with the rigorous mathematical study of the meaning of programming languages
Type theory – any of several formal systems that can serve as alternatives to naive set theory, or the study of such formalisms in general
Compilers – computer program (or set of programs) that transforms source code written in a programming language (the source language) into another computer language (the target language, often having a binary form known as object code)
Concurrent programming languages – form of computing in which programs are designed as collections of interacting computational processes that may be executed in parallel
Information science – interdisciplinary field primarily concerned with the analysis, collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and dissemination of information
Database – organized collection of data, today
typically in digital form
Relational database – collection of data items organized as a set of formally described tables from which data can be accessed easily
Distributed database – database in which storage devices are not all attached to a common CPU.

Object database – database management system in which information is represented in the form of objects as used in object-oriented programming
Multimedia – media and content that uses a combination of different content forms.

hypermedia – computer-based information retrieval system that enables a user to gain or provide access to texts, audio and video recordings, photographs and computer graphics related to a particular subject.

Data mining – process that results in the discovery of new patterns in large data sets
Information retrieval – area of study concerned with searching for documents, for information within documents, and for metadata about documents, as well as that of searching structured storage, relational databases, and the World Wide Web.

Artificial intelligence – branch of computer science that deals with intelligent behavior, learning, and adaptation in machines.

Automated reasoning – area of computer science and mathematical logic dedicated to understand different aspects of reasoning.

Computer vision – field that includes methods for acquiring, processing, analysing, and understanding images and, in general, high-dimensional data from the real world in order to produce numerical or symbolic information, e.g., in the forms of decisions.

Machine learning – scientific discipline concerned with the design and development of algorithms that allow computers to evolve behaviors based on empirical data, such as from sensor data or databases
Artificial neural network – mathematical model or computational model that is inspired by the structure and/or functional aspects of biological neural networks
Natural language processing – field of computer science, artificial intelligence (also called machine learning), and linguistics concerned with the interactions between computers and human (natural) languages.

Computational linguistics – interdisciplinary field dealing with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective.

Expert systems – computer system that emulates the decision-making ability of a human expert
Robotics – branch of technology that deals with the design, construction, operation, structural disposition, manufacture and application of robots
Human-computer interaction – study, planning, and design of the interaction between people (users) and computers.

Numerical analysis – study of algorithms that use numerical approximation (as opposed to general symbolic manipulations) for the problems of mathematical analysis (as distinguished from discrete mathematics).

Algebraic (symbolic) computation – relates to algorithms and software for manipulating mathematical expressions and equations in symbolic form, as opposed to manipulating the approximations of specific numerical quantities represented by those symbols.
Software applications that perform symbolic calculations are called computer algebra systems.

Computational number theory – study of algorithms for performing number theoretic computations
Computational mathematics – involves mathematical research in areas of science where computing plays a central and essential role, emphasizing algorithms, numerical methods, and symbolic methods
Scientific computing (Computational science) –
Computational biology (bioinformatics) – involves the development and application of data-analytical and theoretical methods, mathematical modeling and computational simulation techniques to the study of biological, behavioral, and social systems.

Computational science – subfield of computer science concerned with constructing mathematical models and quantitative analysis techniques and using computers to analyze and solve scientific problems
Computational chemistry – branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems
Computational neuroscience – study of brain function in terms of the information processing properties of the structures that make up the nervous system.

Computer-aided engineering – broad usage of computer software to aid in engineering tasks.

Finite element analysis – numerical technique for finding approximate solutions of partial differential equations (PDE) as well as integral equations.

Computational fluid dynamics – branch of fluid mechanics that uses numerical methods and algorithms to solve and analyze problems that involve fluid flows.

Computational economics – research discipline at the interface between computer science and economic and management science
Computational sociology – branch of sociology that uses computationally intensive methods to analyze and model social phenomena.

Computational finance – cross-disciplinary field which relies on computational intelligence, mathematical finance, numerical methods and computer simulations to make trading, hedging and investment decisions, as well as facilitating the risk management of those decisions
Humanities computing (Digital Humanities) – area of research, teaching, and creation concerned with the intersection of computing and the disciplines of the humanities
Information systems – study of complementary networks of hardware and software that people and organizations use to collect, filter, process, create, and distribute data
Business informatics – discipline combining information technology (IT), informatics and management concepts.

Information technology –
Management information systems – provides information that is needed to manage organizations efficiently and effectively
Health informatics – discipline at the intersection of information science, computer science, and health care.

===
Theoretical linguistics ===


==
See also ==
Outline of academic disciplines
Outline of science
Outline of applied science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of natural science
Outline of life science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science


==
External links ==
2010 Mathematics Subject Classification
Military science is the study of military processes, institutions, and behavior, along with the study of warfare, and the theory and application of organized coercive force.
It is mainly focused on theory, method, and practice of producing military capability in a manner consistent with national defense policy.
Military science serves to identify the strategic, political, economic, psychological, social, operational, technological, and tactical elements necessary to sustain relative advantage of military force; and to increase the likelihood and favorable outcomes of victory in peace or during a war.
Military scientists include theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and other military personnel.

Military personnel obtain weapons, equipment, and training to achieve specific strategic goals.
Military science is also used to establish enemy capability as part of technical intelligence.

In military history, military science had been used during the period of Industrial Revolution as a general term to refer to all matters of military theory and technology application as a single academic discipline, including that of the deployment and employment of troops in peacetime or in battle.

In military education, military science is often the name of the department in the education institution that administers officer candidate education.
However, this education usually focuses on the officer leadership training and basic information about employment of military theories, concepts, methods and systems, and graduates are not military scientists on completion of studies, but rather junior military officers.

==
History ==
Even until the Second World War, military science was written in English starting with capital letters, and was thought of as an academic discipline alongside Physics, Philosophy and the Medical Science.
In part this was due to the general mystique that accompanied education in a World where as late as the 1880s 75% of the European population was illiterate.
The ability by the officers to make complex calculations required for the equally complex "evolutions" of the troop movements in linear warfare that increasingly dominated the Renaissance and later history, and the introduction of the gunpowder weapons into the equation of warfare only added to the veritable arcana of building fortifications as it seemed to the average individual.

Until the early 19th century, one observer, a British veteran of the Napoleonic Wars, Major John Mitchell thought that it seemed nothing much had changed from the application of force on a battlefield since the days of the Greeks.
He suggested that this was primarily so because as Clausewitz suggested, "unlike in any other science or art, in war the object reacts".
Until this time, and even after the Franco-Prussian War, military science continued to be divided between the formal thinking of officers brought up in the "shadow" of Napoleonic Wars and younger officers like Ardant du Picq who tended to view fighting performance as rooted in the individual's and group psychology and suggested detailed analysis of this.
This set in motion the eventual fascination of the military organisations with application of quantitative and qualitative research to their theories of combat; the attempt to translate military thinking as philosophic concepts into concrete methods of combat.

Military implements, the supply of an army, its organization, tactics, and discipline, have constituted the elements of military science in all ages; but improvement in weapons and accoutrements appears to lead and control all the rest.
The breakthrough of sorts made by Clausewitz in suggesting eight principles on which such methods can be based, in Europe, for the first time presented an opportunity to largely remove the element of chance and error from command decision making process.
At this time emphasis was made on the Topography (including Trigonometry), Military art (Military science), Military history, Organisation of the Army in the field, Artillery and Science of Projectiles, Field fortifications and Permanent fortifications, Military legislation, Military administration and Manoeuvres.
The military science on which the model of German combat operations was built for the First World War remained largely unaltered from the Napoleonic model, but took into the consideration the vast improvements in the firepower and the ability to conduct "great battles of annihilation" through rapid concentration of force, strategic mobility, and the maintenance of the strategic offensive better known as the Cult of the offensive.
The key to this, and other modes of thinking about war remained analysis of military history and attempts to derive tangible lessons that could be replicated again with equal success on another battlefield as a sort of bloody laboratory of military science.
Few were bloodier than the fields of the Western Front between 1914 and 1918.
Fascinatingly the man who probably understood Clausewitz better than most, Marshal Foch would initially participate in events that nearly destroyed the French Army.
It is not however true to say that military theorists and commanders were suffering from some collective case of stupidity; quite the opposite is true.
Their analysis of military history convinced them that decisive and aggressive strategic offensive was the only doctrine of victory, and feared that overemphasis of firepower, and the resultant dependence on entrenchment would make this all but impossible, and leading to the battlefield stagnant in advantages of the defensive position, destroying troop morale and willingness to fight.
Because only the offensive could bring victory, lack of it, and not the firepower, was blamed for the defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in the Russo-Japanese War.
Foch thought that "In strategy as well as in tactics one
attacks".
In many ways military science was born as a result of the experiences of the Great War. "
Military implements" had changed armies beyond recognition with cavalry to virtually disappear in the next 20 years.
The "supply of an army" would become a science of logistics in the wake of massive armies, operations and troops that could fire ammunition faster than it could be produced, for the first time using vehicles that used the combustion engine, a watershed of change.
Military "organisation" would no longer be that of the linear warfare, but assault teams, and battalions that were becoming multi-skilled with introduction of machine gun and mortar, and for the first time forcing military commanders to think not only in terms of rank and file, but force structure.

Tactics changed too, with infantry for the first time segregated from the horse-mounted troops, and required to cooperate with tanks, aircraft and new artillery tactics.
Perception of military discipline too had changed.
Morale, despite strict disciplinarian attitudes, had cracked in all armies during the war, but best performing troops were found to be those where emphasis on discipline had been replaced with display of personal initiative and group cohesiveness such as that found in the Australian Corps during the Hundred Days Offensive.
The military sciences' analysis of military history that had failed European commanders was about to give way to a new military science, less conspicuous in appearance, but more aligned to the processes of science of testing and experimentation, the scientific method, and forever "wed" to the idea of the superiority of technology on the battlefield.

Currently military science still means many things to different organisations.
In the United Kingdom and much of the European Union the approach is to relate it closely to the civilian application and understanding.
,
for example Belgium's Royal Military Academy, military science remains an academic discipline, and is studied alongside Social Sciences, including such subjects as Humanitarian law.
The United States Department of Defense defines military science in terms of specific systems and operational requirements, and include among other areas civil defense and force structure.

==
Employment of military skills ==
In the first instance military science is concerned with who will participate in military operations, and what sets of skills and knowledge they will require to do so effectively and somewhat ingeniously.
===
Military organization ===

Develops optimal methods for the administration and organization of military units, as well as the military as a whole.

In addition, this area studies other associated aspects as mobilization/demobilization, and military government for areas recently conquered (or liberated) from enemy control.
===
Force structuring ===
Force structuring is the method by which personnel and the weapons and equipment they use are organized and trained for military operations, including combat.
Development of force structure in any country is based on strategic, operational, and tactical needs of the national defense policy, the identified threats to the country, and the technological capabilities of the threats and the armed forces.

Force structure development is guided by doctrinal considerations of strategic, operational and tactical deployment and employment of formations and units to territories, areas and zones where they are expected to perform their missions and tasks.
Force structuring applies to all Armed Services, but not to their supporting organisations such as those used for defense science research activities.

In the United States force structure is guided by the table of organization and equipment (TOE or TO&E).
The TOE is a document published by the U.S. Department of Defense which prescribes the organization, manning, and equipage of units from divisional size and down, but also including the headquarters of Corps and Armies.

Force structuring also provides information on the mission and capabilities of specific units, as well as the unit's current status in terms of posture and readiness.
A general TOE is applicable to a type of unit (for instance, infantry) rather than a specific unit (the 3rd Infantry Division).
In this way, all units of the same branch (such as Infantry) follow the same structural guidelines which allows for more efficient financing, training, and employment of like units operationally.

===
Military education and training ===
Studies the methodology and practices involved in training soldiers, NCOs (non-commissioned officers, i.e. sergeants and corporals), and officers.

It also extends this to training small and large units, both individually and in concert with one another for both the regular and reserve organizations.

Military training, especially for officers, also concerns itself with general education and political indoctrination of the armed forces.

==
Military concepts and methods ==
Much of capability development depends on the concepts which guide use of the armed forces and their weapons and equipment, and the methods employed in any given theatre of war or combat environment.

===
Military history ===
Military activity has been a constant process over thousands of years, and the essential tactics, strategy, and goals of military operations have been unchanging throughout history.
As an example, one notable maneuver is the double envelopment, considered to be the consummate military maneuver, first executed by Hannibal at the Battle of Cannae in 216 BCE, and later by Khalid ibn al-Walid at the Battle of Walaja in 633 CE.

Via the study of history, the military seeks to avoid past mistakes, and improve upon its current performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical parallels during battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned.
The main areas military history includes are the history of wars, battles, and combats, history of the military art, and history of each specific military service.

===
Military strategy and doctrines ===
Main articles:
Military strategy, Military doctrineMilitary strategy is in many ways the centerpiece of military science.
It studies the specifics of planning for, and engaging in combat, and attempts to reduce the many factors to a set of principles that govern all interactions of the field of battle.
In Europe these principles were first defined by Clausewitz in his Principles of War.
As such, it directs the planning and execution of battles, operations, and wars as a whole.
Two major systems prevail on the planet today.
Broadly speaking, these may be described as the "Western" system, and the "Russian" system.
Each system reflects and supports strengths and weakness in the underlying society.

Modern Western military art is composed primarily of an amalgam of French, German, British, and American systems.

The Russian system borrows from these systems as well, either through study, or personal observation in the form of invasion (Napoleon's War of 1812, and The Great Patriotic War), and form a unique product suited for the conditions practitioners of this system will encounter.

The system that is produced by the analysis provided by Military Art is known as doctrine.

Western military doctrine relies heavily on technology, the use of a well-trained and empowered NCO cadre, and superior information processing and dissemination to provide a level of battlefield awareness that opponents cannot match.
Its advantages are extreme flexibility, extreme lethality, and a focus on removing an opponent's C3I (command, communications, control, and intelligence) to paralyze and incapacitate rather than destroying their combat power directly (hopefully saving lives in the process).
Its drawbacks are high expense, a reliance on difficult-to-replace personnel, an enormous logistic train, and a difficulty in operating without high technology assets if depleted or destroyed.

Soviet military doctrine (and its descendants, in CIS countries) relies heavily on masses of machinery and troops, a highly educated (albeit very small) officer corps, and pre-planned missions.
Its advantages are that it does not require well educated troops, does not require a large logistic train, is under tight central control, and does not rely on a sophisticated C3I system after the initiation of a course of action.
Its disadvantages are inflexibility, a reliance on the shock effect of mass (with a resulting high cost in lives and material), and overall inability to exploit unexpected success or respond to unexpected loss.

Chinese military doctrine is currently in a state of flux as the People's Liberation Army is evaluating military trends of relevance to China.
Chinese military doctrine is influenced by a number of sources including an indigenous classical military tradition characterized by strategists such as Sun Tzu, Western and Soviet influences, as well as indigenous modern strategists such as Mao Zedong.
One distinctive characteristic of Chinese military science is that it places emphasis on the relationship between the military and society as well as viewing military force as merely one part of an overarching grand strategy.

Each system trains its officer corps in its philosophy regarding military art.

The differences in content and emphasis are illustrative.
The United States Army principles of war are defined in the U.S. Army Field Manual FM 100–5.
The Canadian Forces principles of war/military science are defined by Land Forces Doctrine and Training System (LFDTS) to focus on principles of command, principles of war, operational art and campaign planning, and scientific principles.

Russian Federation armed forces derive their principles of war predominantly from those developed during the existence of the Soviet Union.
These, although based significantly on the Second World War experience in conventional war fighting, have been substantially modified since the introduction of the nuclear arms into strategic considerations.

The Soviet–Afghan War and the First and Second Chechen Wars further modified the principles that Soviet theorists had divided into the operational art and tactics.
The very scientific approach to military science thinking in the Soviet union had been perceived as overly rigid at the tactical level, and had affected the training in the Russian Federation's much reduced forces to instil greater professionalism and initiative in the forces.

The military principles of war of the People's Liberation Army were loosely based on those of the Soviet Union until the 1980s when a significant shift begun to be seen in a more regionally-aware, and geographically-specific strategic, operational and tactical thinking in all services.
The PLA is currently influenced by three doctrinal schools which both conflict and complement each other: the People's war, the Regional war, and the Revolution in military affairs that led to substantial increase in the defense spending and rate of technological modernisation of the forces.

The differences in the specifics of Military art notwithstanding, Military science strives to provide an integrated picture of the chaos of battle, and illuminate basic insights that apply to all combatants, not just those who agree with your formulation of the principles.

===
Military geography ===
Military geography encompasses much more than simple protestations to take the high ground.
Military geography studies the obvious, the geography of theatres of war, but also the additional characteristics of politics, economics, and other natural features of locations of likely conflict (the political "landscape", for example).

As an example, the Soviet–Afghan War was predicated on the ability of the Soviet Union to not only successfully invade Afghanistan, but also to militarily and politically flank the Islamic Republic of Iran simultaneously.

==
Military systems ==
How effectively and efficiently militaries accomplish their operations, missions and tasks is closely related not only to the methods they use, but the equipment and weapons they use.

===
Military intelligence ===
Military intelligence supports the combat commanders' decision making process by providing intelligence analysis of available data from a wide range of sources.
To provide that informed analysis the commanders information requirements are identified and input to a process of gathering, analysis, protection, and dissemination of information about the operational environment, hostile, friendly and neutral forces and the civilian population in an area of combat operations, and broader area of interest.
Intelligence activities are conducted at all levels from tactical to strategic, in peacetime, the period of transition to war, and during the war.

Most militaries maintain a military intelligence capability to provide analytical and information collection personnel in both specialist units and from other arms and services.

Personnel selected for intelligence duties, whether specialist intelligence officers and enlisted soldiers or non-specialist assigned to intelligence may be selected for their analytical abilities and intelligence before receiving formal training.

Military intelligence serves to identify the threat, and provide information on understanding best methods and weapons to use in deterring or defeating it.

===
Military logistics ===
The art and science of planning and carrying out the movement and maintenance of military forces.
In its most comprehensive sense, it is those aspects or military operations that deal with the design, development, acquisition, storage, distribution, maintenance, evacuation, and disposition of material; the movement, evacuation, and hospitalization of personnel; the acquisition or construction, maintenance, operation, and disposition of facilities; and the acquisition or furnishing of services.

===
Military technology and equipment ===
Military technology is not just the study of various technologies and applicable physical sciences used to increase military power.

It may also extend to the study of production methods of military equipment, and ways to improve performance and reduce material and/or technological requirements for its production.

An example is the effort expended by Nazi Germany to produce artificial rubbers and fuels to reduce or eliminate their dependence on imported POL (petroleum, oil, and lubricants) and rubber supplies.

Military technology is unique only in its application, not in its use of basic scientific and technological achievements.

Because of the uniqueness of use, military technological studies strive to incorporate evolutionary, as well as the rare revolutionary technologies, into their proper place of military application.

==
Military and Society ==
This speciality examines the ways that military and society interact and shape each other.
The dynamic intersection where military and society meet is influenced by trends in society and the security environment.
This field of study can be linked to works by Clausewitz ("War is the continuation of politics by other means") and Sun Tzu ("If not in the interest of the state, do not act" ).
The contemporary multi and interdisciplinary field traces its origin to World War II and works by sociologists and political scientists.
This field of study includes "all aspects of relations between armed forces, as a political, social and economic institution, and the society, state or political ethnic movement of which they are a part".

Topics often included within the purview of military and society include: veterans, women in the military, military families, enlistment and retention, reserve forces, military and religion, military privatization, Civil-military relations, civil-military cooperation, military and popular culture, military and the media, military and disaster assistance, military and the environment and the blurring of military and police functions.

===
Recruitment and Retention ===
In an all volunteer military, the armed forces relies on market forces and careful recruiting to fill its ranks.
It is thus, very important to understand factors that motivate enlistment and reenlistment.
Service members must have the mental and physical ability to meet the challenges of military service and adapt to the military's values and culture.
Studies show that enlistment motivation generally incorporates both self-interest (pay) and non-market values like adventure, patriotism, and comradeship.

===
Veterans ===
The study veterans or members of the military who leave and return to the society is one of the most important subfields of the military and society field of study.
Veterans and their issues represent a microcosm of the field.
Military recruits represent inputs that flow from the community into the armed forces, veterans are outputs that leave the military and reenter society changed by their time as soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen.
Both society and veteran face multiple layers of adaptation and adjustment upon their reentry.
The definition of veteran is surprisingly fluid across countries.
In the US veteran’s status is established after a service member has completed a minimum period of service.
Australia requires deployment to a combat zone.
In the UK “Everyone who has performed military service for at least one day and drawn a day’s pay is termed a veteran.”

The study of veterans focuses much attention on their, sometimes, uneasy transition back to civilian society.

“Veterans must navigate a complex cultural transition when moving between environments,” and they can expect positive and negative transition outcomes.

Finding a good job and reestablishing a fulfilling family life is high on their resettlement agenda.
Military life is often violent and dangerous.
The trauma of combat often results in post-traumatic stress disorder as well as painful physical health challenges  which often lead to homelessness, suicide, drug and alcohol abuse and family dysfunction.

Society recognizes its responsibilities to veterans by offering programs and policies designed to redress these problems.
Veterans also exert an influence on society often through the political process.
For example, how do veterans vote and establish party affiliation?
During the 2004 presidential election veterans were basically bipartisan.

Veterans who fought in Croatia
’s war of independence voted for the nationalist parties in greater numbers.

===
Reserve Forces ===
Reserve Forces are service members who serve the armed forces on a part-time basis.
These men and women constitute a “reserve” force that countries rely on for their defense, disaster support, and some day-to-day operations etc.
In the United States an active reservist spends a weekend a month and two weeks a year in training.
The size of a county’s reserve force often depends on the type of recruitment method.
Nations with a volunteer force tend to have a lower reserve percentage.
Recently the role of the reserves has changed.

In many countries it [has] gone from a strategic force, largely static, to an operational force, largely dynamic.
After WWII, relatively large standing forces took care of most operational needs.
Reserves were held back strategically and deployed in times of emergency for example during the Cuban missile crisis.
Subsequently, the strategic and budget situation changed and as a result the active duty military began to rely on reserve force, particularly for combat support and combat service support.
Further large-scale military operation, routinely mobilize and deploy reservists Lomsky-Feder et al
(2008p.
594) introduced the metaphor of reserve forces as Transmigrants who live “betwixt and between the civilian and military worlds”.
This metaphor captures “their structural duality” and suggests dynamic nature of reservist experience as they navigate commitments to their often conflicting civilian and military worlds.

Given their greater likelihood of lengthy deployment, reservists face many of the same stresses as active duty but often with fewer support services.

==
University studies ==
Universities (or colleges) around the world also offer a degree(s) in military science:
Belgium:
Royal Military Academy
(Belgium)- BA Social and Military Science;
MA Social and Military ScienceIsrael:
Tel Aviv University – MA in Security.

Bar-Ilan University – MA in Military, Security and Intelligence.
Finland:
National Defence University – Bachelor, Master, and PhD in Military scienceFrance:
Sciences Po, Paris School of International Affairs - Master in International Security.
New Zealand:
Massey University, Centre for Defence and Security Studies – BA in Defence Studies.

Victoria University of Wellington – Centre for Strategic Studies – Master of Strategic Studies
(MSS).Slovenia:University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Social Studies – BA, MA and PhD in Defence studies; PhD in Military-Social SciencesUnited Kingdom:King's College London – MA in International Security and Strategy; MA, MPhil/PhD in Defence Studies
University of Hull – MA in Strategy and International Security
University of St Andrews - MLitt in Strategic StudiesSri LankaSri Lanka Military Academy - (Bachelor and Masters degree in Military Studies) Military training school Diyatalawa, Sri LankaSouth AfricaSouth African Military Academy / University of Stellenbosch - Bachelor of Military Science (BMil), Master of Military Science (MMil), MPhil in Security Management United States:
United States Air Force Academy – Major in Military and Strategic Studies; Minor in Nuclear Weapons and Strategy
United States Military Academy – Major in Defense and Strategic Studies
Hawaii Pacific University –
Major in Diplomacy and Military Studies
Missouri State University –
Minor in Military Studies


==
International Military Sciences or Studies Associations ==
There are many international associations with the core purpose of bringing scholars in the field of Military Science together.
Some are inter-disciplinary and have a broad scope, whilst others are confined and specialized focusing on more specific disciplines or subjects.
Some are integrated in larger scientific communities like the International Sociological Association (ISA) and the American Psychological Association (APA) where others have grown out of military institutions or individuals who have had a particular interest in areas of military science and are military, defense or armed forces oriented.
Some of these associations are:

American Psychological Association; Division 19: Society for Military Psychology (APA-Div19)
European Research Group on Military and Society
(ERGOMAS)
Inter-University Seminar on Armed Forces and Society (IUS)
International Congress on Soldiers
Physical Performance (ICSPP) 
International Military Testing Association (IMTA)
International Society of Military Sciences (ISMS)
International Sociological Association; RC01 Armed Forces and Conflict Resolution


==
Military studies journals ==
The following are notable journals in the field:


==
See also ==
Military doctrine
Military theory
War
List of basic military science and technology topics
List of military inventions
List of military writers


==
References ==
Notes
Bibliography


== External links ==
Military TechnologyUS Military/Government Texts
The Logic of Warfighting Experiments by Kass (CCRP, 2006)
Complexity, Networking, and Effects Based Approaches to Operations by Smith (CCRP, 2006)
Understanding Command and Control by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2006)
The Agile Organization by Atkinson and Moffat (CCRP, 2005)
Power to the Edge by Alberts and Hayes (CCRP, 2003)
Network Centric Warfare by Alberts et al.
(
CCRP, 1999)
Military robots are autonomous robots or remote-controlled mobile robots designed for military applications, from transport to search & rescue and attack.

Some such systems are currently in use, and many are under development.

==
History ==
Broadly defined, military robots date back to World War II and the Cold War in the form of the German Goliath tracked mines and the Soviet teletanks.
The MQB-1 Predator drone was when "CIA officers began to see the first practical returns on their decade-old fantasy of using aerial robots to collect intelligence".
The use of robots in warfare, although traditionally a topic for science fiction, is being researched as a possible future means of fighting wars.
Already several military robots have been developed by various armies.
Some believe the future of modern warfare will be fought by automated weapons systems.
The U.S. military is investing heavily in research and development towards testing and deploying increasingly automated systems.
The most prominent system currently in use is the unmanned aerial vehicle (IAI Pioneer & RQ-1 Predator) which can be armed with air-to-ground missiles and remotely operated from a command center in reconnaissance roles.
DARPA has hosted competitions in 2004 & 2005 to involve private companies and universities to develop unmanned ground vehicles to navigate through rough terrain in the Mojave Desert for a final prize of 2 million.
Artillery has seen promising research with an experimental weapons system named "Dragon Fire II" which automates loading and ballistics calculations required for accurate predicted fire, providing a 12-second response time to fire support requests.
However, military weapons are prevented from being fully autonomous; they require human input at certain intervention points to ensure that targets are not within restricted fire areas as defined by Geneva Conventions for the laws of war.

There have been some developments towards developing autonomous fighter jets and bombers.
The use of autonomous fighters and bombers to destroy enemy targets is especially promising because of the lack of training required for robotic pilots, autonomous planes are capable of performing maneuvers which could not otherwise be done with human pilots (due to high amount of G-force), plane designs do not require a life support system, and a loss of a plane does not mean a loss of a pilot.
However, the largest drawback to robotics is their inability to accommodate for non-standard conditions.
Advances in artificial intelligence in the near future may help to rectify this.

==
Examples ==


===
In current use ===


===
In development ===
 
US Mechatronics has produced a working automated sentry gun and is currently developing it further for commercial and military use.

MIDARS, a four-wheeled robot outfitted with several cameras, radar, and possibly a firearm, that automatically performs random or preprogrammed patrols around a military base or other government installation.
It alerts a human overseer when it detects movement in unauthorized areas, or other programmed conditions.
The operator can then instruct the robot to ignore the event, or take over remote control to deal with an intruder, or to get better camera views of an emergency.
The robot would also regularly scan radio frequency identification tags (RFID) placed on stored inventory as it passed and report any missing items.

Tactical Autonomous Combatant (TAC) units, described in Project Alpha study Unmanned Effects:
Taking the Human out of the Loop.

Autonomous Rotorcraft Sniper System is an experimental robotic weapons system being developed by the U.S. Army since 2005.
It consists of a remotely operated sniper rifle attached to an unmanned autonomous helicopter.
It is intended for use in urban combat or for several other missions requiring snipers.
Flight tests are scheduled to begin in summer 2009.

The "Mobile Autonomous Robot Software" research program was started in December 2003 by the Pentagon who purchased 15 Segways in an attempt to develop more advanced military robots.
The program was part of a $26 million Pentagon program to develop software for autonomous systems.

== Effects and impact ==


===
Advantages ===
Autonomous robotics would save and preserve soldiers' lives by removing serving soldiers, who might otherwise be killed, from the battlefield.
Lt.
Gen. Richard Lynch of the United States Army Installation Management Command and assistant Army chief of staff for installation stated at a 2011 conference:
As I think about what’s happening on the battlefield today ...
I contend there are things we could do to improve the survivability of our service members.
And you all know that’s true.

Major Kenneth Rose of the US Army's Training and Doctrine Command outlined some of the advantages of robotic technology in warfare:
Machines don't get tired.
They don't close their eyes.
They don't hide under trees when it rains and they don't talk to their friends ...
A human's attention to detail on guard duty drops dramatically in the first 30 minutes ...
Machines know no fear.

Increasing attention is also paid to how to make the robots more autonomous, with a view of eventually allowing them to operate on their own for extended periods of time, possibly behind enemy lines.
For such functions, systems like the Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot are being tried, which is intended to gain its own energy by foraging for plant matter.
The majority of military robots are tele-operated and not equipped with weapons; they are used for reconnaissance, surveillance, sniper detection, neutralizing explosive devices, etc.
Current robots that are equipped with weapons are tele-operated
so they are not capable of taking lives autonomously.
Advantages regarding the lack of emotion and passion in robotic combat is also taken into consideration as a beneficial factor in significantly reducing instances of unethical behavior in wartime.
Autonomous machines are created not to be "truly 'ethical' robots", yet ones that comply with the laws of war (LOW) and rules of engagement (ROE).
Hence the fatigue, stress, emotion, adrenaline, etc.
that affect a human soldier's rash decisions are removed; there will be no effect on the battlefield caused by the decisions made by the individual.

===
Risks ===
Human rights groups and NGOs such as Human Rights Watch and the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots have started urging governments and the United Nations to issue policy to outlaw the development of so-called "lethal autonomous weapons systems" (LAWS).
The United Kingdom opposed such campaigns, with the Foreign Office declaring that  "international humanitarian law already provides sufficient regulation for this area".
In July 2015, over 1,000 experts in artificial intelligence signed a letter calling for a ban on autonomous weapons.
The letter was presented in Buenos Aires at the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-15) and was co-signed by Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, Noam Chomsky, Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and Google DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis, among others.

===
Psychology ===
American soldiers have been known to name the robots that serve alongside them.
These names are often in honor of human friends, family, celebrities, pets, or are eponymic.
The 'gender' assigned to the robot may be related to the marital status of its operator.
Some affixed fictitious medals to battle-hardened robots, and even held funerals for destroyed robots.
An interview of 23 explosive ordnance detection members shows that while they feel it is better to lose a robot than a human, they also felt anger and a sense of loss if they were destroyed.
A survey of 746 people in the military showed that 80% either 'liked' or 'loved' their military robots, with more affection being shown towards ground rather than aerial robots.
Surviving dangerous combat situations together increased the level of bonding between soldier and robot, and current and future advances in artificial intelligence may further intensify the bond with the military robots.

==
In fictional media ==


== Pictures ==

		
		
		
		
		
		


== See also ==
Lethal autonomous weapon
Robot combat
Unmanned combat air vehicle
US battlefield UAVs
Powered exoskeleton
Network-centric warfare
Missile guidance
DARPA Grand Challenge
Multi Autonomous Ground-robotic International Challenge
Roboethics
Telerobotics
Three Laws of Robotics
Supersoldier
Robot Wars (disambiguation)


==
References ==


==
External links ==
"Biomass military robot in development"
EATR:
Energetically Autonomous Tactical Robot - Phase II Project
=== Ethical and legal concerns ===
Gerhard Dabringer (Hg.),
Ethica Themen: Ethical and Legal Aspects of Unmanned Systems.
Interviews, Wien 2010
Public Say It's Illegal to Target Americans Abroad as Some Question CIA Drone Attacks, according to Fairleigh Dickinson University PublicMind poll - February 7, 2013
The future of warfare: Why we should all be very afraid (2014-07-21), Rory Tolan, Salon
Archive on air wars, Geographical Imaginations
Logical Limitations to Machine Ethics, with Consequences to Lethal Autonomous Weapons.
Also discussed in:
Does the Halting Problem Mean No Moral Robots?

Robots in War: Issues of Risk and Ethics - 2009
===
Organizations ===
United States Joint Forces Command website: "Leading the transformation of the U.S. military"
irobot.com, builder of the PackBot and the R-Gator systems
Boston Dynamics, builder of BigDog


===
News articles/
press releases ===
USJFC: 'Robotics to play major role in future warfighting'
"From bomb disposal to waste
disposal" Robots help deal with hazards, emergencies and disasters
(International Electrotechnical Commission, July 2011)
"War robots still in Iraq", DailyTech, April 17, 2008
New Model Army Soldier Rolls Closer to Battle (SWORDS)
TALON Small Mobile Robot
TWG Military Robots
Carnegie Mellon University's snooping robot going to Iraq
PackBot Battlefield robotic Platform
Archived 2015-04-05 at the Wayback Machine
Miniature Unmanned Aerial Systems - UAV
Guardium Autonomous Security Vehicle
Unmanned Ground Systems from Israel Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine
High-Tech Military in Due Course
Launching a new kind of warfare
Gerry J. Gilmore (January 24, 2006).
"
Army's Veteran Bomb-Disposal Robot Now 'Packs Heat'".
American Forces Press Service.
Retrieved 2008-02-02.

As Wars End, Robot Field Faces Reboot April 11, 2012
Military ranks are a system of hierarchical relationships in armed forces, police, intelligence agencies or other institutions organized along military lines.
The military rank system defines dominance, authority, and responsibility in a military hierarchy.
It incorporates the principles of exercising power and authority into the military chain of command – the succession of commanders superior to subordinates through which command is exercised.
The military chain of command constructs an important component for organized collective action.
Usually, uniforms denote the bearer's rank by particular insignia affixed to the uniforms.
Ranking systems have been known for most of military history to be advantageous for military operations, in particular with regards to logistics, command, and coordination; as time went on and military operations became larger and more complex, military ranks increased and ranking systems themselves became more complex.

Rank is not only used to designate leadership, but to establish pay-grade as well.
As rank increases, pay-grade follows, but so does amount of responsibility.
Within modern armed forces, the use of ranks is almost universal.
Communist states have sometimes abolished ranks (e.g., the Soviet Red Army
1918–1935, the Chinese People's Liberation Army 1965–1988, and the Albanian Army 1966–1991),
but they had to re-establish them after encountering operational difficulties of command and control.

==
Etymology ==
The term rank comes from Old French ranc meaning "row, line", borrowed from a Germanic dialect and cognate with English ring.

==
Ancient ==


===
Greek ===
From 501 BC, the Athenians annually elected ten individuals to the rank of strategos, one for each of the ten "tribes" that had been created with the founding of the democracy.
Strategos literally means "army leader" and so it is usually translated as "general".
Originally these generals worked together with the old polemarchos ("warlord") but over time the latter figure was absorbed into the generalship: each of the ten generals would rotate as polemarch for one day, and during this day his vote would serve as tie-breaker if necessary.

The ten generals were equal to one another.
There was no hierarchy among them, however, a basic form of democracy was in effect: For example, at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC, the generals determined the battle plan by majority vote.
Particular assignments, however, might have been given to individual generals; inevitably there was a regular division of responsibilities.

The rank that was subordinate to a top general was a taxiarchos or taxiarhos, something akin to the modern brigadier.
In Sparta, however, the title was "polemarchos".
Below this was the syntagmatarchis, which can be translated as "leader of a regiment" (syntagma) and was therefore like a modern colonel.
Below him was the tagmatarches, a commanding officer of a tagma (near to the modern battalion).
The rank was roughly equivalent to the legatus of a Roman legion.
Next was the lokhagos, an officer who led an infantry unit called a lokhos that consisted of roughly a hundred men, much the same as in a modern company led by a captain.

A Greek cavalry (hippikon) regiment was called a hipparchia and was commanded by an epihipparch.
The unit was split into two and led by two hipparchos or hipparch, but Spartan cavalry was led by a hipparmostes.
A hippotoxotès was a mounted archer.
A Greek cavalry company was led by a tetrarchès or tetrarch.

The rank and file of the military in most of the Greek city states was composed of ordinary citizens.
Heavily armed foot soldiers were called hoplitès or hoplites and a hoplomachos was a drill or weapons instructor.

Once Athens became a naval power, the top generals of the land armies had authority over the naval fleets as well.
Under them, each warship was commanded by a trièrarchos or trierarch, a word which originally meant "trireme officer" but persisted when other types of vessels came into use.
Moreover, as in modern navies, the different tasks associated with running a ship were delegated to different subordinates.
Specifically, the kybernètès was the helmsman, the keleustēs managed the rowing speed, and the trièraulès was the flute player who maintained the strike rate for the oarsmen.
Following further specialization, the naval strategos was replaced by a nauarchos, a sea officer equating to an admiral.

With the rise of Macedonia under Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, the Greek military became professional, tactics became more sophisticated and additional levels of ranking developed.
Foot soldiers were organized into heavy infantry phalanxes called phalangites.
These were among the first troops ever to be drilled, and they fought packed in a close rectangular formation, typically eight men deep, with a leader at the head of each column (or file) and a secondary leader in the middle so that the back rows could move off to the sides if more frontage was needed.

A tetrarchia was a unit of four files and a tetrarchès or tetrarch
was a commander of four files; a dilochia was a double file and a dilochitès was a double-file leader; a lochos was a single file and a lochagos was a file leader; a dimoiria was a half file and a dimoirites was a half-file leader.
Another name for the half file was a hèmilochion with a hèmilochitès being a half-file leader.

Different types of units, however, were divided differently and therefore their leaders had different titles.
For example, under a numbering system by tens, a dekas or dekania was a unit of ten led by a dekarchos, a hekatontarchia was a unit of one hundred led by a hekatontarchos and a khiliostys or khiliarchia
was a unit of a thousand led by a khiliarchos.

The cavalry, for which Alexander became most famous (in a military sense), grew more varied.
There were heavy cavalry and wing cavalry (ilè) units
, the latter commanded by an ilarchos.
===
Roman ===
The use of formalized ranks came into widespread use with the Roman legions after the reforms by Marius.
Comparisons to modern ranks, however, can only be loose because the Roman army's command structure was very different from the organizational structure of its modern counterparts, which arose from the medieval mercenary companies, rather than from the writings of fourth-century Roman writer Vegetius and Caesar's commentaries on his conquest of Gaul and the civil war.

Military command
properly so-called was a political office in Rome.
A commander needed to be equipped with imperium, a politico-religious concept.
The king who possessed it (the rex sacrorum) was strictly forbidden to have it to avoid a return to the monarchy.
In the republic, commanding was confined to consuls or (seldom) to praetors, or in cases of necessity a dictator.
Proconsuls, after the establishment of the office, were used.
In imperial times, each legion was commanded by the emperor, who was technically either consul or proconsul.

The commander could appoint a deputy, a so-called legate (legatus).
The association of "legatus" with "legion" is folk etymology, as the meaning of legatus is "proxy" or "envoy".
Legates were typically drawn from the Roman Senate for three-year terms.
The political nature of high military command was even reflected here, in that legions were always subordinate to the governor, and only the second and further legions stationed in a province had their own legatus legionis.
The real commanders and the legates together were, in modern terms, the general officers.
Immediately beneath the commander (or his legate) were six military tribunes (tribuni militum), five of whom were young men of equestrian rank and one of whom was a nobleman who was headed for the senate.
The latter is called laticlavian tribune (tribunus laticlavius) and was second in command.
If in modern divisions the deputy commander is a brigadier general, the laticlavian tribune can perhaps be translated with this rank, though he commanded no formation of his own.
The other tribunes are called tribuni angusticlavii and are equivalent to staff officers in both senses of the term: of ranks major, lieutenant colonel, colonel, and with administrative duties.
They did not command a formation of their own.
The term military tribune is even sometimes translated into English as "colonel"—most notably by the late classicist Robert Graves in his Claudius novels and his translation of Suetonius' Twelve Caesars—to avoid confusion with the political "tribunes of the people"; in addition, they must not either be confused with the "military tribunes with consular authority", who in early republican times could replace the consuls.

The third highest officer of a legion, above the angusticlavian tribunes, was the praefectus castrorum.
He, too, would have a colonel's rank in modern armies, yet he differed much from the tribunes in that his office was not part of the rather administrative cursus, but normally filled by former centurions.
(
Modern armies have a similar distinction on a lower scale—i.e.,
between commissioned and non-commissioned officers.)

The fighting men in the legion were formed into "ranks", rows of men who fought as a unit.
Under Marius's new system, legions were divided into ten cohorts (cohortes) (roughly equivalent to battalions and immediately subject to the legion), each consisting of three manipula, each of them of two centuries (a rather small company in modern terms), each consisting of between 60 and 160 men.
Each century was led by a centurion (centurio, traditionally translated as captain), who was assisted by a number of junior officers, such as an optio.
Centuries were further broken into ten contubernia of eight soldiers each.
The manipula were commanded by one of their two centurions, the cohorts by one of their three manipulum's centurions; the most senior cohort-commanding centurions was called primus pilus.
The ranks of centurions in the individual cohorts were, in descending order, pilus prior, pilus posterior, princeps prior, princeps posterior, hastatus prior, and hastatus posterior.
Individual soldiers were referred to as soldiers (milites) or legionaries (legionarii).

Roman discipline was severe, with all ranks subject to corporal and capital punishment at the commander's discretion.
For example, if a cohort broke in battle, the typical punishment was decimation, in which every tenth soldier, selected by lot, was killed.
Decimation was not commonplace as lack of men would reduce combat effectiveness, which would eventually overcome the psychological "benefit" of keeping the troops in line.

===
Mongol ===
See Mongol military tactics and organization.
===
Turk ===
There were no ranks in the modern sense of a hierarchy of titles, although the army was organized into a hierarchical command.
The organization of the army was based on the decimal system, employed by Oghuz Khagan.
The army was built upon a squad of ten (aravt) led by an appointed chief.
Ten of these would then compose a company of a hundred (zuut), also led by an appointed chief.
The next unit was a regiment of a thousand (myangat) led by an appointed noyan.
The largest organic unit was a ten thousand man unit (tumen) also led by an appointed noyan.

===
Persian ===
The army of ancient Persia consisted of manageable military groupings under the individual commands.
Starting at the bottom, a unit of 10 was called a dathabam and was led by a dathapatis.
A unit of 100 men was a satabam led by a satapatis.
A unit of 1,000 was a hazarabam and was commanded by a hazarapatis.
A unit of 10,000 was a baivarabam and was commanded by a baivarapatis.
The Greeks called such masses of troops a myrias or myriad.
Among mounted troops, an asabam was a cavalry unit led by an asapatis.

Historians have discovered the existence of the following ranks in Parthian and Sassanian armies:

Commander-in-chief: Eran spahbod (to be replaced with four spahbods, one for each frontier of the empire during the reign of Khosrau I)
Commander of the cavalry: Aspwargan salar (Parthian) or aswaran salar (Sassanian)
Commander of the archers:
Tirbodh
Commander of the infantry:
paygan salar
Castellan: Argbadh or argbod
Commander of a frontier march:
Marzpawn (Parthian) or marzban (Sassanian)
Marzban of Central Asian marches was called kanarang


==
Post-classical ==
Post-classical militaries did not have a unified rank structure; while the feudal lords were in some ways equivalent to modern officers, they didn't have a strict hierarchy—a king was conceived of as first among equals, not a monarch as later or ancient societies understood the concept, and all nobles were theoretically equals (hence "peers").
A nobleman was obligated to bring a set number of troops when asked by his liege-lord, a king or merely a higher-ranked noble who had obtained his service by the gift of land.
The troops' lord retained at least nominal control over them—
many  post-classical  military planning sessions involved negotiating each lord's role in the coming battle—and each lord was allowed to leave after a predetermined amount of time had passed.

===
High command in post-classical armies ===
The command structure of armies was generally loose and varied considerably.
Typically, the king and high-ranking lords would call out for all lords to gather their troops for a campaign.
They would appoint a renowned noble to organize the assembling forces, the marshal.
The term field marshal came from the marshal then leading the army on the march, and being in charge of organizing camps and logistics.
Tactics for an upcoming battle were often decided by councils of war among the nobles leading the largest forces.
Outside of campaigns, the high constable had authority over the local constables, and commanders of the garrisons of major castles.
The high constable might have authority in the army due to his role of head of the regular cavalry.

===
Origins of modern ranks ===
As the European and Asian Middle Ages came to an end, the rank structure of post-classical armies became more formalized.
The top officers were known as commissioned officers because their rank came from a royal commission.
Army commissions were usually reserved for those of high stature—the aristocracy of mainland Europe and the aristocracy and gentry of Great Britain.

The basic unit of the post-classical army was the company, a band of soldiers assigned (or raised) by a vassal lord on behalf of his lord (in later times the king himself).
The vassal lord in command of the company was a commissioned officer with the rank of captain.
Captain was derived from the Late Latin word capitaneus (meaning "head man" or chief).

The commissioned officer assisting the captain with command of the company was the lieutenant.
Lieutenant was derived from the French language; the lieu meaning "place" as in a position; and tenant meaning "holding" as in "holding a position"; thus a "lieutenant" is somebody who holds a position in the absence of their superior.
When he was not assisting the captain, the lieutenant commanded a unit called a platoon, particularly a more specialized platoon.
The word is derived from the 17th-century French peloton, meaning a small ball or small detachment of men, which came from pelote, a ball.

The commissioned officer carrying the (infantry) company's flag was the ensign.
The word ensign was derived from the Latin word insignia.
In cavalry companies the equivalent rank was cornet.
In English usage, these ranks were merged into the single rank of second lieutenant in the 19th century.

Not all officers received a commission from the king.
Certain specialists were granted a warrant, certifying their expertise as craftsmen.
These warrant officers assisted the commissioned officers but ranked above the non-commissioned officers (NCOs).
They received their authority from superior officers rather than the king.
The first NCOs were the armed servants (men-at-arms) of the aristocracy, assigned to command, organize and train the militia units raised for battle.
After years of commanding a squad, an NCO could be promoted to sergeant, the highest NCO rank.
While a sergeant might have commanded a squad upon promotion, he usually became a staff officer.
While commissioned staff officers assisted their commander with personnel, intelligence, operations and logistics, the sergeant was a jack of all trades, concerning himself with all aspects of administration to maintain the enlisted men serving under his commander.
Over time, sergeants were differentiated into many ranks as various levels of sergeants were used by the commanders of various levels of units.

A corporal commanded a squad.
Squad derived from the Italian word for a "square" or "block" of soldiers.
In fact, corporal was derived from the Italian caporal de squadra (head of the squad).
Corporals were assisted by lancepesades.
Lancepesades were veteran soldiers; lancepesade was derived from the Italian lancia spezzata meaning broken spear—the broken spear being a metaphor for combat experience, where such an occurrence was likely.
The first lancepesades were simply experienced privates; who either assisted their corporal or performed the duties of a corporal themselves.
It was this second function that made armies increasingly regard their lancepesades as a grade of corporal rather than a grade of private.
As a result, the rank of lance corporal was derived from combining lancepesade and corporal.

As the post-classical came to an end, kings increasingly relied on professional soldiers to fill the bottom ranks of their armies instead of militiamen.
Each of these professionals began their careers as a private.
The private was a man who signed a private contract with the company commander, offering his services in return for pay.
The money was raised through taxation; those yeomen (smallholding peasants) who did not fulfill their annual 40-day militia service paid a tax that funded professional soldiers recruited from the yeomanry.
This money was handed to the company commanders from the royal treasury, with the company commanders using the money to recruit the troops.

===
Origins of higher ranks ===
As armies grew larger, composed of multiple companies, one captain was granted general (overall) authority over the field armies by the king.
(
National armies were the armies of the kings.
Field armies were armies raised by the king to enter the battle field in preparation for major battles.)
In French history, lieutenant du roi was a title borne by the officer sent with military powers to represent the king in certain provinces.
A lieutenant du roi was sometimes known as a lieutenant général to distinguish him from lieutenants subordinate to mere captains.
The sergeant acting as staff officer to the captain general was known as the sergeant major general.
This was eventually shortened to major general, while captain general was shortened to simply general.
This is the reason a major outranks a lieutenant, but a lieutenant general outranks a major general.

In modern times recruits attending basic training, also referred to as boot camp by some branches, are instructed in the hierarchical structure of military rank.
Many new enlisted civilians find it difficult to understand the structure of general staff ranks as stated before, it becomes somewhat complicated to understand when applying basic rationale.

As armies grew bigger, heraldry and unit identification remained primarily a matter of the regiment.
Brigades headed by brigadier generals were the units invented as a tactical unit by the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus II ("Gustav II Adolf", who was killed at the battle of Lützen 1632).
It was introduced to overcome the normal army structure, consisting of regiments.
The so-called "brigada" was a mixed unit, comprising infantry, cavalry and normally artillery, designated for a special task.
The size of such brigada was a reinforced company up to two regiments.
The brigada was a 17th-century form of the modern "task force".
In some armies "brigadier general" has been shortened to "brigadier".

Around the end of the 16th century, companies were grouped into regiments.
The officers commissioned to lead these regiments were called "colonels" (column officers).
They were first appointed in Spain by King Ferdinand II of Aragon where they were also known as "coronellos" (crown officers) since they were appointed by the Crown.
Thus the English pronunciation of the word colonel.
The first colonels were captains granted command of their regiments by commission of the king.
The lieutenants of the colonel were the lieutenant colonels.
In the 17th century, the sergeant of the colonel was the sergeant major.
These were field officers, third in command of their regiments (after their colonels and lieutenant colonels), with a role similar to the older, army-level sergeants major (although on a smaller scale).
The older position became known as sergeant major general to distinguish it.
Over time, the sergeant was dropped from both titles since both ranks were used for commissioned officers.
This gave rise to the modern ranks of major and major general.

The full title of sergeant major fell out of use until the latter part of the 18th century, when it began to be applied to the senior non-commissioned officer of an infantry battalion or cavalry regiment.

Regiments were later split into battalions with a lieutenant colonel as a commanding officer and a major as an executive officer.

==
Modern ==
Modern military services recognize three broad categories of personnel.

These are codified in the Geneva Conventions, which distinguish officers, non-commissioned officers, and enlisted men.

Apart from conscripted personnel one can distinguish:


===
Commissioned officers ===
Officers are distinguished from other military members (or an officer in training) by holding a commission; they are trained or training as leaders and hold command positions.

Officers are further generally separated into four levels:
General, flag, or air officers
Field or senior officers
Company grade or junior officers
Subordinate officer (naval cadet or officer cadet in the Canadian Forces, for example)


====
General, flag, and air officers ====
Officers who typically command units or formations that are expected to operate independently for extended periods of time (i.e., brigades and larger, or flotillas or squadrons of ships), are referred to variously as general officers (in armies, marines, and some air forces), flag officers (in navies and coast guards), or air officers (in some Commonwealth air forces).

General-officer ranks typically include (from the most senior) general, lieutenant general, major general, and brigadier general, although there are many variations like division general or (air-, ground-) force general.

Flag-officer ranks, named after the traditional practice of showing the presence of such an officer with a flag on a ship and often land, typically include (from the most senior) admiral, vice admiral and rear admiral.
In some navies, such as Canada's, the rank of commodore is a flag rank.

In the United Kingdom and most other Commonwealth air forces, air-officer ranks usually include air chief marshal, air marshal, air vice-marshal and air commodore.
For some air forces, however, such as those of Canada, United States and many other air forces, general officer rank titles are used.
In the case of the United States Air Force, that service was once part of the U.S. Army and evolved as a separate service in 1947, carrying over its extant officer rank structure.
Brazil and Argentina use a system of general officer ranks based on the term brigadier.

In some forces, there may be one or more superior ranks to the common examples, above, that are given distinguishing titles, such as field marshal (most armies of the world, notably excluding the United States) or general of the army (mainly the United States because "marshal" is used as a peace officer's designation), fleet admiral (U.S. Navy), Marshal of the Royal Air Force, or other national air force.
These ranks have often been discontinued, such as in Germany and Canada, or limited to wartime or honorific promotion, such as in the United Kingdom and the United States.

In various countries, particularly the United States, these may be referred to as "star ranks" for the number of stars worn on some rank insignia: typically one-star for brigadier general or equivalent with the addition of a star for each subsequent rank.
In the United States, five stars has been the highest rank regularly attainable (excluding the marines and coast guard, which have traditionally served as branches of the navy in times of war and thus under the command of a fleet admiral).
There also exists the specialty ranks of General of the Armies of the United States and Admiral of the Navy which at their inception were considered senior four star officers but came to be considered six-star rank after the creation of five star officers.
To date only one officer has held a six star rank in his lifetime, John J. Pershing.
George Washington was posthumously promoted to the post in 1976.
Additionally, Admiral George Dewey was promoted to admiral of the navy but died well before statute made it senior to an admiral of the fleet upon the latter's inception.

Some titles are not genuine ranks, but either functions assumed by generals or honorific titles.
For instance, in the French Army général de corps d'armée is a function assumed by some généraux de division, and maréchal de France, which is a distinction denoting the most superior military office, but one that has often neutered the practical command powers of those on whom it is conferred.
In the United States Navy, a commodore currently is a senior captain commanding a squadron, air group, or air wing that is too small for a rear admiral to command, although that name has historically been used as a rank.
The title (not rank) of commodore can also indicate an officer who is senior to a ship's captain (since only the ship's commanding officer is addressed as captain while under way).
Marine captains are sometimes referred to as major to distinguish themselves while shipboard, although this reference is not employed in the U.S. Navy or U.S. Marine Corps.

====
Field or senior officers ====
Field officers, also called "field-grade officers" or "senior officers", are officers who typically command units that can be expected to operate independently for short periods of time (i.e., infantry battalions, cavalry or artillery regiments, warships, air squadrons).
Field officers also commonly fill staff positions of superior commands.

The term field(-grade) officer is primarily used by armies and marines; air forces, navies and coast guards generally prefer the term "senior officer.
"
The two terms are not necessarily synonymous because the former is frequently used to describe any officer who holds a command position from a platoon to a theater.

Typical army and marine field officer ranks include colonel, lieutenant colonel, major and, in the British army, captains holding an adjutant's or operations officer appointment.
In many Commonwealth countries the field rank of brigadier is used, although it fills the position held by brigadier general in other countries.
In the United States Army, warrant officers who hold the rank of CW3-CW4 are field grade officers; CW5s are senior field grade officers.

Naval and coast guard senior officer ranks include captain and commander.
In some countries, the more senior rank of commodore is also included.
In others lieutenant-commanders, as equivalents to army and marine majors, are considered senior officers.

Commonwealth air force
senior officer ranks include group captain, wing commander, and squadron leader, where such ranks are still used.

====
Company grade or junior officers ====
The ranks of junior officers are the three or four lowest ranks of officers.
Units under their command are generally not expected to operate independently for any significant length of time.
Company grade officers also fill staff roles in some units.
In some militaries, however, a captain may act as the permanent commanding officer of an independent company-sized army unit, for example a signal or field engineer squadron, or a field artillery battery.

Typical army company officer ranks include captain and various grades of lieutenant.
Typical naval and coast guard junior officer ranks include grades of lieutenant commander, lieutenant, lieutenant junior grade, sub-lieutenant and ensign.
Commonwealth (excluding Canada)
air force junior officer ranks usually include flight lieutenant, flying officer, and pilot officer.

"The [U.S.] commissioned officer corps is divided into 10 pay grades (O-1 through O-10).
Officers in pay grades O-1 through O-3 are considered company grade officers.
In the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, these pay grades correspond to the ranks of second lieutenant (O-1), first lieutenant (O-2), and captain (O-3), and in the Navy, ensign, lieutenant junior grade, and lieutenant.
Officers in the next three pay grades (O-4 through O-6) are considered field grade officers.
In the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, these pay grades correspond to the ranks of major (O-4), lieutenant colonel (O-5), and colonel (O-6), and in the Navy, lieutenant commander, commander, and captain.
The highest four pay grades are reserved for general officers in the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, and flag officers in the Navy.
The ranks associated with each pay grade are as follows: in the Army, Marine Corps, and Air Force, brigadier general (O-7), major general (O-8), lieutenant general (O-9), and general (O-10); in the Navy, rear admiral-lower half, rear admiral-upper half, vice admiral, and admiral."
====
Subordinate or student officer ====
Officers in training in the Canadian Armed Forces are either naval cadet for naval training or officer cadet for army or air force training.

In the US and several other western forces, officers in training are referred to as student officers, and carry the rank of cadet (army and air force) or midshipman (navy, and in some countries, marines).
These officers may be serving at a military academy, or, as common in the United States, as members of a military training unit attached to a civilian college or university, such as an ROTC unit.
This is due to a requirement that commissioned officers have at least a four-year collegiate undergraduate degree.

The British Army refers to its trainee officers as officer cadets, who rank as private soldiers at the start of their training, with no authority over other ranks (except when appointed to carry out a role as part of training).
Officer cadets are addressed to as "Mister" or "Miss" until the completion of the early stages of their training at the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst (at which point cadets "pass out" and formally gain their commissions), thereafter other ranks (non-officers) will address them as "Sir" or "Ma'am".

While cadet has always been a rank of limited authority and prestige (cadets and US Navy midshipmen have no authority over commissioned personnel, warrants, or officers, only subordinate cadets), midshipman has historically been a rank with limited leadership responsibility, particularly in the Royal Navy (where cadets are commissioned at the start of their training, unlike their army counterparts).
This tradition was continued by the US Navy after its original adoption of the rank, but now US Navy midshipmen are limited in the same manner as cadets in the other US services.
Additionally, US Marine officers in training are also midshipmen, trained and educated alongside their naval counterparts, and wear distinctive insignia to indicate their branch of service.

US Coast Guard Academy students are referred to as "cadets", while those attending the military branch's officer candidate school are "officer candidates".

In the US an alternative to spending four years as a cadet or midshipmen is for college graduates with a four-year degree to attend officer candidate school, an intensive twelve-week training course designed to convert college graduates into military officers.
Each service has at least one, and usually several, officer candidate school facilities.
Students at these programs are called officer candidates.

===
Warrant officers ===
Warrant officers (as receiving authority by virtue of a warrant) are a hybrid rank treated slightly differently in each country or service.
Warrant officers may either be effectively senior non-commissioned officers or an entirely separate grade between commissioned and non-commissioned officers, usually held by specialist personnel.

In the United States, warrant officers are appointed by warrant then commissioned by the President of the United States at the rank of chief warrant officer.
Warrant officers range from WO1-CW5.
A warrant officer is not a chief warrant officer until they reach W2.
CW3-CW4 are field grade officers.
Warrant officers in the rank or grade of CW5 are senior field grade officers.

===
Enlisted personnel ===
Enlisted personnel are personnel below commissioned rank and make up the vast majority of military personnel.
They are known by different names in different countries, such as other ranks (ORs) in the United Kingdom and some Commonwealth countries, and non-commissioned members (NCMs) in Canada.

==== Non-commissioned officers ====

Non-commissioned officers (NCOs) are enlisted personnel, under the command of an officer, granted delegated authority to supervise other military members or assigned significant administrative responsibilities.
They are responsible for the care and direct control of junior military members, often functioning in the smaller field units as executive officers.

Even the most senior NCO officially ranks beneath the most junior commissioned officer or warrant officer.
However, most senior NCOs have more experience, possibly including combat, than junior officers.
In many armies, because junior officers have a great amount of responsibility and authority but little operational experience, they are paired with senior NCO advisers.
In some organizations, senior NCOs may have formal responsibility and informal respect beyond that of junior officers, but less than that of warrant officers.
Many warrant officers come from the ranks of mid-career NCOs.
In some countries warrant ranks replace senior enlisted ranks.

NCO ranks typically include a varying number of grades of sergeant and corporal (air force, army and marines), or chief petty officer and petty officer (navy and coast guard).
In many navies the term 'rating' is used to designate specialty, while rank denotes pay grade.

In some countries warrant officers come under the non-commissioned officer branch (senior non-commissioned officiers).

====
Other enlisted ====
Personnel with no command authority usually bear titles such as private, airman or aircraftman, or seaman (starting with seaman recruit in the United States Navy and Coast Guard).
In the United States Marine Corps individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as "marine".
In the United States Air Force individuals of all ranks regardless of command status may be referred to as "airman".
Shortly after the Sailor's Creed was formally instituted, Secretary of the Navy John Dalton directed that the word sailor should be capitalized when referring to any uniformed member of the Navy.
In some countries and services, personnel in different branches have different titles.
These may have a variety of grades, such as private first class, but these usually only reflect variations in pay, not increased authority.
These may or may not technically be ranks, depending on the country or service.
Each rank gives the individual an indication of how long and how well they have served in combat and training.

==
Appointment ==
Appointment is the instrument by virtue of which the person exercises his or her authority.
Officers are appointed by a royal commission in most monarchies or a presidential commission in many other countries.
In the Commonwealth, warrant officers hold a royal or presidential warrant.
In the United States, officers are appointed by the president, with the advice and consent of the United States Senate.
Most officers are approved en bloc by voice vote, but flag officers are usually required to appear before the Armed Services Committee and answer questions to the satisfaction of its members, prior to a vote on their commission.

NCOs are appointed by an instrument of appointment, a written document, often a certificate, usually from the service head.
Entry into service is often referred to as enlistment throughout the English-speaking world, even in countries where soldiers do not technically enlist.

Sometimes personnel serve in an appointment which is higher than their actual rank.
For instance, commodore used to be an appointment of captain in the Royal Navy and lance corporal used to be an appointment of private in the British Army.

== Types ==
There are a number of different forms of rank; from highest to lowest degree, they are:

Substantive or permanent: the fully paid and confirmed rank, with eligibility for the corresponding pension/benefits
Retired or retained: usually granted to those officers of the rank of lieutenant in the navy, or captain in the army, or above, and enlisted, who have reached the end of their service obligation and have not been dishonorably discharged or dismissed from the service.
A retired rank is usually kept for life, if the officer concerned so wishes.
In the Commonwealth of Nations, such an officer will also hold the style of Esquire, if they do not hold a higher title.

Veterans rank is different in each country.
Members of the United States military maintain their highest rank after discharge or retirement.
10 U.S. Code § 772(e) states:
A person not on active duty who served honorably in time of war in the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marine Corps may bear the title and wear the uniform of the highest grade held by him during that war.
After a war, regular serving members of the military holding war substantive or temporary rank often revert to their former, substantive rank and all others often end their service.
However, the holder may be granted permission to permanently retain the rank they held when the conflict ended.

Temporary: usually granted for a specific task or mission.
The holder holds the rank while occupying that position.
Despite the name, temporary rank may be held for a considerable period of time, perhaps even years.
In wartime, temporary ranks are often common.
In the United Kingdom, the rank of brigadier was long considered a temporary rank; while its holder was addressed as "brigadier," he would retain the substantive rank of colonel or lieutenant-colonel if not selected for promotion to general officer rank.
Sub-classes of temporary rank (from highest to lowest) include:
War substantive: a temporarily confirmed rank only held for the duration of that war, though war substantive rank may be treated as substantive when considering the holder's eligibility for subsequent promotions and appointments.

Acting is where the holder assumes the pay and allowances appropriate to the acting rank, but a higher commanding officer may revert the holder to previous rank held.
This is normally for a short period of time while the permanent occupant of the office is absent.
During wartime, acting ranks are frequently held on an emergency basis, while peacetime holders of acting ranks are often those who must hold their permanent rank for a sufficient period before being confirmed in their new higher rank.

Brevet: an honorary promoted rank, without the full official authority or pay appropriate to the rank.

Local or theater: a form of temporary rank restricted to a specific location instead of a specific duty.

Honorary: Often granted on retirement, or in certain special cases to honour a deserving civilian.
Generally, honorary rank is treated as if it were substantive, but usually does not grant a corresponding wage or pension (increase).

==
Size of command ==
===
Rank and unit size ===
To get a sense of the practical meaning of these ranks—and thus to be able to compare them across the different armed services, different nations, and the variations of titles and insignia—an understanding of the relative levels and sizes of each command is helpful.
The ranking and command system used by U.S. Marine ground forces or U.S. Army infantry units can serve as a template for this purpose.
Different countries will often use their own systems that do not match the presentation here.

Under this system, starting from the bottom and working up, a corporal leads a fireteam consisting of three other individuals.
A sergeant leads a squad consisting of three fireteams.
As a result, a full squad numbers 13 individuals.
Squads usually have numbered designations (e.g., 1st Squad).

Generally, in most armies and marine units, a lieutenant or equivalent rank leads a platoon, which can consist of three or four squads.
For example, in U.S. Marine infantry units, rifle platoons usually consist of three rifle squads of 13 men each, with a Navy corpsman, the platoon leader, and a platoon sergeant (i.e., a staff sergeant who serves as second-in-command).
An infantry platoon can number from 42 to 55 individuals, depending on the service.
Platoons are usually numbered (e.g., 1st Platoon) or named after their primary function (e.g., service platoon).

A captain or equivalent rank commands a company, usually consisting of four platoons (three line platoons and one heavy weapons platoon).
His headquarters can include a first sergeant and as many as seven others.
As such, a company can comprise from roughly 175 to 225 individuals.
Equivalent units also commanded by captains are batteries (for field artillery units) and detachments.
In English speaking countries, a company (or troop in the cavalry, and battery in the artillery) is usually designated by a letter (e.g., "A Company").
In non-English speaking countries, they are usually numbered.
In most Commonwealth armies a company is commanded by a major, assisted by a captain.

A lieutenant colonel or equivalent rank commands a battalion or a squadron, often consisting of four companies, plus the various members of his headquarters.
A battalion is around 500–1,500 men and usually consists of between two and six companies.

A colonel or equivalent commands a regiment or group, often consisting of four battalions (for an infantry unit) or five to six air groups (for a wing).
Battalions and regiments are usually numbered, either as a separate battalion or as part of a regimental structure (e.g., 1-501st Infantry in the US Army).

In these later examples, abstractions cease to be helpful
and it becomes necessary to turn to an actual unit.
The 1st Battalion of the 1st Marine Regiment of the 1st Marine Division of the I Marine Expeditionary Force consists of three infantry companies, one weapons company, and one headquarters and service company.
Above that, the 1st Marine Regiment (also known as "First Marines") consists of four such battalions and one headquarters company.
Marine Air Control Group 18 of 1st Marine Air Wing of the III Marine Expeditionary Force consists of four squadrons, one battery, and one detachment, a mix of different-sized units under a regimental equivalent-sized unit.

The next level has traditionally been a brigade, commanded by a brigadier general, and containing two or more regiments.
But this structure is considered obsolete today.
At the present time, in the U.S. Army, a brigade is roughly equal to or a little larger than a regiment, consisting of three to seven battalions.
Strength typically ranges from 1,500 to 3,500 personnel.
In the U.S. Marines, brigades are only formed for certain missions.
In size and nature they are larger and more varied collections of battalions than is common for a regiment, fitting them for their traditional role as the smallest formation able to operate independently on a battlefield without external logistical tactical support.
Brigades are usually numbered (e.g., 2nd Brigade).

The level above regiment and brigade is the division, commanded by a major general and consisting of from 10,000 to 20,000 persons.
The 1st Marine Division, for example, is made up of four marine regiments (of the type described above), one assault amphibian battalion, one reconnaissance battalion, two light armored reconnaissance battalions, one combat engineer battalion, one tank battalion, and one headquarters battalion—totalling more than 19,000 marines.
(
Within the headquarters battalion are one headquarters company, one service company, one military police company, one communications company, and one truck company.)
An equivalent elsewhere within the same marine expeditionary force (MEF) might be a MEF logistics group (MLG), which is not a regimental-sized unit (as the word "group" implies), but rather a large support unit consisting of several battalions of support personnel.
Divisions are normally numbered, but can be named after a function or personage.

Considering such a variety of units, the command sizes for any given rank will vary widely.
Not all units are as troop intensive as infantry forces need to be.
Tank and artillery crews, for example, involve far fewer personnel.
Numbers also differ for non-combat units such as quartermasters, cooks, and hospital staff.
Beyond this, in any real situation, not all units will be at full strength and there will be various attachments and detachments of assorted specialists woven throughout the system.

The 1st Marine Division is part of the I Marine Expeditionary Force, which also includes the 3rd Marine Air Wing, 1st Marine Logistics Group, 1st Marine Expeditionary Brigade (as required), three marine expeditionary units (featuring helicopter groups), and a battalion-sized marine air ground task force.
In the U.S. Marine Corps there are three marine expeditionary forces.

In the U.S. Army, the level above division is called a corps instead of an expeditionary force.
It is commanded by a lieutenant general.
In many armies, a corps numbers around 60,000, usually divided into three divisions.
Corps (and similar organizations) are normally designated with Roman numerals and their nationality when operating in a combined (international) force—
e.g.,
V (US) Corps, VIII (ROK) Corps, II MEF, I Canadian Corps.

During World War II, due to the large scale of combat, multiple corps were combined into armies commanded in theory by a general (four stars), but often by a lieutenant general (three stars), and comprising as many as 240,000 troops.
Armies are numbered by spelled-out numerals or functional titles, using their nationality in "combined" forces (e.g., Eighth US Army, Third ROK Army, British Army of the Rhine).
These were in their turn formed into army groups, these being the largest field organization handled by a single commander in modern warfare.
Army groups included between 400,000 and 1,500,000 troops.
Army groups received Arabic numeral designations and national designations when combined.

These examples illustrate a standard that holds true all over the world and throughout military history, namely that higher rank generally implies command of larger units in a nested system of ranks and commands.
The specific size of a command for any given rank will, however, depend on the task the unit performs, the nature of weapons used, and the strategies of warfare.

===
Military ranks and insignia of various nations ===
Algeria
Argentina
Bangladesh (
Army, Navy, Air Force)
 Belgium
 Brazil
Canada
China (Ground Force, Navy, Air Force)
Colombia
Croatia
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France (Army, Navy)
Germany
India (Army, Navy, Air Force)
Indonesia
Israel
Iran
Japan
Korea
 Norway
 Pakistan
Philippines
Portugal
Russia
Saudi Arabia
Serbia
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey
 Ukraine
Egypt
United Kingdom (Army officers, enlisted; Navy and Marines officers, ratings; Air Force officers, enlisted)
Republic of China (Taiwan)
United States (Army officers, enlisted, Marine Corps officers and enlisted, Navy officers, enlisted, Air Force officers, enlisted,
Space Force officers and enlisted, Coast Guard officers, enlisted)


==
See also ==
Ranks of nobility and peerage
UK and US military ranks compared
==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


==
External links ==
United States Military Rank Insignia, Background, & Description
Glossary of Ancient Greek Military Terms
US Military Ranks, Ratings, and Grades by Branch (with insignia)
Military rank
US Military ranks and rank insignia
British Army ranks and responsibilities
Military ranks
Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST)
(Bengali: মিলিটারি
ইনস্টিটিউট
অফ সায়েন্স অ্যান্ড
টেকনোলজি) is under National University, Bangladesh in Mirpur Cantonment, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
It is an institute under the Ministry of Defence (Bangladesh) which is run by Military of Bangladesh and is affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals.
Though a military institution, both military and civil students study in MIST.

==
History ==
MIST came into existence on 19 April 1998 and academic programs were launched in January 1999.
The initial batches included only selected military students.
However, feeling the necessity of spreading quality engineering education, the authority decided to admit civil students (both male and female) and from 2002, civilian students were admitted in different departments through passing a rigorous admission test.

The maiden department of the institute is the Civil Engineering department, which started functioning in 1999.
In 2000, Computer Science & Engineering (CSE) department was established.
Mechanical Engineering (ME) department and Electrical, Electronic & Communication Engineering (EECE) department were established in the year 2003.
MIST started its Masters program in different disciplines from 2012 and MPhil/PhD from year 2014.In
the beginning MIST was affiliated with the University of Dhaka (DU).

==
Campus ==
MIST is located at Mirpur Cantonment, on the northwest edge of Dhaka City.
Students' hall and teachers' quarters are at the last end of the campus.
The academic buildings of MIST are on 50 acres (200,000 m2) of land.
This area is confined, with officers' mess, four tower buildings (two of them are completed, known as Faculty Tower-1 and Faculty Tower-2; as of December 2019, the other two are in construction), cafeteria, library, two fields for the civil students, medical center, physical center and administrative buildings.
Halls for students and teachers are situated outside the campus.
Recently more land was issued for the campus for residential accommodation.

==
Aim of MIST ==
The aim of MIST is to conduct undergraduate, post graduate/Masters (M.Sc.
Engg./ M. Engg.)
and Ph.D. program on various disciplines of engineering.
==
Student's dress ==
Civil students are to wear dress with displayed identity card as per 'Dress Code' prescribed by MIST authority.
Military students put on uniform as per Dress Regulation of respective services.

==
Affiliation ==
MIST was previously affiliated with the University of Dhaka.
However, at present all academic programs of MIST are affiliated with Bangladesh University of Professionals (BUP).
All examinations are conducted as per the schedule approved by BUP.
It also approves the results and awards certificates to the qualified students.

==
Procedure of admission ==
The undergraduate admission process at MIST has several steps.
First, students are screened based on their grade point average (GPA) in HSC or equivalent examinations.
Every year, 10,000 candidates are short-listed from approximately 20,000-20,500 applicants to sit for the admission test.
Besides the admission test, SSC and HSC results are taken into consideration while evaluating candidates.
Students who have passed in minimum five subjects in GCE O-Level and three subjects (mathematics, physics and chemistry) in A-Level, obtaining minimum C-grades in all subjects are also eligible for the admission test.
Foreign students may be admitted against a reserved quota of 3% of overall vacancies available (6% of civil seats).
Vacancies will be offered to countries through Armed Forces Division (AFD), Prime Minister's Office, of the Government of Bangladesh.
Admission to Ph.D. and M.Phil
programs requires a master's degree from relevant branch from a recognized university.
Admission to a Master's program requires a bachelor's degree in engineering from a recognized institution.
Admission is based on written admission test & interview/viva voce on the relevant departments.
Admission is highly competitive in postgraduate programs as only few aspirants are selected every year from a large pool of applicants.

==
Academics ==


===
Faculties and departments ===
Academic activities are undertaken by 12 departments under four faculties.
Twelve departments offer undergraduate programs.

===
Postgraduate programs ===
Eight departments of MIST offer postgraduate courses(M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D) and other three departments of Science and Engineering Faculty offer M.Phil.

Civil Engineering [Structure/Transportation/Environment/Water Resource/Geotechnical Engineering] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Electrical, Electronics & Communication Engineering [Power/Electronics/Communication] (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Computer Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Mechanical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Aeronautical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Nuclear Science & Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.,
Ph.
D)
Biomedical Engineering (M.Sc./M.Engg.)
===
Diploma courses ===
Certificate Course on
GIS and Remote Sensing
Diploma courses in surveying & mapping
Diploma & Certificate courses in CSE.

Professional advance courses.

==
Regulatory bodies ==


===
Council of MIST ===


====
Chairman ====
Honorable Minister, Ministry of Education, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh.
====
Vice chairman ====
Chief of Army Staff, Bangladesh Army
Chief of Naval Staff, Bangladesh Navy
Chief of Air Staff,
Bangladesh Air Force


====
Members ====
Principal Staff Officer, Armed Forces Division (AFD)
Secretary, MOD
Vice Chancellor(VC), BUP
Engineer in Chief(E in C), Army Headquarters(AHQ)
Commandant, MIST
Commandant, BMA
Commandant, BNA
Commandant, BAFA
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), Faculty of science, DU
Representative of the VC(Prof eqvt), BUET
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of the Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Science and Technology


====
Member secretary ====
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Governing Body of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Vice chairman ====
E in C, Bangladesh Army/ Commandant, MIST(As per seniority)


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BMA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BNA / Commandant MIST
Dean/ Senior Instructor appointed by Commandant BAFA /
Commandant MIST
Director General, Training Directorate, AFD
Director, Military Training, Bangladesh Army
Director, Naval Training,  Bangladesh Navy
Director, Air Training,  Bangladesh Air Force
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Director Administration, MIST
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education
Representative of the Ministry of Finance
Representative of the Ministry of Post, Telecommunication and Information Technology


===
Member secretary ===
Colonel Staff, MIST


===
Academic Council  of MIST ===


====
Chairman
====
Commandant, MIST


====
Members ====
Representative of the VC, Faculty of Science, DU
Representative of the VC,
BUET
Representative of the VC, BUP
All Dean's of Faculty (CE, ECE, ME, and Sc & Engg), MIST
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BMA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BNA
Representative of Commandant, Engineering Faculty, BAFA
Director, Research & Development (R&D), MIST
Heads of all Department, MIST
Colonel Staff, MIST
Controller of Exam, MIST
Representative of Training Directorate, AFD
Representative of Military Training Directorate, AHQ
Representative of Naval Training Directorate, NHQ
Representative of Air Training Directorate, Air HQ
Representative of MOD
Representative of Ministry of Education


====
Member secretary ====
General Staff Officer Grade-1 (Academic),
MIST


== Number of seats ==
The number of seats for 4-year bachelor's degree in Engineering Programmes (Unit-A) and
5-year bachelor's degree of Architecture Programme (Unit-B) is given below:


==
Teacher's quarters ==
MIST has two Teacher's Quarters for the permanent teachers with families.
They are:
Polash (পলাশ)
Shapla (শাপলা)


== Facilities and services ==


== Halls of residence ==
MIST has dorms for male and female students.
Hostel administration is performed by the provost who is selected from one of the senior teachers of the 11 departments.
The hall organizes many creative works and tournaments.

===
Osmany Hall ===
Osmany Hall is named after the Bangabir General M.A.G. Osmany, the Commander-in-chief of Bangladesh forces during Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971.
Osmany Hall is an 8 stored building with female and male wings, having a capacity of 558 students (male 260 and female 298).
There are 20 staff for each wing.
Osmany Hall is known for the security of the students compared to the other hall in the country.
Students get various modern facilities such as 24-hour electricity, internet service, gym, games and sports facilities.

==
Students organizations ==
MIST
Robotics Club (MISTRC)
<http://mistroboticsclub.com//>
MIST
Literature and Cultural Club (MISTLCC)
MIST
IEEE MIST Student Branch
MIST
Debating Society (MISTDS)
MIST  Photographic Society (MISTPS)
MIST  Film and Drama Society (MISTFDS)
MIST
Sports Club
MIST
Aeronautics and Astronautics Club (MAAC)
MIST  Computer Club <https://computer-club.mist.ac.bd/
>
MIST  Nuclear Engineering Club


==
Laboratory facilities ==
Each department is equipped with modern lab facilities.
The various laboratories available under each dept are given below:


==
Central library ==
MIST library has a resourceful collection of 65,000 books (as of 2018), 1,680 CD-ROMs, and a good number of magazines, periodicals, journals and articles from home and abroad.
The library gives access to online journals through Library Consortium of Bangladesh (LiCoB)[previously
Bangladesh INASP-PERii Consortium (BIPC)].
The central library uses KOHA, Dspace.
VuFind and Drupal (open source software) as a part of the Integrated Library Management System.
It also subscribes a number of Bangla and English newspapers and periodicals.
In addition to that, each dept has its own library enriched with adequate text and reference books.
Start of each semester library issues reference books of that particular semester to students of every department.
There is also a Cyber Center for Internet browsing.

==
MIST journals and magazines ==
MIST has an annual technical journal titled "Galaxy" (ISSN 2073-6444) whose concern is to provide a firm ground for students and faculty members to share their research outcome and knowledge.

"
IMPULSE"-Annual publication from Dept.
of Electrical, Electronic and Communication Engineering.
So far, there are 6 editions of this illustrious magazine.

Osmany Hall Magazine "Prottasha(প্রত্যাশা)
"
"
AEROMIST"-A departmental magazine of Aeronautical Engineering department.
===
Osmany Memorial Gold Medal ===
Awarded to the best student amongst all the MIST Medal holders.

===
MIST Medal ===
Awarded to first position holder in each department with a minimum CGPA of 3.80 out of 4.00.
===
Research Medal ===
Awarded to the student of different departments for the best Research work in their Graduation.

===
Dean's List of Honour ===
All students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 at the end of each academic level for level 1, 2 and 3
All graduating students earning CGPA ≥ 3.75 considering results of entire program (level 1 to 4)


===
Scholarships and stipends ===
Chancellor's(BUP) Scholarship
Vice Chancellors (BUP) Scholarship/
Stipend
MIST Scholarship
MIST Stipends
Osmany Memorial Trust Scholarship
Buro Bangladesh Stipend
Chief of Army Staff Scholarship
Chief of Army Staff Stipend
Chief of Naval Staff Scholarship
Chief of Air Staff Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Scholarship
Brig Gen Kamal Stipend


==
Achievements ==
Md Mijanur Rahman (AE-1)
Won Runner-Up Trophy in "International Public Speaking Competition-2010" held in England.

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "4th IUT ICT Fest-2012", placed 8th( 5th in institution ranking).

MIST programming contest teams MIST_Kernel participated in the "ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest Dhaka Regional 2012", achieved 17th position ( 9th in institution ranking).

MIST Lunabotics Team participated in "3rd Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2012" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA.

Mobile Apps "Save Life" developed by the Students (Ishtiak Ahmed & Kazi Munshimun Nabi) of CSE Dept of MIST secured 2nd runner-up position in the Mobile Apps Development Contest by EATL Apps among 188 projects.

MIST Aero Thunder Team participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition(West)-2013" & placed 19th position in world ranking, held in California, USA from 12 to 14 April 2013.

Two Teams from CE Dept.(Team VIVE & Team STORM) participated in "ACI Mortar Workability Competition 2013" held in Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA on 14 April and
Team VIVE placed 4th among all the universities & 1st contestant from Bangladesh & whole Asia.

Team "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" from Aeronautical Engineering Dept.
participated in 2013 AIAA/
Cessna Aircraft Company/
Raytheon Missile Systems Design/Build/Fly Competition held in Tucson, Arizona, US, from 19 to 21 April 2013 & placed 40 out of 90 team from all over the world (placed 4th in whole ASIA region). "
MIST Dreamer's Fin" is the 1st team from Bangladesh
participate this competition.

MIST Team "BIJOY" became Runners up of the Inter University Design Contest-UAPT jointly organized by Engineering Students Association of Bangladesh(ESAB) & Bangladeshi Systems Change Advocacy Network (B-SCAN) among 82 teams from all over the country on 10 May 2013.

MIST Lunabotics Team "EKUSH" participated in the "4th Annual Lunabotics Mining Competition 2013" held in Kennedy Space Center, Florida, USA & placed 11th in mining Category all over world.
And won 1st position in 'Outreach Project',1st in 'Luna World Wide Award'  2nd in 'System Engineering Paper' & 3rd in 'Team Spirit Award'.

"
MIST Aero Thunder Team GREEN" participated in "SAE Aero Design Competition (WEST)-2014" & placed 17th position among 100 universities all over the world.
And also placed 4th position in payload section & 10th in flight score
"MIST Aero Thunder Team RED" participated in "SAE Aero Design
Competition(East)-2014" & placed 10th position in world ranking, held in USA from 11 to 13 April 2014.
They also placed 5th position in System Engineering Paper & 5th position in Presentation.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Mist computer club website
Mist robotics club
The following list of active People's Liberation Army aircraft is a list of military aircraft currently in service with three branches of the People's Liberation Army.
For retired aircraft, see list of historic aircraft of the People's Liberation Army Air Force.

==
People's Liberation Army Air Force ==


==
People's Liberation Army Naval Air Force ==


==
People's Liberation Army Ground Force ==


==
See also ==
List of unmanned aerial vehicles of China
Currently active military equipment by country
People's Liberation Army Air Force
People's Liberation Army Naval Air Force
People's Liberation Army Ground Force Aviation


==
References ==
Lethal Weapon is an American buddy cop action-comedy media franchise created by Shane Black.
It focuses on two Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) detectives, Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh.
The franchise originally consisted of a series of four films released between 1987 and 1998, and later a television series which aired from 2016 to 2019.
All four films in the series were directed by Richard Donner and also share many of the same core cast members, while the television series recast the main roles with younger actors instead.
Though the first film was not explicitly a comedy, the later films and the television series gradually became comedic in nature.

==
Films ==


===
Lethal Weapon (1987) ===
Anxious with age and retirement, homicide detective Roger Murtaugh (Danny Glover) is partnered with young and suicidal narcotics officer Martin Riggs (Mel Gibson).
Together, they work the case of the alleged suicide of Amanda Hunsaker (Jackie Swanson), daughter of a wealthy businessman who served with Murtaugh in Vietnam.
Murtaugh and Riggs soon discover that Hunsaker was involved in a heroin-smuggling scheme led by a retired general (Mitchell Ryan) and his lead enforcer (Gary Busey).
===
Lethal Weapon 2 (1989) ===
During a car chase, Riggs and Murtaugh stumble upon a trunk full of smuggled South African Krugerrands.
This sparks a series of attempts at their lives, forcing them to take a less dangerous case, protecting Leo Getz (Joe Pesci), a loud-mouthed whistleblower with whom they gradually bond and befriend.
However, they realize that Getz was involved in the same South African illegal activities.
As a result, the three men become entangled in a drug-smuggling operation involving South African diplomats in Los Angeles, using their immunity and biting wit as a shield.
Riggs kills the murderer of his wife who is among the criminals.

===
Lethal Weapon 3 (1992) ===
As Murtaugh, who is one week from retiring, and Riggs investigate a robbery committed using a duplicate armored car, they find themselves in the middle of an Internal Affairs investigation led by Sergeant Lorna Cole (Rene Russo).
With assistance from Leo, they learn that the subject of the investigation is a rogue AWOL cop (Stuart Wilson) who is stealing impounded weapons and selling them on the black market.
During the investigation, Murtaugh shoots and kills a teenager who attacks him and Riggs; he turns out to be a friend of his own son.
This prompts Murtaugh to capture the man responsible for the distribution of illegal firearms and to rethink his retirement.

===
Lethal Weapon 4 (1998) ===
While Lorna and Murtaugh's daughter Rianne are both pregnant, Riggs and Murtaugh once again team up with Leo as well as rookie Detective Lee Butters (Chris Rock) to investigate a Chinese immigrant smuggling ring.
Wah
Sing Ku (Jet Li) is a ruthless enforcer who personally attempts to murder Murtaugh's family by burning them alive in their own home.
As the story progresses, Murtaugh discovers that Lee is the father of his daughter's unborn child.
The two slay dozens of Chinese gangsters and ultimately manage to catch up with the boss of the smuggling ring.
Riggs and Lorna are married at the end of the film as their child is born.

===
Lethal Finale (TBA) ===
There had long been talk of a fifth Lethal Weapon film, although both Mel Gibson and Danny Glover had initially expressed a lack of interest.
In 2007, Moviehole.net received word from sources that Warner Bros. were in the early stages of trying to relaunch the Lethal Weapon series sometime in 2009 or later.
A spec script treatment was written by Shane Black and Chuck Mondry, leading to rumors that the sequel was on fast track by Warner Bros. with Black in the director's chair.
In November 2017, Mel Gibson hinted that a fifth movie might happen and that he, Richard Donner, and Danny Glover have discussed the idea to return.
In December 2017, Donner confirmed in an interview on the Spocklight podcast that Gibson and Glover have agreed to return as Riggs and Murtaugh respectively and that he has a story all set.
The only obstacle is
Warner Bros. Pictures greenlighting the film.
Donner has recruited Channing Gibson, the screenwriter from the fourth film, to begin writing the script.
The story will take place in present day (setting the characters of Murtaugh and Riggs in their mid-seventies and sixties, respectively) and is intended to be the final film in the series.
In February 2018, Donner revealed the film's official title to be Lethal Finale; while also stating that the film is being held up by the production company and story.
In January 2020, Lethal Weapon 5 was confirmed to be in active development, with Mel Gibson and Danny Glover confirmed to return, and Richard Donner returning to direct.

==
Television ==


===
Lethal Weapon (2016–2019) ===
Deadline reported that Matthew Miller will create and co-executive produce a Lethal Weapon TV series with Dan Lin and Jennifer Gwartz for Fox.
In February 2016, The Hollywood Reporter reported that FOX had officially picked up the Lethal Weapon pilot, with McG directing and Clayne Crawford as Riggs and Damon Wayans as Murtaugh.
The cast was further expanded in February and March, with Keesha Sharp replacing Golden Brooks as Trish, Jordana Brewster as Dr. Maureen Cahill, Kevin Rahm as Captain Brooks Avery, Chandler Kinney as Riana Murtaugh, Dante Brown as Roger "R.J." Murtaugh Jr.,  Johnathan Fernandez as Scorsese, and Thomas Lennon in the recurring role of Leo Getz.
Fox gave Lethal Weapon a series order on May 10, 2016.
For the third season, Crawford was replaced by Seann William Scott, as a new character named Wesley Cole.
Crawford was fired from the show after Fox and Warner Bros. refused to aid in escalating tensions between Crawford and Wayans, and the series killed off the character of Riggs.

On May 10, 2019, after three seasons Fox canceled the show.

== Cast and crew ==


===
Cast ===
Key
A
Y  indicates the actor portrayed the role of a younger version of the character.

A
P  indicates the actor portrayed the role of the character in a photograph.

A dark gray cell indicates the character was not in the film.

===
Crew ===


== Reception ==


===
Box office performance ===


===
Critical and public response ===


==
Music ==


===
Soundtracks ===


===
Singles ===


==
Other media ==


===
Video game ===
Lethal Weapon – Based on Lethal Weapon 3.
Released in 1992


==
References ==
The following is a list of modern Russian small arms and light weapons which were in service in 2016:


==
Handguns ==


=== Revolvers ===


===
Pistols ===


===
Special purpose ===


==
Submachine guns ==


===
Special purpose ===


==
Shotguns ==


== Rifles ==


===
Bolt-action ===


===
Semi-automatic ===


===
Selective-fire ===


===
Special purpose ===


===
Anti-materiel rifles ===


==
Machine guns ==


===
Squad automatic weapons (SAWs) ===
The following outline is provided as a topical overview of science:
Science is both the systematic effort of acquiring knowledge through observation, experimentation and reasoning, and the body of knowledge thus acquired.
The word "science" comes from the Latin word "scientia" meaning knowledge.
A practitioner of science is called a "scientist".
Modern science respects objective logical reasoning, and follows a set of core procedures or rules to determine the nature and underlying natural laws of the universe and everything in it.
Some scientists do not know of the rules themselves, but follow them through research policies.
These procedures are known as the scientific method.

==
Essence of science ==
Research – systematic investigation into existing or new knowledge.

Scientific discovery – observation of new phenomena, new actions, or new events and
providing new reasoning to explain the knowledge gathered through such observations with previously acquired knowledge from abstract thought and everyday experiences.

Laboratory – facility that provides controlled conditions in which scientific research, experiments, and measurement may be performed.

Objectivity – the idea that scientists, in attempting to uncover truths about the natural world, must aspire to eliminate personal or cognitive biases, a priori commitments, emotional involvement, etc.

Inquiry – any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem.
==
Scientific method ==
Scientific method
(outline) – body of techniques for investigating phenomena and acquiring new knowledge, as well as for correcting and integrating previous knowledge.
It is based on observable, empirical, measurable evidence, and subject to laws of reasoning, both deductive and inductive.

Empirical method –
Experimental method –
The steps involved to produce a reliable and logical conclusion include:
Conducting initial research and asking a question about a natural phenomenon
Making observations of the phenomenon
and/or collecting data about it
Forming a hypothesis – proposed explanation for a phenomenon.
For a hypothesis to be a scientific hypothesis, the scientific method requires that one can test it.
Scientists generally base scientific hypotheses on previous observations that cannot satisfactorily be explained with the available scientific theories.

Predicting a logical consequence of the hypothesis
Testing the hypothesis through an experiment – methodical procedure carried out with the goal of verifying, falsifying, or establishing the validity of a hypothesis.
The 3 types of scientific experiments are:
Controlled experiment – experiment that compares the results obtained from an experimental sample against a control sample, which is practically identical to the experimental sample except for the one aspect the effect of which is being tested (the independent variable).

Natural experiment – empirical study in which the experimental conditions (i.e., which units receive which treatment) are determined by nature or by other factors out of the control of the experimenters and yet the treatment assignment process is arguably exogenous.
Thus, natural experiments are observational studies and are not controlled in the traditional sense of a randomized experiment.

Observational study – draws inferences about the possible effect of a treatment on subjects, where the assignment of subjects into a treated group versus a control group is outside the control of the investigator.

Field experiment – applies the scientific method to experimentally examine an intervention in the real world (or as many experimentalists like to say, naturally occurring environments) rather than in the laboratory.

See also field research.

Gather and analyze data from experiments or observations, including indicators of uncertainty.

Draw conclusions by comparing data with predictions.

Possible outcomes:
Conclusive:
The hypothesis is falsified by the data.

Data are consistent with the hypothesis.

Data are consistent with alternative hypotheses.

Inconclusive:
Data are not relevant to the hypothesis, or data and predictions are incommensurate.

There is too much uncertainty in the data to draw any conclusion.

Further steps include peer review and enabling others to reproduce or falsify the observations and/or conclusions
Deductive-nomological model
Scientific modelling –
Models of scientific method
Hypothetico-deductive model – proposed description of scientific method.
According to it, scientific inquiry proceeds by formulating a hypothesis in a form that could conceivably be falsified by a test on observable data.
A test that could and does run contrary to predictions of the hypothesis is taken as a falsification of the hypothesis.
A test that could but does not run contrary to the hypothesis corroborates the theory.

==
Branches of science ==
Branches of science – divisions within science with respect to the entity or system concerned, which typically embodies its own terminology and nomenclature.
===
Formal science ===
Formal science – branches of knowledge that are concerned with formal systems, such as those under the branches of: logic, mathematics, computer science, statistics, and some aspects of linguistics.
Unlike other sciences, the formal sciences are not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the real world, but instead with the properties of formal systems based on definitions and rules.

Branches of formal science (also known as the formal sciences)


===
Natural science ===
Natural science
(outline) – major branch of science, that tries to explain and predict nature's phenomena, based on empirical evidence.
In natural science, hypotheses must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.
Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are among the criteria and methods used for this purpose.
Natural science can be broken into two main branches: biology, and physical science.
Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

Branches of natural science (also known as the natural sciences)


===
Social science ===
Social science – study of the social world constructed between humans.
The social sciences usually limit themselves to an anthropomorphically centric view of these interactions with minimal emphasis on the inadvertent impact of social human behavior on the external environment (physical, biological, ecological, etc.).
'
Social' is the concept of exchange/influence of ideas, thoughts, and relationship interactions (resulting in harmony, peace, self enrichment, favoritism, maliciousness, justice seeking, etc.)
between humans.
The scientific method is used in many social sciences, albeit adapted to the needs of the social construct being studied.

Branches of social science (also known as the social sciences)


===
Applied science ===
Applied science – branch of science that applies existing scientific knowledge to develop more practical applications, including inventions and other technological advancements.

Branches of applied science (also known as the applied sciences)


==
Types of scientific fields ==
Exact science – any field of science capable of accurate quantitative expression or precise predictions and rigorous methods of testing hypotheses, especially reproducible experiments involving quantifiable predictions and measurements.

Fundamental science – science that describes the most basic objects, forces, relations between them and laws governing them, such that all other phenomena may be in principle derived from them following the logic of scientific reductionism.

Hard and soft science –
colloquial terms often used when comparing scientific fields of academic research or scholarship, with hard meaning perceived as being more scientific, rigorous, or accurate.
==
Politics of science ==
Disruptive technology – innovation that helps create a new market and value network, and eventually goes on to disrupt an existing market and value network (over a few years or decades),
displacing an earlier technology.

Kansas evolution hearings – series of hearings held in Topeka, Kansas, United States 5 to 12 May 2005 by the Kansas State Board of Education and its State Board Science Hearing Committee to change how evolution and the origin of life would be taught in the state's public high school science classes.

List of books about the politics of science – list of books about the politics of science.

Politicization of science – politicization of science is the manipulation of science for political gain.

Science by press release – refers to scientists who put an unusual focus on publicizing results of research in the media.

==
History of science ==
History of science – history of science in general
History of scientific method – history of scientific method is a history of the methodology of scientific inquiry, as differentiated from a history of science in general.

Theories/sociology of science – sociology and philosophy of science, as well as the entire field of science studies, have in the 20th century been occupied with the question of large-scale patterns and trends in the development of science, and asking questions about how science "works" both in a philosophical and practical sense.

Historiography – study of the history and methodology of the sub-discipline of history, known as the history of science, including its disciplinary aspects and practices (methods, theories, schools) and to the study of its own historical development ("History of History of Science", i.e., the history of the discipline called History of Science).

History of pseudoscience – history of pseudoscience is the study of pseudoscientific theories over time.
A pseudoscience is a set of ideas that presents itself as science, while it does not meet the criteria to properly be called such.

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific thought – lists the major landmarks across all scientific philosophy and methodological sciences.

===
By period ===
History of science in early cultures – history of science in early cultures refers to the study of protoscience in ancient history, prior to the development of science in the Middle Ages.

History of science in Classical Antiquity – history of science in classical antiquity encompasses both those inquiries into the workings of the universe aimed at such practical goals as establishing a reliable calendar or determining how to cure a variety of illnesses and those abstract investigations known as natural philosophy.

History of science in the Middle Ages – Science in the Middle Ages comprised the study of nature, including practical disciplines, the mathematics and natural philosophy in medieval Europe.

History of science in the Renaissance – During the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, mathematics, manufacturing, and engineering.

Science and inventions of Leonardo da Vinci – Italian polymath, regarded as the epitome of the "Renaissance Man", displaying skills in numerous diverse areas of study.

Scientific revolution –
scientific revolution is an era associated primarily with the 16th and 17th centuries during which new ideas and knowledge in physics, astronomy, biology, medicine and chemistry transformed medieval and ancient views of nature and laid the foundations for modern science.

Governmental impact on science during WWII –
Governmental impact on science during World War II represents the effect of public administration on technological development that provided many advantages to the armed forces, economies and societies in their strategies during the war.

====
By date ====
List of years in science – events related to science or technology which occurred in the listed year
(current year in the box on the right).

Timeline of scientific discoveries – shows the date of publication of major scientific theories and discoveries, along with the discoverer.
In many cases, the discoveries spanned several years.

Timeline of scientific experiments – shows the date of publication of major scientific experiments.

Timeline of the history of the scientific method – shows an overview of the cultural inventions that have contributed to the development of the scientific method.

List of science timelines
– more timeline articles
===
By field ===
History of natural science – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural philosophy – study of nature and the physical universe that was dominant before the development of modern science.

Natural history – scientific research of plants or animals, leaning more towards observational rather than experimental methods of study, and encompasses more research published in magazines than in academic journals.

History of biology – traces the study of the living world from ancient to modern times.

History of ecology – history of the science of ecology.

History of molecular biology – begins in the 1930s with the convergence of various, previously distinct biological disciplines: biochemistry, genetics, microbiology, and virology.

History of astronomy –
Timeline
History of chemistry –
By 1000 BC, ancient civilizations used technologies that would eventually form the basis of the various branches of chemistry.

History of geography
History of geology –
Timeline
History of meteorology – Timeline
History of physics –
As forms of science historically developed out of philosophy, physics was originally referred to as natural philosophy, a field of study concerned with "the workings of nature."

History of science and technology
History of the social sciences – has origin in the common stock of Western philosophy and shares various precursors, but began most intentionally in the early 19th century with the positivist philosophy of science.

History of archaeology –
Timeline
History of cognitive science
History of criminal justice –
Throughout the history of criminal justice, evolving forms of punishment, added rights for offenders and victims, and policing reforms have reflected changing customs, political ideals, and economic conditions.

History of economics – study of different thinkers and theories in the subject that became political economy and economics from the ancient world to the present day.

History of education – development of systematic methods of teaching and learning.

History of law – study of how law has evolved and why it changed.

History of linguistics – endeavors to describe and explain the human faculty of language.

History of marketing – recognized discipline, along with concomitant changes in marketing theory and practice.

History of parapsychology
History of political science – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

History of psychology – Timeline
History of sociology –
Timeline


===
By region ===


====
History of science in present states, by continent ====
See –
Category:Science and technology by continent


====
History of science in historic states ====
Science and technology of the Han Dynasty
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire
Science and technology of the Song Dynasty
Science and technology in the Soviet Union
Science and technology of the Tang Dynasty


==
Philosophy of science ==
Philosophy of science – questions the assumptions, foundations, methods and implications of science.

Models of scientific inquiry


==
Adoption, use, results and coordination of science ==
Science and technology studies
Scientometrics
Altmetrics
Article-level metrics
Expert elicitation
Lists of science and technology awards
Research and development
Innovation
Science policy
Knowledge#Scientific
knowledge
Funding of science


==
Technology and mechanisms of science ==
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology
Laboratory automation
History of communication
Internet research
Scientific journal
Peer review
Metascience


== Scientific community ==
Scientific community – group of all interacting scientists.

===
Scientific organizations ===
Academy of Sciences – national academy or another learned society dedicated to sciences.

===
Scientists ===
Scientist – practitioner of science; an individual who uses scientific method to objectively inquire into the nature of reality—be it the fundamental laws of physics or how people behave.

There are many names for scientists, often named in relation to the job that they do.
One example of this is a biologist, a scientist who studies biology (the study of living organisms and their environments).

====
Types of scientist ====


=====
By field =====
The scientific fields mentioned below are generally described by the science they study.

Agricultural scientist – broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.

Archaeologist – study of human activity, primarily through the recovery and analysis of the material culture and environmental data that they have left behind, which includes artifacts, architecture, biofacts and cultural landscapes (the archaeological record).

Astronomer – astronomer is a scientist who studies celestial bodies such as planets, stars and galaxies.

Astrophysicist – branch of astronomy that deals with the physics of the universe, including the physical properties of celestial objects, as well as their interactions and behavior.

Biologist – scientist devoted to the study of living organisms and their relationship to their environment.

Astrobiologist – study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of extraterrestrial life.

Biophysicist – interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physical science to study biological systems.

Biotechnologist – field of applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Botanist – discipline of biology, is the science of plant life.

Cognitive scientists – scientific study of the mind and its processes.

Ecologist – scientific study of the relations that living organisms have with respect to each other and their natural environment.

Entomologist – scientific study of insects, a branch of arthropodology.

Evolutionary biologist – sub-field of biology concerned with the study of the evolutionary processes that have given rise to the diversity of life on Earth.

Geneticist – biologist who studies genetics, the science of genes, heredity, and variation of organisms.

Herpetologist – branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians (including frogs, toads, salamanders, newts, and gymnophiona) and reptiles (including snakes, lizards, amphibians, turtles, terrapins, tortoises, crocodiles, and the tarantulas).

Immunologist – branch of biomedical science that covers the study of all aspects of the immune system in all organisms.

Ichthyologist – study of fish.

Lepidopterist – person who specializes in the study of Lepidoptera, members of an order encompassing moths and the three superfamilies of butterflies, skipper butterflies, and moth-butterflies.

Marine biologist – scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water.

Medical scientist – basic research, applied research, or translational research conducted to aid and support the body of knowledge in the field of medicine.

Microbiologist – study of microscopic organisms.

Mycologist – branch of biology concerned with the study of fungi, including their genetic and biochemical properties, their taxonomy and their use to humans as a source for tinder, medicinals (e.g., penicillin), food (e.g., beer, wine, cheese, edible mushrooms) and entheogens, as well as their dangers, such as poisoning or infection.

Neuroscientist – individual who studies the scientific field of neuroscience or any of its related sub-fields.

Ornithologist – branch of zoology that concerns the study of birds.

Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life.

Pathologist – precise study and diagnosis of disease.

Pharmacologist – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

Physiologist – science of the function of living systems.

Zoologist – branch of biology that relates to the animal kingdom, including the structure, embryology, evolution, classification, habits, and distribution of all animals, both living and extinct.

Chemist – scientist trained in the study of chemistry.

Analytical chemist – study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

Biochemist – study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.

Inorganic chemist – branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

Organic chemist – subdiscipline within chemistry involving the scientific study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

Physical chemist – study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

Earth scientist – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.

Geologist – scientist who studies the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth as well as the processes and history that has shaped it.

Glaciologist – study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

Hydrologist – study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Limnologist – study of inland waters
Meteorologist – study of weather
Mineralogist – study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

Oceanographer – branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
Paleontologist – study of prehistoric life
Seismologist – scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies.

Volcanologist – study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

Informatician – science of information, the practice of information processing, and the engineering of information systems.

Computer scientist – scientist who has acquired knowledge of computer science, the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation
Library scientist – interdisciplinary or multidisciplinary field that applies the practices, perspectives, and tools of management, information technology, education, and other areas to libraries; the collection, organization, preservation, and dissemination of information resources; and the political economy of information.

Management scientist – study of advanced analytical methods to help make better decisions.

Mathematician – person with an extensive knowledge of mathematics, a field that has been informally defined as being concerned with numbers, data, collection, quantity, structure, space, and change.

Statistician – someone who works with theoretical or applied statistics.

Military scientist – process of translating national defense policy to produce military capability by employing military scientists, including theorists, researchers, experimental scientists, applied scientists, designers, engineers, test technicians, and military personnel responsible for prototyping.

Physicist – scientist who does research in physics
Psychologist – professional or academic title used by individuals who practice psychology
Abnormal psychologist – branch of psychology that studies unusual patterns of behavior, emotion and thought, which may or may not be understood as precipitating a mental disorder.

Educational psychologist – psychologist
whose differentiating functions may include diagnostic and psycho-educational assessment, psychological counseling in educational communities (students, teachers, parents and academic authorities), community-type psycho-educational intervention, and mediation, coordination, and referral to other professionals, at all levels of the educational system.

Biopsychologist – application of the principles of biology (in particular neurobiology), to the study of physiological, genetic, and developmental mechanisms of behavior in human and non-human animals.

Clinical psychologist – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Comparative psychologist – scientific study of the behavior and mental processes of non-human animals, especially as these relate to the phylogenetic history, adaptive significance, and development of behavior.

Cognitive psychologist – subdiscipline of psychology exploring internal mental processes.
It is the study of how people perceive, remember, think, speak, and solve problems.

Developmental psychologist – scientific study of systematic psychological changes, emotional changes, and perception changes that occur in human beings over the course of their life span.

Evolutionary psychologist – approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological traits such as memory, perception, and language from a modern evolutionary perspective.

Experimental psychologist – study of behavior and the processes that underlie it, by means of experiment
Neuropsychologist – studies the structure and function of the brain as they relate to specific psychological processes and behaviors.

Social psychologist – scientific study of how people's thoughts, feelings, and behaviors are influenced by the actual, imagined, or implied presence of others.

Social scientist –  field of study concerned with society and human behaviors.

Anthropologist – study of humanity.

Ethnologist – branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the origins, distribution, technology, religion, language, and social structure of the ethnic, racial, and/or national divisions of humanity.

Communication scientist – academic field that deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning.

Criminologist – study of criminal behavior
Demographer – statistical study of populations
Economist –
professional in the social science discipline of economics.

Geographer – geographer is a scholar whose area of study is geography, the study of Earth's natural environment and human society.

Political economist – study of production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.

Political scientist – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

Sociologist –
Technologist
Architectural technologist – specialist in the technology of building design and construction
Educational technologist – specialist in tools to enhance learning
Engineering technologist – specialist who implements technology within a field of engineering
Industrial technologist – specialist in the management, operation, and maintenance of complex operation systems
Medical Technologist – healthcare professional who performs diagnostic analysis on a variety of body fluids
Radiologic technologist – medical professional who applies doses of radiation for imaging and treatment
Surgical technologist – health specialist who facilitates the conduct of invasive surgical procedures
=====
By employment status =====
Academic – community of students and scholars engaged in higher education and research.

Corporate Scientist – someone who is employed by a business to do research and development for the benefit of that business
Layperson – someone who is not an expert or someone who has not had professional training
Gentleman scientist – financially independent scientist who pursues scientific study as a hobby.

Government scientist – scientist employed by a country's government


====
Famous scientists ====
Aristotle – Greek philosopher and polymath, a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great.

Archimedes – Greek mathematician, physicist, engineer, inventor, and astronomer.

Andreas Vesalius – Flemish anatomist, physician, and author of one of the most influential books on human anatomy, De humani corporis fabrica
(On the Structure of the Human Body).

Nicolaus Copernicus – Renaissance astronomer and the first person to formulate a comprehensive heliocentric cosmology which displaced the Earth from the center of the universe.

Galileo Galilei – Italian physicist, mathematician, astronomer, and philosopher who played a major role in the Scientific Revolution.

Johannes Kepler – German mathematician, astronomer and astrologer.
A key figure in the 17th century scientific revolution, he is best known for his eponymous laws of planetary motion, codified by later astronomers, based on his works Astronomia nova, Harmonices Mundi, and Epitome of Copernican Astronomy.

René Descartes – French philosopher, mathematician, and writer who spent most of his adult life in the Dutch Republic.

Isaac Newton – English physicist, mathematician, astronomer, natural philosopher, alchemist, and theologian, who has been "considered by many to be the greatest and most influential scientist who ever lived."

Leonhard Euler – pioneering Swiss mathematician and physicist.

Pierre-Simon Laplace – French mathematician and astronomer whose work was pivotal to the development of mathematical astronomy and statistics.

Alexander von Humboldt – German geographer, naturalist and explorer, and the younger brother of the Prussian minister, philosopher and linguist Wilhelm von Humboldt.

Charles Darwin – Charles Robert Darwin FRS (12 February 1809 - 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist.[I]
He established that all species of life have descended over time from common ancestors, and proposed the scientific theory that this branching pattern of evolution resulted from a process that he called natural selection.

James Clerk Maxwell – Scottish physicist and mathematician.

Marie Curie – Polish physicist and chemist famous for her pioneering research on radioactivity.

Albert Einstein – German-born theoretical physicist who developed the theory of general relativity, effecting a revolution in physics
Linus Pauling – American chemist, biochemist, peace activist, author, and educator.
He was one of the most influential chemists in history and ranks among the most important scientists of the 20th century.

John Bardeen – American physicist and electrical engineer, the only person to have won the Nobel Prize in Physics
twice
Frederick Sanger – English biochemist and a two-time Nobel laureate in chemistry, the only person to have been so.

Stephen Hawking – British theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author.

==
Science education ==
Science education

Scientific literacy – encompasses written, numerical, and digital literacy as they pertain to understanding science, its methodology, observations, and theories.
Pseudo-scholarship – is a work (e.g., publication, lecture) or body of work that is presented as, but is not, the product of rigorous and objective study or research; the act of producing such work; or the pretended learning upon which it is based.

Science communication


==
See also ==
Outline of academic disciplines
Sci-Mate – open collaboration of scientists using Web 2.0 software to address well known challenges in academic publishing and technology transfer
Science Daily – news website for topical science articles
Phys.org – news website for topical science articles with some public metrics
Science.tv – virtual community for people interested in science
Sci-Hub – Scientific research paper file sharing website
Science studies


=
=
References ==
The history of the Philippines from 1898 to 1946 describes the period of the American colonization of the Philippines.
It began with the outbreak of the Spanish–American War in April 1898, when the Philippines was still a colony of the Spanish East Indies, and concluded when the United States formally recognized the independence of the Republic of the Philippines on July 4, 1946.

With the signing of the Treaty of Paris on December 10, 1898, Spain ceded the Philippines to the United States, thereby beginning the era of American colonization.
The interim U.S. military government of the Philippine Islands experienced a period of great political turbulence, characterised by the Philippine–American War.

Beginning in 1901, the military government was replaced by a civilian government—the Insular Government of the Philippine Islands—with William Howard Taft serving as its first Governor-General.
A series of insurgent governments that lacked significant international and diplomatic recognition also existed between 1898 and 1904.Following the passage of the Philippine Independence Act in 1934, a Philippine presidential election was held in 1935.
Manuel L. Quezon was elected and inaugurated second President of the Philippines on November 15, 1935.
The Insular Government was dissolved and the Commonwealth of the Philippines, intended to be a transitional government in preparation for the country's full achievement of independence in 1946, was brought into existence.
After the World War II Japanese invasion in 1941 and subsequent occupation of the Philippines, the United States and Philippine Commonwealth military recaptured the Philippines in 1945.
The United States formally recognised the independence of the Republic of the Philippines on July 4, 1946, according to the terms of the Philippine Independence Act.

==
Historical perspective ==
The Philippine Revolution began in August 1896 and ended with the Pact of Biak-na-Bato, a ceasefire between the Spanish colonial Governor-General Fernando Primo de Rivera and the revolutionary leader Emilio Aguinaldo which was signed on December 15, 1897.
The terms of the pact called for Aguinaldo and his militia to surrender.
Other revolutionary leaders were given amnesty and a monetary indemnity by the Spanish government in return for which the rebel government agreed to go into exile in Hong Kong.

==
Spanish–American War (1898) ==
The failure of Spain to engage in active social reforms in Cuba as demanded by the United States government was the basic cause for the Spanish–American War.
American attention was focused on the issue after the mysterious explosion that sank the American battleship Maine on February 15, 1898 in Havana Harbor.
As public political pressure from the Democratic Party and certain industrialists built up for war, the U.S. Congress forced the reluctant Republican President William McKinley to issue an ultimatum to Spain on April 19, 1898.
Spain found it had no diplomatic support in Europe, but nevertheless declared war; the U.S. followed on April 25 with its own declaration of war.
Theodore Roosevelt, who was at that time Assistant Secretary of the Navy, ordered Commodore George Dewey, commanding the Asiatic Squadron of the United States Navy: "Order the squadron ...to Hong Kong.
Keep full of coal.
In the event of declaration of war Spain, your duty will be to see that the Spanish squadron does not leave the Asiatic coast, and then offensive operations in Philippine Islands.
"
Dewey's squadron departed on April 27 for the Philippines, reaching Manila Bay on the evening of April 30.
===
Battle of Manila Bay ===
The Battle of Manila Bay took place on May 1, 1898.
In a matter of hours, Commodore Dewey's Asiatic Squadron defeated the Spanish squadron under Admiral Patricio Montojo.
The U.S. squadron took control of the arsenal and navy yard at Cavite.
Dewey cabled Washington, stating that although he controlled Manila Bay, he needed 5,000 additional men to seize Manila itself.

===
U.S. preparation for land-based operations ===
The unexpected rapidity and completeness of Dewey's victory in the first engagement of the war prompted the McKinley administration to make the decision to capture Manila from the Spanish.
The United States Army began to assemble the Eighth Army Corps—a military unit which would consist of 10,844 soldiers under the command of Major General Wesley Merritt—in preparation for deployment to the Philippines.
While awaiting the arrival of troops from the Eighth Corps, Dewey dispatched the cutter USRC McCulloch to Hong Kong to transport Aguinaldo back to the Philippines.

Aguinaldo arrived on May 19 and, after a brief meeting with Dewey, resumed revolutionary activities against the Spanish.
On May 24, Aguinaldo issued a proclamation in which he assumed command of all Philippine forces and announced his intention to establish a dictatorial government with himself as dictator, saying that he would resign in favor of a duly elected president.
Public jubilation marked Aguinaldo's return.
Many Filipino enlisted men deserted local Spanish army units to join Aguinaldo's command and the Philippine Revolution against Spain resumed.
Soon, many cities such as Imus, Bacoor, Parañaque, Las Piñas, Morong, Macabebe and San Fernando, as well as some entire provinces such as Laguna, Batangas, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Bataan, Tayabas (now Quezon), and the Camarines provinces, were liberated by the Filipinos and the port of Dalahican in Cavite was secured.

The first contingent of American troops arrived on June 30 under the command of Brigadier General Thomas McArthur Anderson, commander of the Eighth Corps' 2nd Division (U.S. brigade and division numbers of the era were not unique throughout the army).
General Anderson wrote to Aguinaldo, requesting his cooperation in military operations against the Spanish forces.
Aguinaldo responded, thanking General Anderson for his amicable sentiments, but saying nothing about military cooperation.
General Anderson did not renew the request.
The 2nd Brigade and the 2nd Division of the Eighth Corps arrived on July 17, under the command of Brigadier General Francis V. Greene.
Major General Merritt (the Commander in Chief of the Philippine Expedition) and his staff arrived at Cavite on July 25.
The 1st Brigade of the corps' 2nd Division arrived on July 30, under the command of Brigadier General Arthur MacArthur.

===
Philippine declaration of independence ===
On June 12, 1898, Aguinaldo proclaimed the independence of the Philippines at his house in Cavite El Viejo.
Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista wrote the Philippine Declaration of Independence, and read this document in Spanish that day at Aguinaldo's house.
On June 18, Aguinaldo issued a decree formally establishing his dictatorial government.
On June 23, Aguinaldo issued another decree, this time replacing the dictatorial government with a revolutionary government (and naming himself as President).

Writing retrospectively in 1899, Aguinaldo claimed that an American naval officer had urged him to return to the Philippines to fight the Spanish and said "The United States is a great and rich nation and needs no colonies."
Aguinaldo also wrote that after checking with Dewey by telegraph, U.S. Consul E. Spencer Pratt had assured him in Singapore: That the United States would at least recognize the independence of the Philippines under the protection of the United States Navy.
The consul added that there was no necessity for entering into a formal written agreement because the word of the Admiral and of the United States Consul were in fact equivalent to the most solemn pledge that their verbal promises and assurance would be fulfilled to the letter and were not to be classed with Spanish promises or Spanish ideas of a man’s word of honour.

Aguinaldo received nothing in writing.

On April 28 Pratt wrote to United States Secretary of State William R. Day, explaining the details of his meeting with Aguinaldo: At this interview, after learning from General Aguinaldo the state of an object sought to be obtained by the present insurrectionary movement, which, though absent from the Philippines, he was still directing, I took it upon myself, whilst explaining that I had no authority to speak for the Government, to point out the danger of continuing independent action at this stage; and, having convinced him of the expediency of cooperating with our fleet, then at Hongkong, and obtained the assurance of his willingness to proceed thither and confer with Commodore Dewey to that end, should the latter so desire, I telegraphed the Commodore the same day as follows, through our consul-general at Hongkong:--
There was no mention in the cablegrams between Pratt and Dewey of independence or indeed of any conditions on which Aguinaldo was to cooperate, these details being left for future arrangement with Dewey.
Pratt had intended to facilitate the occupation and administration of the Philippines, and also to prevent a possible conflict of action.
In a communication written on July 28, Pratt made the following statement: I declined even to discuss with General Aguinaldo the question of the future policy of the United States with regard to the Philippines, that I held out no hopes to him of any kind, committed the government in no way
whatever, and, in the course of our confidences, never acted upon the assumption that the Government would cooperate with him—General Aguinaldo—for the furtherance of any plans of his own, nor that, in accepting his said cooperation, it would consider itself pledged to recognize any political claims which he might put forward.

On June 16, Secretary Day cabled Consul Pratt: "
Avoid unauthorized negotiations with the Philippine insurgents," and later on the same day: The Department observes that you informed General Aguinaldo that you had no authority to speak for the United States; and, in the absence of the fuller report which you promise, it is assumed that you did not attempt to commit this Government to any alliance with the Philippine insurgents.
To obtain the unconditional personal assistance of General Aguinaldo in the expedition to Manila was proper, if in so doing he was not induced to form hopes which it might not be practicable to gratify.
This Government has known the Philippine insurgents only as discontented and rebellious subjects of Spain, and is not acquainted with their purposes.
While their contest with that power has been a matter of public notoriety, they have neither asked nor received from this Government any recognition.
The United States, in entering upon the occupation of the islands, as the result of its military operations in that quarter, will do so in the exercise of the rights which the state of war confers, and will expect from the inhabitants, without regard to their former attitude toward the Spanish Government, that obedience which will be lawfully due from them.

If, in the course of your conferences with General Aguinaldo, you acted upon the assumption that this Government would co-operate with him for the furtherance of any plan of his own, or that, in accepting his co-operation, it would consider itself pledged to recognize any political claims which he may put forward, your action was unauthorized and can not be approved.

Filipino scholar Maximo Kalaw wrote in 1927: "A few of the principal facts, however, seem quite clear.
Aguinaldo was not made to understand that, in consideration of Filipino cooperation, the United States would extend its sovereignty over the Islands, and thus in place of the old Spanish master a new one would step in.
The truth was that nobody at the time ever thought that the end of the war would result in the retention of the Philippines by the United States."
===
Tensions between U.S. and revolutionary forces ===
On July 9 General Anderson informed Major General Henry Clark Corbin, the Adjutant General of the U.S. Army, that Aguinaldo "has declared himself Dictator and President, and is trying to take Manila without our assistance", opining that that would not be probable but, if done, would allow him to antagonize any U.S. attempt to establish a provisional government.
On July 15, Aguinaldo issued three organic decrees assuming civil authority of the Philippines.

On July 18, General Anderson wrote that he suspected Aguinaldo to be secretly negotiating with the Spanish authorities.
In a July 21 letter to the Adjutant General, General Anderson wrote that Aguinaldo had "put in operation an elaborate system of military government, under his assumed authority as Dictator, and has prohibited any supplies being given us, except by his order," and that Anderson had written to Aguinaldo that the requisitions on the country for necessary items must be filled, and that he must aid in having them filled.

On July 24, Aguinaldo wrote a letter to General Anderson in effect warning him not to disembark American troops in places conquered by the Filipinos from the Spaniards without first communicating in writing the places to be occupied and the object of the occupation.
Murat Halstead, official historian of the Philippine Expedition, writes that General Merritt remarked shortly after his arrival on June 25, As General Aguinaldo did not visit me on my arrival, nor offer his services as a subordinate military leader, and as my instructions from the President fully contemplated the occupation of the islands by the American land forces, and stated that 'the powers of the military occupant are absolute and supreme and immediately operate upon the political condition of the inhabitants,' I did not consider it wise to hold any direct communication with the insurgent leader until I should be in possession of the city of Manila, especially as I would not until then be in a position to issue a proclamation and enforce my authority, in the event that his pretensions should clash with my designs.

U.S. commanders suspected that Aguinaldo and his forces were informing the Spanish of American movements.
U.S. Army Major John R. M. Taylor later wrote, after translating and analyzing insurgent documents,
The officers of the United States Army who believed that the insurgents were informing the Spaniards of the American movements were right.
Sastrón has printed a letter from Pío del Pilar, dated July 30, to the Spanish officer commanding at Santa Ana, in which Pilar said that Aguinaldo had told him that the Americans would attack the Spanish lines on August 2 and advised that the Spaniards should not give way, but hold their positions.
Pilar added, however, that if the Spaniards should fall back on the walled city and surrender Santa Ana to himself, he would hold it with his own men.
Aguinaldo's information was correct, and on August 2 eight American soldiers were killed or wounded by the Spanish fire.

On the evening of August 12, on orders of General Merritt, General Anderson notified Aguinaldo to forbid the insurgents under his command from entering Manila.
On August 13, unaware of the peace protocol signing, U.S. forces assaulted and captured the Spanish positions in Manila.
Insurgents made an independent attack of their own, as planned, which promptly led to trouble with the Americans.
At 0800 that morning, Aguinaldo received a telegram from General Anderson, sternly warning him not to let his troops enter Manila without the consent of the American commander, who was situated on the south side of the Pasig River.
General Anderson's request was ignored, and Aguinaldo's forces crowded forward alongside the American forces until they directly confronted the Spanish troops.
Although the Spanish were waving a flag of truce, the insurgents fired on the Spanish forces, provoking return fire.
19 American soldiers were killed, and 103 more were wounded in this action.

General Anderson sent Aguinaldo a telegram, later that day, which read:Dated Ermita Headquarters 2nd Division 13 to Gen. Aguinaldo.
Commanding Filipino Forces.--Manila, taken.
Serious trouble threatened between our forces.
Try and prevent it.
Your troops should not force themselves in the city until we have received the full surrender then we will negotiate with you.
-Anderson, commanding.

Aguinaldo however demanded joint occupation of Manila.
On August 13 Admiral Dewey and General Merritt informed their superiors of this and asked how far they might proceed in enforcing obedience in the matter.

General Merritt received news of the August 12 peace protocol on August 16, three days after the surrender of Manila.
Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were informed by a telegram dated August 17 that the President of the United States had directed: That there must be no joint occupation with the Insurgents.
The United States in the possession of Manila city, Manila bay and harbor must preserve the peace and protect persons and property within the territory occupied by their military and naval forces.
The insurgents and all others must recognize the military occupation and authority of the United States and the cessation of hostilities proclaimed by the President.
Use whatever means in your judgment are necessary to this end.

Insurgent forces were looting the portions of the city which they occupied, and were not confining their attacks to Spaniards, but were assaulting their own people and raiding the property of foreigners as well.
U.S. commanders pressed Aguinaldo to withdraw his forces from Manila.
Negotiations proceeded slowly and, on August 31, General Elwell Otis (General Merritt being unavailable) wrote, in a long letter to Aguinaldo: ...
I am compelled by my instructions to direct that your armed forces evacuate the entire city of Manila, including its suburbs and defences, and that I shall be obliged to take action with that end in view within a very short space of time
should you decline to comply with my Government's demands; and I hereby serve notice on you that unless your troops are withdrawn beyond the line of the city's defences before Thursday, the 15th instant, I shall be obliged to resort to forcible action, and that my Government will hold you responsible for any unfortunate consequences which may ensue.

After further negotiation and exchanges of letters, Aguinaldo wrote on September 16: "On the evening of the 15th the armed insurgent organizations withdrew from the city and all of its suburbs, ...


===
Peace protocol between the U.S. and Spain ===
On August 12, 1898, The New York Times reported that a peace protocol had been signed in Washington that afternoon between the U.S. and Spain, suspending hostilities between the two nations.
The full text of the protocol was not made public until November 5, but Article III read: "The United States will occupy and hold the City, Bay, and Harbor of Manila, pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace, which shall determine the control, disposition, and government of the Philippines."
After conclusion of this agreement, U.S. President McKinley proclaimed a suspension of hostilities with Spain.

===
Capture of Manila ===
By June, U.S. and Filipino forces had taken control of most of the islands, except for the walled city of Intramuros.
Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were able to work out a bloodless solution with acting Governor-General Fermín Jáudenes.
The negotiating parties made a secret agreement to stage a mock battle in which the Spanish forces would be defeated by the American forces, but the Filipino forces would not be allowed to enter the city.
This plan minimized the risk of unnecessary casualties on all sides, while the Spanish would also avoid the shame of possibly having to surrender Intramuros to the Filipino forces.
On the eve of the mock battle, General Anderson telegraphed Aguinaldo, "Do not let your troops enter Manila without the permission of the American commander.
On this side of the Pasig River you will be under fire".
On August 13, with American commanders unaware that a ceasefire had already been signed between Spain and the U.S. on the previous day, American forces captured the city of Manila from the Spanish in the Battle of Manila.
The battle started when Dewey's ships bombarded Fort San Antonio Abad, a decrepit structure on the southern outskirts of Manila, and the virtually impregnable walls of Intramuros.
In accordance with the plan, the Spanish forces withdrew while U.S. forces advanced.
Once a sufficient show of battle had been made, Dewey hoisted the signal "D.W.H.B." (meaning "Do you surrender?),
whereupon the Spanish hoisted a white flag and Manila was formally surrendered to U.S. forces.
This battle marked the end of Filipino-American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos.
This later led to the Philippine–American War, which would prove to be more deadly and costly than the Spanish–American War.

===
U.S. military government ===
On August 14, 1898, two days after the capture of Manila, the U.S. established a military government in the Philippines, with General Merritt acting as military governor.
During military rule (1898–1902), the U.S. military commander governed the Philippines under the authority of the U.S. president as Commander-in-Chief of the United States Armed Forces.
After the appointment of a civil Governor-General, the procedure developed that as parts of the country were pacified and placed firmly under American control, responsibility for the area would be passed to the civilian.

General Merritt was succeeded by General Otis as military governor, who in turn was succeeded by General MacArthur.
Major General Adna Chaffee was the final military governor.
The position of military governor was abolished in July 1902, after which the civil Governor-General became the sole executive authority in the Philippines.
Under the military government, an American-style school system was introduced, initially with soldiers as teachers; civil and criminal courts were reestablished, including a supreme court; and local governments were established in towns and provinces.
The first local election was conducted by General Harold W. Lawton on May 7, 1899, in Baliuag, Bulacan.

===
U.S. and insurgents clash ===
In a clash at Cavite between United States soldiers and insurgents on August 25, 1898, George Hudson of the Utah regiment was killed, Corporal William Anderson was mortally wounded, and four troopers of the Fourth Cavalry were slightly wounded.
This provoked General Anderson to send Aguinaldo a letter saying, "In order to avoid the very serious misfortune of an encounter between our troops, I demand your immediate withdrawal with your guard from Cavite.
One of my men has been killed and three wounded by your people.
This is positive and does not admit of explanation or delay."
Internal insurgent communications reported that the Americans were drunk at the time.
Halstead writes that Aguinaldo expressed his regret and promised to punish the offenders.
In internal insurgent communications, Apolinario Mabini initially proposed to investigate and punish any offenders identified.
Aguinaldo modified this, ordering, "... say that he was not killed by your soldiers, but by them themselves [the Americans] since they were drunk according to your telegram".
An insurgent officer in Cavite at the time reported on his record of services that he: "took part in the movement against the Americans on the afternoon of the 24th of August, under the orders of the commander of the troops and the adjutant of the post."
===
Philippine elections, Malolos Congress, Constitutional government ===
Elections were held by the Revolutionary Government between June and September 10, resulting in the seating of a legislature known as the Malolos Congress.
In a session between September 15 and November 13, 1898, the Malolos Constitution was adopted.
It was promulgated on January 21, 1899,
creating the First Philippine Republic with Emilio Aguinaldo as president.
===
Spanish–
American War ends ===
Article V of the peace protocol signed on August 12 had mandated negotiations to conclude a treaty of peace to begin in Paris not later than October 1, 1898.
President McKinley sent a five-man commission, initially instructed to demand no more than Luzon, Guam, and Puerto Rico; which would have provided a limited U.S. empire of pinpoint colonies to support a global fleet and provide communication links.
In Paris, the commission was besieged with advice, particularly from American generals and European diplomats, to demand the entire Philippine archipelago.
The unanimous recommendation was that "it would certainly be cheaper and more humane to take the entire Philippines than to keep only part of it."
On October 28, 1898, McKinley wired the commission that "cessation of Luzon alone, leaving the rest of the islands subject to Spanish rule, or to be the subject of future contention, cannot be justified on political, commercial, or humanitarian grounds.
The cessation must be the whole archipeligo or none.
The latter is wholly inadmissible, and the former must therefore be required.
"
The Spanish negotiators were furious over the "immodist demands of a conqueror", but their wounded pride was assuaged by an offer of twenty million dollars for "Spanish improvements" to the islands.
The Spaniards capitulated, and on December 10, 1898, the U.S. and Spain signed the Treaty of Paris, formally ending the Spanish–American War.
In Article III, Spain ceded the Philippine archipelago to the United States, as follows: "Spain cedes to the United States the archipelago known as the Philippine Islands, and comprehending the islands lying within the following line: [... geographic description elided ...].
The United States will pay to Spain the sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) within three months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty."

In the U.S., there was a movement for Philippine independence; some said that the U.S. had no right to a land where many of the people wanted self-government.
In 1898 Andrew Carnegie, an industrialist and steel magnate, offered to pay the U.S. government $20 million to give the Philippines its independence.
On November 7, 1900, Spain and the U.S. signed the Treaty of Washington, clarifying that the territories relinquished by Spain to the United States included any and all islands belonging to the Philippine Archipelago, but lying outside the lines described in the Treaty of Paris.
That treaty explicitly named the islands of Cagayan Sulu and Sibutu and their dependencies as among the relinquished territories.

===
Benevolent assimilation ===
U.S. President McKinley's December 21, 1898 proclamation of Benevolent Assimilation was announced in the Philippines on January 4, 1899.
Referring to the Treaty of Paris, it said that as a result of the victories of American arms, the future control, disposition, and government of the Philippine Islands are ceded to the United States.
It enjoined the military commander (General Otis) to make known to the inhabitants of the Philippine Islands that in succeeding to the sovereignty of Spain, the authority of the United States is to be exerted for the securing of the persons and property of the people of the islands and for the confirmation of all their private rights and relations.
It specified that it will be the duty of the commander of the forces of occupation to announce and proclaim in the most public manner that we come, not as invaders or conquerors, but as friends, to protect the natives in their homes, in their employments, and in their personal and religious rights.
On January 6, 1899, General Otis was quoted in The New York Times as expressing himself as convinced that the U.S. government intends to seek the establishment of a liberal government, in which the people will be as fully represented as the maintenance of law and order will permit, susceptible of development, on lines of increased representation, and the bestowal of increased powers, into a government as free and independent as is enjoyed by the most favored provinces in the world.

==
Philippine–American War (1899–1902) ==


===
Tensions escalate ===
The Spanish had yielded Iloilo to the insurgents in 1898 for the purpose of troubling the Americans.
On January 1, 1899, news had come to Washington from Manila that American forces which had been sent to Iloilo under the command of General Marcus Miller had been confronted by 6,000 armed Filipinos, who refused them permission to land.
A Filipino official styling himself "Presidente Lopez of the Federal Government of the Visayas" informed Miller that "foreign troops" would not land "without express orders from the central government of Luzon".
On December 21, 1898, President McKinley issued a Proclamation of Benevolent Assimilation.
General Otis delayed its publication until January 4, 1899, then publishing an amended version edited so as not to convey the meanings of the terms "sovereignty", "protection", and "right of cessation" which were present in the unabridged version.
Unknown to Otis, the War Department had also sent an enciphered copy of the Benevolent Assimilation proclamation to General Marcus Miller in Iloilo for informational purposes.
Miller assumed that it was for distribution and, unaware that a politically bowdlerized version had been sent to Aguinaldo, published it in both Spanish and Tagalog translations which eventually made their way to Aguinaldo.
Even before Aguinaldo received the unaltered version and observed the changes in the copy he had received from Otis, he was upset that Otis had altered his own title to "Military Governor of the Philippines" from "... in the Philippines".
Aguinaldo did not miss the significance of the alteration, which Otis had made without authorization from Washington.

On January 5, Aguinaldo issued a counter-proclamation summarizing what he saw as American violations of the ethics of friendship, particularly as regards the events in Iloilo.
The proclamation concluded as follows:

Such procedures, so foreign to the dictates of culture and the usages observed by civilized nations, gave me the right to act without observing the usual rules of intercourse.
Nevertheless, in order to be correct to the end, I sent to General Otis commissioners charged to solicit him to desist from his rash enterprise, but they were not listened to.

My government can not remain indifferent in view of such a violent and aggressive seizure of a portion of its territory by a nation which arrogated to itself the title champion of oppressed nations.
Thus it is that my government is disposed to open hostilities if the American troops attempt to take forcible possession of the Visayan Islands.
I denounce these acts before the world, in order that the conscience of mankind may pronounce its infallable verdict as to who are the true oppressors of nations and the tormentors of human kind.

After some copies of that proclamation had been distributed, Aguinaldo ordered the recall of undistributed copies and issued another proclamation, which was published the same day in El Heraldo de la Revolucion, the official newspaper of the Philippine Republic.
There, he said partly,

As in General Otis's proclamation he alluded to some instructions edited by His Excellency the President of the United States, referring to the administration of the matters in the Philippine Islands, I in the name of God, the root and fountain of all justice, and that of all the right which has been visibly granted to me to direct my dear brothers in the difficult work of our regeneration, protest most solemnly against this intrusion of the United States Government on the sovereignty of these islands.

I equally protest in the name of the Filipino people against the said intrusion, because as they have granted their vote of confidence appointing me president of the nation, although I don't consider that I deserve such, therefore I consider it my duty to defend to death its liberty and independence.

Otis, taking these two proclamations as a call to arms, strengthened American observation posts and alerted his troops.
In the tense atmosphere, some 40,000 Filipinos fled Manila within a period of 15 days.
Meanwhile, Felipe Agoncillo, who had been commissioned by the Philippine Revolutionary Government as Minister Plenipotentiary to negotiate treaties with foreign governments, and who had unsuccessfully sought to be seated at the negotiations between the U.S. and Spain in Paris, was now in Washington.
On January 6, he filed a request for an interview with the President to discuss affairs in the Philippines.
The next day the government officials were surprised to learn that messages to General Otis to deal mildly with the rebels and not to force a conflict had become known to Agoncillo, and cabled by him to Aguinaldo.
At the same time came Aguinaldo's protest against General Otis signing himself "Military Governor of the Philippines".
On January 8, Agoncillo gave out this statement:
In my opinion the Filipino people, whom I represent, will never consent to become a colony dependency of the United States.
The soldiers of the Filipino army have pledged their lives that they will not lay down their arms until General Aguinaldo tells them to do so, and they will keep that pledge
, I feel confident.

The Filipino committees in London, Paris and Madrid about this time telegraphed to President McKinley as follows:
We protest against the disembarkation of American troops at Iloilo.
The treaty of peace still unratified, the American claim to sovereignty is premature.
Pray reconsider the resolution regarding Iloilo.
Filipinos wish for the friendship of America and abhor militarism and deceit.

On January 8, Aguinaldo received the following message from Teodoro Sandiko:

To the President of the Revolutionary Government, Malolos, from Sandico, Manila.
8 Jan., 1899, 9.40 p.m..:
In consequence of the order of General Rios to his officers, as soon as the Filipino attack begins the Americans should be driven into the Intramuros district and the walled city should be set on fire.
Pipi.

The New York Times reported on January 8, that two Americans who had been guarding a waterboat in Iloilo had been attacked, one fatally, and that insurgents were threatening to destroy the business section of the city by fire; and on January 10 that a peaceful solution to the Iloilo issues may result but that Aguinaldo had issued a proclamation threatening to drive the Americans from the islands.

By January 10, insurgents were ready to assume the offensive, but desired, if possible, to provoke the Americans into firing the first shot.
They made no secret of their desire for conflict, but increased their hostile demonstrations and pushed their lines forward into forbidden territory.
Their attitude is well illustrated by the following extract from a telegram sent by Colonel Cailles to Aguinaldo on January 10, 1899:
Most urgent.
An American interpreter has come to tell me to withdraw our forces in Maytubig fifty paces.
I shall not draw back a step, and in place of withdrawing, I shall advance a little farther.
He brings a letter from his general, in which he speaks to me as a friend.
I said that from the day I knew that Maquinley (McKinley) opposed our independence
I did not want any dealings with any American.
War, war, is what we want.
The Americans after this speech went off pale.

Aguinaldo approved the hostile attitude of Cailles, for there is a reply in his handwriting which reads:
I approve and applaud what you have done with the Americans, and zeal and valour always, also my beloved officers and soldiers there.
I believe that they are playing us until the arrival of their reinforcements, but I shall send an ultimatum and remain always on the alert.--E. A. Jan. 10, 1899.

On January 31, 1899, The Minister of Interior of the revolutionary First Philippine Republic, Teodoro Sandiko, signed a decree saying that President Aguinaldo had directed that all idle lands be planted to provide food for the people, in view of impending war with the Americans.

=== Outbreak of general hostilities ===
Worcester writes that General Otis' account of the opening of active hostilities was as follows:
On the night of February 2 they sent in a strong detachment to draw the fire of our outposts, which took up a position immediately in front and within a few yards of the same.
The outpost was strengthened by a few of our men, who silently bore their taunts and abuse the entire night.
This was reported to me by General MacArthur, whom I directed to communicate with the officer in command of the insurgent troops concerned.
His prepared letter was shown me and approved, and the reply received was all that could be desired.
However, the agreement was ignored by the insurgents and on the evening of February 4 another demonstration was made on one of our small outposts, which occupied a retired position at least 150 yards within the line which had been mutually agreed upon, an insurgent approaching the picket and refusing to halt or answer when challenged.
The result was that our picket discharged his piece, when the insurgent troops near Santa Mesa opened a spirited fire on our troops there stationed.

The insurgents had thus succeeded in drawing the fire of a small outpost, which they had evidently labored with all their ingenuity to accomplish, in order to justify in some way their premeditated attack.
It is not believed that the chief insurgent leaders wished to open hostilities at this time, as they were not completely prepared to assume the initiative.
They desired two or three days more to perfect their arrangements, but the zeal of their army brought on the crisis which anticipated their premeditated action.
They could not have delayed long, however, for it was their object to force an issue before American troops, then en route, could arrive in Manila.

Thus began the Insurgent attack, so long and so carefully planned for.
We learn from the Insurgent records that the shot of the American sentry missed its mark.
There was no reason why it should have provoked a hot return fire, but it did.

The result of the ensuing combat was not at all what the Insurgents had anticipated.
The Americans did not drive very well.
It was but a short time before they themselves were routed and driven from their positions.

Aguinaldo of course promptly advanced the claim that his troops had been wantonly attacked.
The plain fact is that the Insurgent patrol in question deliberately drew the fire of the American sentry, and this was just as much an act of war as was the firing of the shot.
Whether the patrol was acting under proper orders from higher authority is not definitely known.

Other sources name the two specific U.S. soldiers involved in the first exchange of fire as Privates William Grayson and Orville Miller of the Nebraska Volunteers.
Subsequent to the conclusion of the war, after analyzing captured insurgent papers, Major Major J. R. M. Taylor wrote, in part,

An attack on the United States forces was planned which should annihilate the little army in Manila, and delegations were appointed to secure the interference of foreign powers.
The protecting cloak of pretense of friendliness to the United States was to be kept up until the last.
While commissioners were appointed to negotiate with General Otis, secret societies were organized in Manila pledged to obey orders of the most barbarous character to kill and burn.
The attack from without and the attack from within was to be on a set day and hour.
The strained situation could not last.
The spark was applied, either inadvertently or by design, on the 4th of February by an insurgent, willfully transgressing upon what, by their own admission, was within the agreed limits of the holding of the American troops.
Hostilities resulted and the war was an accomplished fact.

===
War ===
On February 4, Aguinaldo declared "That peace and friendly relations with the Americans be broken and that the latter be treated as enemies, within the limits prescribed by the laws of war."
On June 2, 1899, the First Philippine Republic issued a declaration of war on the United States, which was publicly proclaimed on that same day by Pedro Paterno, President of the Assembly.
As before when fighting the Spanish, the Filipino rebels did not do well in the field.
Aguinaldo and his provisional government escaped after the capture of Malolos on March 31, 1899 and were driven into northern Luzon.
Peace feelers from members of Aguinaldo's cabinet failed in May when the American commander, General Ewell Otis, demanded an unconditional surrender.
In 1901, Aguinaldo was captured and swore allegiance to the United States, marking one end to the war.

===
First Philippine Commission ===
President McKinley had appointed a five-person group headed by Dr. Jacob Schurman, president of Cornell University, on January 20, 1899, to investigate conditions in the islands and make recommendations.

The three civilian members of the Philippine Commission arrived in Manila on March 4, 1899, a month after the Battle of Manila which had begun armed conflict between U.S. and revolutionary Filipino forces.
The commission published a proclamation containing assurances that the U.S. "... is anxious to establish in the Philippine Islands an enlightened system of government under which the Philippine people may enjoy the largest measure of home rule and the amplest liberty."

After meetings in April with revolutionary representatives, the commission requested authorization from McKinley to offer a specific plan.
McKinley authorized an offer of a government consisting of "a Governor-General appointed by the President; cabinet appointed by the Governor-General; [and] a general advisory council elected by the people."
The Revolutionary Congress voted unanimously to cease fighting and accept peace and, on May 8, the revolutionary cabinet headed by Apolinario Mabini was replaced by a new "peace" cabinet headed by Pedro Paterno.
At this point, General Antonio Luna arrested Paterno and most of his cabinet, returning Mabini and his cabinet to power.
After this, the commission concluded that "... The Filipinos are wholly unprepared for independence ...
there being no Philippine nation, but only a collection of different peoples.
"In
the report that they issued to the president the following year
, the commissioners acknowledged Filipino aspirations for independence; they declared, however, that the Philippines was not ready for it.

On November 2, 1899, The commission issued a preliminary report containing the following statement: Should our power by any fatality be withdrawn, the commission believe that the government of the Philippines would speedily lapse into anarchy, which would excuse, if it did not necessitate, the intervention of other powers and the eventual division of the islands among them.
Only through American occupation, therefore, is the idea of a free, self-governing, and united Philippine commonwealth at all conceivable.
And the indispensable need from the Filipino point of view of maintaining American sovereignty over the archipelago is recognized by all intelligent Filipinos and even by those insurgents who desire an American protectorate.
The latter, it is true, would take the revenues and leave us the responsibilities.
Nevertheless, they recognize the indubitable fact that the Filipinos cannot stand alone.
Thus the welfare of the Filipinos coincides with the dictates of national honour in forbidding our abandonment of the archipelago.
We cannot from any point of
view escape the responsibilities of government which our sovereignty entails; and
the commission is strongly persuaded that the performance of our national duty will prove the greatest blessing to the peoples of the Philippine Islands.

Specific recommendations included the establishment of civilian government as rapidly as possible (the American chief executive in the islands at that time was the military governor), including establishment of a bicameral legislature, autonomous governments on the provincial and municipal levels, and a system of free public elementary schools.

===
Second Philippine Commission ===
The Second Philippine Commission (the Taft Commission), appointed by McKinley on March 16, 1900, and headed by William Howard Taft, was granted legislative as well as limited executive powers.
On September 1, the Taft Commission began to exercise legislative functions.
Between September 1900 and August 1902, it issued 499 laws, established a judicial system, including a supreme court, drew up a legal code, and organized a civil service.
The 1901 municipal code provided for popularly elected presidents, vice presidents, and councilors to serve on municipal boards.
The municipal board members were responsible for collecting taxes, maintaining municipal properties, and undertaking necessary construction projects; they also elected provincial governors.

===
Establishment of civil government ===
On March 3, 1901 the U.S.
Congress passed the Army Appropriation Act containing (along with the Platt Amendment on Cuba)
the Spooner Amendment which provided the President with legislative authority to establish of a civil government in the Philippines.
Up until this time, the President been administering the Philippines by virtue of his war powers.
On July 1, 1901, civil government was inaugurated with William H. Taft as the Civil Governor.
Later, on February 3, 1903, the U.S. Congress would change the title of Civil Governor to Governor-General.
A highly centralized public school system was installed in 1901, using English as the medium of instruction.
This created a heavy shortage of teachers, and the Philippine Commission authorized the Secretary of Public Instruction to bring to the Philippines 600 teachers from the U.S.A. — the so-called Thomasites.
Free primary instruction that trained the people for the duties of citizenship and avocation was enforced by the Taft Commission per instructions of President McKinley.
Also, the Catholic Church was disestablished, and a considerable amount of church land was purchased and redistributed.

An anti-sedition law was established in 1901, followed by a anti-brigandage law in 1902.
===
Official end to the war ===
The Philippine Organic Act of July 1902 approved, ratified, and confirmed McKinley's Executive Order establishing the Philippine Commission, and also stipulated that the bicameral Philippine Legislature would be established composed of an elected lower house, the Philippine Assembly and the appointed Philippine Commission as the upper house.
The act also provided for extending the United States Bill of Rights to the Philippines.
On July 2, 1902 the Secretary of War telegraphed that the insurrection against the sovereign authority of the U.S. having come to an end, and provincial civil governments having been established, the office of Military Governor was terminated.
On July 4, Theodore Roosevelt, who had succeeded to the U.S. Presidency after the assassination of President McKinley on September 5, 1901 proclaimed a full and complete pardon and amnesty to all persons in the Philippine archipelago who had participated in the conflict.
An estimated 250,000 to 1 million civilians died during the war, mostly due to famine and disease.
On April 9, 2002, Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo proclaimed that the Philippine–American War had ended on April 16, 1902 with the surrender of General Miguel Malvar, and declared the centennial anniversary of that date as a national working holiday and as a special non-working holiday in the Province of Batangas and in the Cities of Batangas, Lipa and Tanaun.
The Kiram-Bates Treaty secured the Sultanate of Sulu.
American forces also established control over interior mountainous areas that had resisted Spanish conquest.

===
Post-1902 hostilities ===
Some sources have suggested that the war unofficially continued for nearly a decade, since bands of guerrillas, quasi-religious armed groups and other resistance groups continued to roam the countryside, still clashing with American Army or Philippine Constabulary patrols.
American troops and the Philippine Constabulary continued hostilities against such resistance groups until 1913.
Some of this resistance was from a claimed successor to the Philippines Republic.
A 1907 law prohibited the display of flags and other symbols "used during the late insurrection in the Philippine Islands".
Some historians consider these unofficial extensions to be part of the war.

==
US colonization:
the "Insular Government" (1900–1935) ==
The 1902 Philippine Organic Act was a constitution for the Insular Government, as the U.S. colonial administration was known.
This was a form of territorial government that reported to the Bureau of Insular Affairs.
The act provided for a Governor-General appointed by the U.S. president and an elected lower house, the Philippine Assembly.
It also disestablished the Catholic Church as the state religion.
The United States government, in an effort to resolve the status of the friars, negotiated with the Vatican.
The church agreed to sell the friars' estates and promised gradual substitution of Filipino and other non-Spanish priests for the friars.
It refused, however, to withdraw the religious orders from the islands immediately, partly to avoid offending Spain.
In 1904 the administration bought for $7.2 million the major part of the friars' holdings, amounting to some 166,000 hectares (410,000 acres), of which one-half was in the vicinity of Manila.
The land was eventually resold to Filipinos, some of them tenants but the majority of them estate owners.

In socio-economic terms, the Philippines made solid progress in this period.
The 1909 U.S. Payne–Aldrich Tariff Act provided for free trade with the Philippines.
Foreign trade had amounted to 62 million pesos in 1895, 13% of which was with the United States.
By 1920, it had increased to 601 million pesos, 66% of which was with the United States.
A health care system was established which, by 1930, reduced the mortality rate from all causes, including various tropical diseases, to a level similar to that of the United States itself.
The practices of slavery, piracy and headhunting were suppressed but not entirely extinguished.
Cultural developments strengthened the continuing development of a national identity, and Tagalog began to take precedence over other local languages.

Two years after completion and publication of a census, a general election was conducted for the choice of delegates to a popular assembly.
An elected Philippine Assembly was convened in 1907 as the lower house of a bicameral legislature, with the Philippine Commission as the upper house.

Every year from 1907 the Philippine Assembly and later the Philippine Legislature passed resolutions expressing the Filipino desire for independence.

Philippine nationalists led by Manuel L. Quezon and Sergio Osmeña enthusiastically endorsed the draft Jones Bill of 1912, which provided for Philippine independence after eight years, but later changed their views, opting for a bill which focused less on time than on the conditions of independence.
The nationalists demanded complete and absolute independence to be guaranteed by the United States, since they feared that too-rapid independence from American rule without such guarantees might cause the Philippines to fall into Japanese hands.
The Jones Bill was rewritten and passed Congress in 1916 with a later date of independence.

The law, officially the Philippine Autonomy Act but popularly known as the Jones Law, served as the new organic act (or constitution) for the Philippines.
Its preamble stated that the eventual independence of the Philippines would be American policy, subject to the establishment of a stable government.
The law maintained the Governor-General of the Philippines, appointed by the President of the United States, but established a bicameral Philippine Legislature to replace the elected Philippine Assembly (lower house); it replaced the appointive Philippine Commission (upper house) with an elected senate.

The Filipinos suspended their independence campaign during the First World War and supported the United States against Germany.
After the war they resumed their independence drive with great vigor.
On March 17, 1919, the Philippine Legislature passed a "Declaration of Purposes", which stated the inflexible desire of the Filipino people to be free and sovereign.
A Commission of Independence was created to study ways and means of attaining liberation ideal.
This commission recommended the sending of an independence mission to the United States.
The "Declaration of Purposes" referred to the Jones Law as a veritable pact, or covenant, between the American and Filipino peoples whereby the United States promised to recognize the independence of the Philippines as soon as a stable government should be established.
U.S. Governor-General of the Philippines
Francis Burton Harrison had concurred in the report of the Philippine legislature as to a stable government.

The Philippine legislature funded an independence mission to the U.S. in 1919.
The mission departed Manila on February 28 and met in the U.S. with and presented their case to Secretary of War Newton D. Baker.
U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, in his 1921 farewell message to Congress, certified that the Filipino people had performed the condition imposed on them as a prerequisite to independence, declaring that, this having been done, the duty of the U.S. is to grant Philippine independence.
The Republican Party then controlled Congress and the recommendation of the outgoing Democratic president was not heeded.
After the first independence mission, public funding of such missions was ruled illegal.
Subsequent independence missions in 1922, 1923, 1930, 1931 1932, and two missions in 1933 were funded by voluntary contributions.
Numerous independence bills were submitted to the U.S. Congress, which passed the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill on December 30, 1932.
U.S. President Herbert Hoover vetoed the bill on January 13, 1933.
Congress overrode the veto on January 17, and the Hare–Hawes–
Cutting Act became U.S. law.
The law promised Philippine independence after 10 years, but reserved several military and naval bases for the United States, as well as imposing tariffs and quotas on Philippine exports.
The law also required the Philippine Senate to ratify the law.
Manuel L. Quezon urged the Philippine Senate to reject the bill, which it did.
Quezon himself led the twelfth independence mission to Washington to secure a better independence act.
The result was the Tydings–McDuffie Act of 1934 which was very similar to the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act except in minor details.
The Tydings-McDuffie Act was ratified by the Philippine Senate.
The law provided for the granting of Philippine independence by 1946.The Tydings–McDuffie Act provided for the drafting and guidelines of a Constitution, for a 10-year "transitional period" as the Commonwealth of the Philippines before the granting of Philippine independence.
On May 5, 1934, the Philippines legislature passed an act setting the election of convention delegates.
Governor-General Frank Murphy designated July 10 as the election date, and the convention held its inaugural session on July 30.
The completed draft constitution was approved by the convention on February 8, 1935, approved by U.S. President Franklin Roosevelt on March 23, and ratified by popular vote on May 14.
The first election under the constitution was held on September 17, and on November 15, 1935, the Commonwealth was put into place.

==
Philippine Commonwealth (1935–1946) ==
It was planned that the period 1935–1946 would be devoted to the final adjustments required for a peaceful transition to full independence, a great latitude in autonomy being granted in the meantime.
Instead there was war with Japan.

On May 14, 1935, an election to fill the newly created office of President of the Commonwealth of the Philippines was won by Manuel L. Quezon (Nacionalista Party), and a Filipino government was formed on the basis of principles superficially similar to the U.S. Constitution.
The Commonwealth as established in 1935 featured a very strong executive, a unicameral national assembly, and a supreme court composed entirely of Filipinos for the first time since 1901.

Quezon's priorities were defence, social justice, inequality and economic diversification, and national character.
Tagalog was designated the national language, women's suffrage was introduced, and land reform mooted.
The new government embarked on an ambitious agenda of establishing the basis for national defense, greater control over the economy, reforms in education, improvement of transport, the colonization of the island of Mindanao, and the promotion of local capital and industrialization.
The Commonwealth however, was also faced with agrarian unrest, an uncertain diplomatic and military situation in South East Asia, and uncertainty about the level of United States commitment to the future Republic of the Philippines.

In 1939–40, the Philippine Constitution was amended to restore a bicameral Congress, and permit the re-election of President Quezon, previously restricted to a single, six-year term.

During the Commonwealth years, Philippines sent one elected Resident Commissioner to the United States House of Representatives, as Puerto Rico currently does today.

==
Japanese occupation and World War II (1941–1945) ==
A few hours after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the Japanese launched air raids in several cities and US military installations in the Philippines on December 8, and on December 10, the first Japanese troops landed in Northern Luzon.
Filipino pilot Captain Jesús A. Villamor, leading a flight of three P-26 "Peashooter" fighters of the 6th Pursuit Squadron, distinguished himself by attacking two enemy formations of 27 planes each and downing a much-superior Japanese Zero, for which he was awarded the U.S. Distinguished Service Cross.
The two other planes in that flight, flown by Lieutenants César Basa and Geronimo Aclan, were shot down.
As the Japanese forces advanced, Manila was declared an open city to prevent it from destruction, meanwhile, the government was moved to Corregidor.
In March 1942, General MacArthur and President Quezon fled the country.
Guerrilla units harassed the Japanese when they could, and on Luzon native resistance was strong enough that the Japanese never did get control of a large part of the island.

General Douglas MacArthur, commander of the United States Armed Forces in the Far East (USAFFE), was forced to retreat to Bataan.
Manila was occupied by the Japanese on January 2, 1942.
The fall of Bataan was on April 9, 1942 with Corregidor Island, at the mouth of Manila Bay, surrendering on May 6.
Atrocities and war crimes were committed during the war, including the Bataan Death March and the Manila massacre.

The Commonwealth government by then had exiled itself to Washington, DC, upon the invitation of President Roosevelt; however many politicians stayed behind and collaborated with the occupying Japanese.
The Philippine Commonwealth Army continued to fight the Japanese in a guerrilla war and were considered auxiliary units of the United States Army.
Several Philippine Commonwealth military awards, such as the Philippine Defense Medal, Independence Medal, and Liberation Medal, were awarded to both the United States and Philippine Armed Forces.

The Second Philippine Republic, under Jose P. Laurel, was established as a puppet state.
From 1942 the Japanese occupation of the Philippines was opposed by large-scale underground guerrilla activity.
The Hukbalahap, a communist guerilla movement formed by peasant farmers in Central Luzon, did most of the fighting.
The Hukbalahap, also known as Huks, resisted invaders and punished the people who collaborated with the Japanese, but did not have a well-disciplined organization, and were later seen as a threat to the Manila government.
Before MacArthur came back, the effectiveness of the guerilla movement had decimated Japanese control, limiting it to only 12 out of the 48 provinces.

In October 1944, MacArthur had gathered enough additional troops and supplies to begin the retaking of the Philippines, landing with Sergio Osmeña who had assumed the Presidency after Quezon's death.
The Philippine Constabulary went on active service under the Philippine Commonwealth Army on October 28, 1944 during liberation under the Commonwealth regime.

The largest naval battle in history, according to gross tonnage sunk, the Battle of Leyte Gulf, occurred when Allied forces began liberating the Philippines from the Japanese Empire.
Battles on the islands entailed long fierce fighting and some of the Japanese continued to fight after the official surrender of the Empire of Japan on September 2, 1945.After
their landing, Filipino and American forces also undertook measures to suppress the Huk movement, which was founded to fight the Japanese Occupation.
The Filipino and American forces removed local Huk governments and imprisoned many high-ranking members of the Philippine Communist Party.
While these incidents happened, there was still fighting against the Japanese forces and, despite the American and Philippine measures against the Huk, they still supported American and Filipino soldiers in the fight against the Japanese.

Allied troops defeated the Japanese in 1945.
By the end of the war it is estimated that over a million Filipinos (including regular and constable soldiers, recognized guerrillas and non-combatant civilians) died during the war.
The 1947 final report of the  High Commissioner to the Philippines documents massive damage to most coconut mills and sugar mills; inter-island shipping had all been destroyed or removed; concrete highways had been broken up for use on military airports; railways were inoperative; Manila was 80 percent destroyed, Cebu 90 percent, and Zamboanga 95 percent.

==
Independence (1946) ==
On October 11, 1945, the Philippines became one of the founding members of the United Nations.
On July 4, 1946, the Philippines was officially recognized by the United States as an independent nation through the Treaty of Manila between the governments of the United States and the Philippine, during the presidency of Manuel Roxas.
The treaty provided for the recognition of the independence of the Republic of the Philippines and the relinquishment of American sovereignty over the Philippine Islands.
From 1946 to 1961, Independence Day was observed on July 4.
On May 12, 1962, President Macapagal issued Presidential Proclamation No.
28, proclaiming Tuesday, June 12, 1962 as a special public holiday throughout the Philippines.
In 1964, Republic Act No.
4166
changed the date of Independence Day from July 4 to June 12 and renamed the July 4 holiday as Philippine Republic Day.

==
World War II veteran benefits ==
During World War II, over 200,000 Filipinos fought in defense of the United States against the Japanese in the Pacific theater of military operations, where more than half died.
As a commonwealth of the United States before and during the war, Filipinos were legally American nationals.
With American nationality, Filipinos were promised all the benefits afforded to those serving in the armed forces of the United States.
In 1946, Congress passed the Rescission Act (38 U.S.C. § 107) which stripped Filipinos of the benefits they were promised.
Since the passage of the Rescission Act, many Filipino veterans have traveled to the United States to lobby Congress for the benefits promised to them for their service and sacrifice.
Over 30,000 of such veterans live in the United States today, with most being United States citizens.
Sociologists introduced the phrase "Second Class Veterans" to describe the plight of these Filipino Americans.
Beginning in 1993, numerous bills titled Filipino Veterans Fairness Act were introduced in Congress to return the benefits taken away from these veterans, only to die in committee.
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, signed into law on February 17, 2009, included provisions to pay benefits to the 15,000 remaining veterans.
On January 6, 2011 Jackie Speier (D-CA), U.S. Representative for California's 12th congressional district, serving since 2008, introduced a bill seeking to make Filipino WW-II veterans eligible for the same benefits available to U.S. veterans.
In a news conference to outline the bill, Speier estimated that approximately 50,000 Filipino veterans survive.

== See also ==
Spanish–American War
Philippine–
American War
Moro Rebellion
Negros Revolution
Republic of Negros
Republic of Zamboanga
Insular Government of the Philippine Islands
Commonwealth of the Philippines
Japanese invasion of the Philippines
Japanese occupation of the Philippines
Second Philippine Republic
Independence Day (Philippines)
History of the Philippines
Prehistory of the Philippines
History of the Philippines (Pre-Colonial Era 900–1521)
History of the Philippines (Spanish Era 1521–1898)
History of the Philippines (Third Republic 1946–65)
History of the Philippines (Marcos Era 1965–86)
History of the Philippines (Contemporary Era 1986–present)
List of sovereign state leaders in the Philippines


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Citations ===


===
Sources ===


====
Primary sources ====
Aguinaldo, Don Emilio y Famy, "Chapter I.
The Revolution of 1896", True Version of the Philippine Revolution, Authorama: Public Domain Books, retrieved February 7, 2008
Aguinaldo, Don Emilio y Famy, "Chapter II.
The Treaty of Biak-na-bató", True Version of the Philippine Revolution, Authorama: Public Domain Books, retrieved February 7, 2008
Aguinaldo, Don Emilio y Famy, "Chapter III.
Negotiations", True Version of the Philippine Revolution, Authorama:
Public Domain Books, retrieved February 7, 2008
Guevara, Sulpico, ed.
(
2005), The laws of the first Philippine Republic (the laws of Malolos)
1898–1899.
,
Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Library (published 1972), retrieved March 26, 2008.
(
English translation by Sulpicio Guevara.)
====
Secondary sources ====
Agoncillo, Teodoro Andal (1990), "11.
The Revolution Second Phase", History of the Filipino People (Eighth ed.),
University of the Philippines, pp.
187–198
, ISBN 971-8711-06-6
Agoncillo, Teodoro Andal (1997), Malolos:
The Crisis of the Republic, University of the Philippines Press, ISBN 978-971-542-096-9
Beede, Benjamin R. (1994),
The War of 1898, and U.S. interventions, 1898–1934:
an encyclopedia, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-8240-5624-7
Blanchard, William H. (1996), "9.
Losing Stature in the Philippines", Neocolonialism American Style, 1960–2000, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-313-30013-5
Blitz, Amy (2000), "Conquest and Coercion:
Early U.S. Colonialism, 1899–1916", The Contested State:
American Foreign Policy and Regime Change in the Philippines, Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 0-8476-9935-8
Brands, Henry William (1992), Bound to empire: the United States and the Philippines, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-507104-7 questia.com
Burns, Adam D. "Adapting to Empire: William H. Taft, Theodore Roosevelt, and the Philippines, 1900-08," Comparative American Studies 11 (Dec. 2013), 418–33.

Constantino, Renato (1975), The Philippines:
A Past Revisited, ISBN 971-8958-00-2
Elliott, Charles Burke (1917), The Philippines: To the End of the Commission Government, a Study in Tropical Democracy
Golay, Frank H. (1997), Face of empire:
United States-Philippine relations, 1898–1946, Ateneo de Manila University Press, ISBN 978-971-550-254-2.

Halstead, Murat (1898), "XXVIII.
Battles with the Filipinos before Manila", The Story of the Philippines and Our New Possessions, Including the Ladrones, Hawaii, Cuba and Porto Rico
Jernegan, Prescott F (2009), The Philippine Citizen, BiblioBazaar, LLC, ISBN 978-1-115-97139-3
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1921), The Present Government of the Philippines, Oriental commercial, ISBN 1-4067-4636-3, retrieved March 12, 2008(Note: 1.
The book cover incorrectly lists author as "Maximo M Lalaw", 2.
Originally published in 1921 by The McCullough Printing Co., Manila)
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "V. The Katipunan revolt under Bonifacio and Aguinaldo", The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
69–98
, retrieved February 7, 2008
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "VI.
The Revolutionary Government", The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
99–163
, retrieved February 7, 2008
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "VII.
The Opposition to American Sovereignty (1898–1901)", The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
99–163
, retrieved February 7, 2008
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "Appendix A. Act of the Proclamation of Independence of the Filipino People", The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
413–417, retrieved February 7, 2008
(English translation by the author.
Original in Spanish.)

Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "Appendix C. Aguinaldo's Proclamation of June 23, 1898, Establishing the Revolutionary Government", The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
423–429, retrieved September 7, 2009
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), "Appendix D.
The Political Constitution of the Philippine Republic",
The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
430–445, retrieved February 7, 2008
(English translation by the author.
Original in Spanish.)

Kalaw, Maximo M. (1927), "Appendix F: President McKinley's Instructions to the Taft Commission", The development of Philippine politics, Oriental commercial, pp.
452–459, retrieved January 21, 2008
Karnow, Stanley (1990), In Our Image, Century, ISBN 978-0-7126-3732-9
Lacsamana, Leodivico Cruz (2006), Philippine history and government, Phoenix Publishing House, ISBN 978-971-06-1894-1
Miller, Stuart Creighton (1984), Benevolent Assimilation:
The American Conquest of the Philippines, 1899–1903 (4th edition, reprint ed.),
Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-03081-5
Seekins, Donald M. (1993), "The First Phase of United States Rule, 1898–1935",  in Dolan, Ronald E. (ed.),
Philippines:
A Country Study (4th ed.),
Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress, retrieved December 25, 2007
Trask, David F. (1996), The war with Spain in 1898, University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 978-0-8032-9429-5
Taylor, John R.M., ed.
(
1907), "Chapter I. Telegraphic Correspondence of Emilio Aguinaldo, July 15, 1898 to February 28, 1899, Annotated" (PDF),
Compilation of Philippine Insurgent Records, Combined Arms Research Library, originally from War Department, Bureau of Insular Affairs, archived from the original (PDF) on October 3, 2008, retrieved June 2, 2012
Thayer, William Roscoe (1919), "VII.
The Rough Rider", Theodore Roosevelt; an intimate biography, Boston:
Houghton Mifflin
Titherington, Richard Handfield (1900), A history of the Spanish–American War of 1898, D. Appleton and Company(republished by [1])
Wolff, Leon (2006), Little brown brother: how the United States purchased and pacified the Philippine Islands at the century's turn, History Book Club (published 2005), ISBN 978-1-58288-209-3(Introduction, Decolonizing the History of the Philippine–
American War, by Paul A. Kramer dated December 8, 2005)
Worcester, Dean Conant (1914), "II.
Was independence promised?",
The Philippines:
Past and Present (vol.
1 of 2), Macmillan, pp.
39–43, ISBN 1-4191-7715-X, retrieved February 7, 2008
Worcester, Dean Conant (1914), "III.
Insurgent "Coöperation"", The Philippines:
Past and Present (vol.
1 of 2), Macmillan, pp.
43–74, ISBN 1-4191-7715-X, retrieved February 7, 2008
Worcester, Dean Conant (1914), "IV.
The Premeditated Insurgent Attack", The Philippines:
Past and Present (vol.
1 of 2), Macmillan, pp.
75–89, ISBN 1-4191-7715-X, retrieved February 7, 2008
Worcester, Dean Conant (1914), "IX,
The conduct of the war", The Philippines:
Past and Present (vol.
1 of 2), Macmillan, pp.
168–184, ISBN 1-4191-7715-X, retrieved February 7, 2008
Zaide, Sonia M. (1994), The Philippines:
A Unique Nation, All-Nations Publishing Co., ISBN 978-971-642-071-5


==
Further reading ==
Abinales, Patricio N.; Amoroso, Donna J. (2005), State and Society in the Philippines, Philippines: Anvil Publishing, U.S.: Rowman and Littlefield, ISBN 0-7425-1024-7
Agoncillo, Teodoro Andal (1974),
Introduction to Filipino History, Garotech publishing, ISBN 971-8711-05-8
Alcantra, Teresita A. (2002),  Arcella, Lydia (ed.),
Views on Philippine Revolution, I, Quezon City: University of the Philippines, ISBN 971-92410-1-2
Alcantra, Teresita A. (2002),  Arcella, Lydia (ed.),
Views on Philippine Revolution, II, Quezon City: University of the Philippines, ISBN 971-92410-1-2
Arcilla, José S. (1994),
An introduction to Philippine history (Fourth, enlarged ed.),
Atoneo De Mamila University Press, ISBN 971
-550-261-X
Gates, John M. (
Summer 1985), "The Official Historian and the Well-Placed Critic:
James A. LeRoy's Assessment of John R. M. Taylor's "The Philippine Insurrection against the United States"", The Public Historian, 7 (3):
57–67, doi:10.2307/3377127, JSTOR 3377127
Richard W. Stewart, ed.
(
2005), "16.
Change, and the Road to war, 1902–1917", American Military History,
Volume I:
The United States Army and the Forging of a Nation, 1775–1917, Center of Military History, United States Army, ISBN 0-16-072362-0
Zuleta, Francisco M.; Nebres, Abriel M. (2007), Philippine History and Government Through the Years, National Bookstore, ISBN 978-971-08-6344-0
Philippines.
Civil Service Board (1906).
Annual Report of the Philippine Civil Service Board to the Civil Governor of the Philippine Islands, Issue 5.
Contributors United States.
Philippine Commission (1900–1916), United States.
Bureau of Insular Affairs.
Bureau of Public Printing.
ISBN 9715501680.
Retrieved April 24, 2014.

"The Philippines, 1898-1946".
history.house.gov.
History, Art & Archives, U.S. House of Representatives.
2018.
The following is a list of lists of currently active military equipment by country.

==
Afghanistan ==
List of military equipment used by Afghan National Army


==
Albania ==
List of equipment of the Albanian Armed Forces


==
Algeria ==
List of equipment of the Algerian People's National Army


==
Angola ==
List of equipment of the Angolan Army


==
Argentina ==
Active Argentine Navy ships
Active Argentina military aircraft
Equipment of the Argentine Army


==
Armenia ==
List of equipment of the Armenian Armed Forces


==
Australia ==
Current Royal Australian Navy ships
Current Royal Australian Air Force Aircraft
Equipment of the Australian Army


==
Austria ==
List of equipment of the Austrian Army


==
Azerbaijan ==
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Land Forces
Modern equipment of the Azerbaijani Air Force


==
Bangladesh ==
Currently active ships of the Bangladesh Navy
List of ships of the Bangladesh Coast Guard
Active aircraft of the Bangladesh Air Force
Active Bangladesh military aircraft
Equipment of the Bangladesh Army


==
Belarus ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Belarus


==
Belgium ==
List of equipment of the Belgian Land Component


==
Bhutan ==
List of equipment used by the Royal Bhutan Army


==
Bolivia ==
List of equipment of the Bolivian Armed Forces


==
Bosnia and Herzegovina ==
List of equipment of the Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina


==
Botswana ==
List of equipment of the Botswana Ground Force


==
Brazil ==
Currently active Brazil military watercraft
Currently active Brazil military land vehicles
Active Brazilian military aircraft
Modern equipment of the Brazilian Army


==
Bulgaria ==
Modern equipment of the Bulgarian land forces


==
Burkina Faso ==
List of equipment of the Burkina Faso Armed Forces


==
Cambodia ==
List of equipment of the Royal Cambodian Army


==
Canada ==
Fleet of the Royal Canadian Navy
List of aircraft of the Royal Canadian Air Force
List of active Canadian military aircraft
List of modern Canadian Army equipment


==
Chad ==
List of equipment of the Chadian Ground Forces


==
Chile ==
List of active ships of the Chilean Navy
List of aircraft of the Chilean Air Force
List of equipment of the Chilean Army


==
China ==
Active Chinese Navy ships
Active Chinese military aircraft
Aircraft of the People's Liberation Army Air Force
Equipment of the PLA Ground Force


==
Colombia ==
List of equipment of the National Army of Colombia


==
Comoros ==
List of equipment of the Comorian Army


==
Croatia ==
List of equipment of the Croatian Army


==
Cuba ==
List of equipment of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces


==
Cyprus ==
List of military equipment of Cyprus


==
Czech Republic ==
Military equipment of the Czech Republic


==
DR Congo ==
List of equipment of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Army


==
Denmark ==
List of equipment of the Royal Danish Army


==
Djibouti ==
List of equipment of the Djiboutian Army


==
Dominican Republic ==
List of equipment of the Dominican Army


==
Egypt ==
Equipment of the Egyptian Army


==
El Salvador ==
List of equipment of the Salvadoran Army


==
Eritrea ==
List of equipment of the Eritrean Army


==
Ecuador ==
List of equipment of the Ecuadorian Army


==
Estonia ==
List of equipment of the Estonian Defence Forces


==
Ethiopia ==
List of equipment of the Ethiopian National Defence Force


==
Finland ==
List of equipment of the Finnish Army
List of equipment of the Finnish Navy
List of active Finnish Navy ships
List of military aircraft of Finland


==
France ==
Active French Navy ships
Modern equipment and uniform of the French Army
Active French military aircraft


==
Georgia ==
List of equipment of the Defense Forces of Georgia


==
Germany ==
List of modern equipment of the German Army
Active German Navy ships


==
Greece ==
List of equipment of the Hellenic Army
List of active Hellenic Navy ships


==
India ==
Active Indian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indian Army
Active Indian military aircraft
Guided missiles of India
Weapon systems of the Indian Navy


==
Indonesia ==
Equipment of the Indonesian Navy
List of active Indonesian Navy ships
Equipment of the Indonesian Army
Equipment of the Indonesian Air Force


==
Iran ==
List of active Iranian Navy ships
List of active Iranian military Aircraft
Equipment of Iranian army


==
Ireland ==
Modern equipment of the Irish Army
List of aircraft of the Irish Air Corps


==
Italy
==
Equipment of the Italian Army
List of active Italian military aircraft
List of active Italian Navy ships
List of aircraft used by Italian Air Force


==
Japan ==
Active Japan
Maritime Self-Defense Force ships
List of modern equipment of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force


==
South Korea ==
List of active Republic of Korea Navy ships
List of equipment of the Republic of Korea Army


==
Malaysia
==
Equipment of the Malaysian Army
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Air Force
Equipment of the Royal Malaysian Navy
List of aircraft of the Malaysian Armed Forces


==
Myanmar ==
List of equipment of the Myanmar Army
List of equipment in the Myanmar Navy


==
Malta ==
Equipment of the Armed Forces
Active aircraft of the Air Wing
Active vessels of the Maritime Squadron


==
Morocco
==
List of active Moroccan military aircraft


==
Netherlands ==
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Army
Active Royal Netherlands Navy ships
Equipment of the Royal Netherlands Air Force


==
New Zealand ==
List of active New Zealand military aircraft
List of active Royal New Zealand Navy ships
List of individual weapons of the New Zealand armed forces


==
Norway ==
List of equipment of the Norwegian Army
List of active Royal Norwegian Navy ships


==
Pakistan ==
List of active Pakistan Navy ships
Equipment of the Pakistan Army
List of missiles of Pakistan
List of active Pakistan Air Force aircraft


==
Philippines ==
 Equipments of the Philippine Army
Current ships of the Philippine Navy
Current aircraft of the Philippine Air Force


==
Poland
==
Equipment of the Polish Army
List of ships of the Polish Navy


==
Portugal ==
Equipment of the Portuguese Army
Active Portuguese Navy ships
List of aircraft of the Portuguese Air Force


==
Romania ==
Equipment of the Romanian Armed Forces
List of aircraft of the Romanian Air Force


==
Russia ==
List of active Russian Navy ships
List of active Russian Air Force aircraft
List of active Russian military aircraft
List of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces


==
Serbia ==
List of equipment of the Serbian Armed Forces


==
South Africa ==
List of equipment of the South African Army
List of aircraft of the South African Air Force
List of weapon systems of the South African Air Force
List of active South African Navy ships


==
Spain ==
List of active Spanish Navy ships
List of currently active Spain military land vehicles
List of active Spanish military aircraft


==
Sri Lanka ==
Sri Lanka Army Equipment
List of current Sri Lanka Navy ships
Sri Lanka Air Force Inventory


==
Sweden ==
List of equipment of the Swedish Army


==
Switzerland ==
List of equipment of the Swiss Armed Forces


==
Syria ==
Equipment of the Syrian Army


==
Thailand ==
List of equipment of the Royal Thai Army
Equipment of the Royal Thai Navy
Aircraft of the Royal Thai Air Force


==
Turkey ==
List of active aircraft of the Turkish Air Force
List of equipment of the Turkish Land Forces
List of active Turkish Navy ships


==
Ukraine ==
Active Ukrainian Navy ships
Equipment of the Ukrainian Ground Forces


==
United Kingdom ==
Active Royal Navy ships
List of active Royal Marines military watercraft
Royal Fleet Auxiliary
Active United Kingdom military aircraft
Modern equipment of the British Army
Active Royal Navy weapon systems


==
United States
==
Equipment of the United States Armed Forces
Currently active United States military missiles
List of currently active United States military land vehicles
List of individual weapons of the U.S. Armed Forces
Uniforms of the United States Armed Forces
Equipment of the United States Army
Equipment of the United States Marine Corps
Equipment of the United States Navy
Currently active ships of the United States Navy
Currently active United States military watercraft
Equipment of the United States Air Force
Currently active United States military aircraft
Equipment of the United States Coast Guard


==
See also ==
List of military special forces units
The military funding of science has had a powerful transformative effect on the practice and products of scientific research since the early 20th century.

Particularly since World War I, advanced science-based technologies have been viewed as essential elements of a successful military.

World War
I is often called "the chemists’ war", both for the extensive use of poison gas and the importance of nitrates and advanced high explosives.

Poison gas, beginning in 1915 with chlorine from the powerful German dye industry, was used extensively by the Germans and the British ; over the course of the war, scientists on both sides raced to develop more and more potent chemicals and devise countermeasures against the newest enemy gases.

Physicists also contributed to the war effort, developing wireless communication technologies and sound-based methods of detecting U-boats, resulting in the first tenuous long-term connections between academic science and the military.
World War II marked a massive increase in the military funding of science, particularly physics.

In addition to the Manhattan Project and the resulting atomic bomb, British and American work on radar was widespread and ultimately highly influential in the course of the war; radar enabled detection of enemy ships and aircraft, as well as the radar-based proximity fuze.

Mathematical cryptography, meteorology, and rocket science were also central to the war effort, with military-funded wartime advances having a significant long-term effect on each discipline.

The technologies employed at the end—jet aircraft, radar and proximity fuzes, and the atomic bomb—were radically different from pre-war technology; military leaders came to view continued advances in technology as the critical element for success in future wars.

The advent of the Cold War solidified the links between military institutions and academic science, particularly in the United States and the Soviet Union, so that even during a period of nominal peace military funding continued to expand.

Funding spread to the social sciences as well as the natural sciences, and whole new fields, such as digital computing, were born of military patronage.

Following the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, military funding of science has decreased substantially, but much of the American military-scientific complex remains in place.

The sheer scale of military funding for science since World War II has instigated a large body of historical literature analyzing the effects of that funding, especially for American science.

Since Paul Forman’s 1987 article “
Behind quantum electronics
: National security as a basis for physical research in the United State, 1940-1960,” there has been an ongoing historical debate over precisely how and to what extent military funding affected the course of scientific research and discovery.

Forman and others have argued that military funding fundamentally redirected science—particularly physics—toward applied research, and that military technologies predominantly formed the basis for subsequent research even in areas of basic science; ultimately the very culture and ideals of science were colored by extensive collaboration between scientists and military planners.

An alternate view has been presented by Daniel Kevles, that while military funding provided many new opportunities for scientists and dramatically expanded the scope of physical research, scientists by-and-large retained their intellectual autonomy.

==
Science and military technology before the modern era ==
While there were numerous instances of military support for scientific work before the 20th century, these were typically isolated instances; knowledge gained from technology was generally far more important for the development of science than scientific knowledge was to technological innovation.

Thermodynamics, for example, is a science partly born from military technology: one of the many sources of the first law of thermodynamics was Count Rumford’s observation of the heat produced by boring cannon barrels.

Mathematics was important in the development of the Greek catapult and other weapons, but analysis of ballistics was also important for the development of mathematics, while Galileo tried to promote the telescope as a military instrument to the military-minded Republic of Venice before turning it to the skies while seeking the patronage of the Medici court in Florence.

In general, craft-based innovation, disconnected from the formal systems of science, was the key to military technology well into the 19th century.

Even craft-based military technologies were not generally produced by military funding.

Instead, craftsmen and inventors developed weapons and military tools independently and actively sought the interest of military patrons afterward.

Following the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, governments and military leaders did try to harness the methods of both science and engineering for more specific ends, but frequently without success.

In the decades leading up to the French Revolution, French artillery officers were often trained as engineers, and military leaders from this mathematical tradition attempted to transform the process of weapons manufacture from a craft-based enterprise to an organized and standardized system based on engineering principles and interchangeable parts (pre-dating the work of Eli Whitney in the U.S.).

During the Revolution, even natural scientists participated directly, attempting to create “weapons more powerful than any we possess” to aid the cause of the new French Republic, though there were no means for the revolutionary army to fund such work.

Each of these efforts, however, was ultimately unsuccessful in producing militarily useful results.

A slightly different outcome came from the longitude prize of the 18th century, offered by the British government for an accurate method of determining a ship's longitude at sea (essential for the safe navigation of the powerful British navy): intended to promote—and financially reward—a scientific solution, it was instead won by a scientific outsider, the clockmaker John Harrison.

However, the naval utility of astronomy did help increase the number of capable astronomers and focus research on developing more powerful and versatile instruments.

Through the 19th century, science and technology grew closer together, particularly through electrical and acoustic inventions and the corresponding mathematical theories.

The late 19th and early 20th centuries witnessed a trend toward military mechanization, with the advent of repeating rifles with smokeless powder, long-range artillery, high explosives, machine guns, and mechanized transport along with telegraphic and later wireless battlefield communication.

Still, independent inventors, scientists and engineers were largely responsible for these drastic changes in military technology (with the exception of the development of battleships, which could only have been created through organized large-scale effort).

==
World War I and the interwar years ==
World War
I marked the first large-scale mobilization of science for military purposes.

Prior to the war, the American military ran a few small laboratories as well as the Bureau of Standards, but independent inventors and industrial firms predominated.

Similarly in Europe, military-directed scientific research and development was minimal.

The powerful new technologies that led to trench warfare, however, reversed the traditional advantage of fast-moving offensive tactics; fortified positions supported by machine guns and artillery resulted in high attrition but strategic stalemate.

Militaries turned to scientists and engineers for even newer technologies, but the introduction of tanks and aircraft had only a marginal impact; the use of poison gas made a tremendous psychological impact, but decisively favored neither side.

The war ultimately turned on maintaining adequate supplies of materials, a problem also addressed by military-funded science—and, through the international chemical industry, closely related to the advent of chemical warfare.

The Germans introduced gas as a weapon in part because naval blockades limited their supply of nitrate for explosives, while the massive German dye industry could easily produce chlorine and organic chemicals in large amounts.

Industrial capacity was completely mobilized for war, and Fritz Haber and other industrial scientists were eager to contribute to the German cause; soon they were closely integrated into the military hierarchy as they tested the most effective ways of producing and delivering weaponized chemicals.

Though the initial impetus for gas warfare came from outside the military, further developments in chemical weapon technology might be considered military-funded, considering the blurring of lines between industry and nation in Germany.

Following the first chlorine attack by the Germans in May 1915, the British quickly moved to recruit scientists for developing their own gas weapons.

Gas research escalated on both sides, with chlorine followed by phosgene, a variety of tear gases, and mustard gas.

A wide array of research was conducted on the physiological effects of other gases, such and hydrogen cyanide, arsenic compounds, and a host of complex organic chemicals.

The British built from scratch what became an expansive research facility at Porton Down, which remains a significant military research institution into the 21st century.

Unlike many earlier military-funded scientific ventures, the research at Porton Down did not stop when the war ended or an immediate goal was achieved.

In fact, every effort was made to create an attractive research environment for top scientists, and chemical weapons development continued apace—though in secret—through the interwar years and into World War II.

German military-backed gas warfare research did not resume until the Nazi era, following the 1936 discovery of tabun, the first nerve agent, through industrial insecticide research.

In the United States, the established tradition of engineering was explicitly competing with the rising discipline of physics for World War
I military largess.

A host of inventors, led by Thomas Edison and his newly created Naval Consulting Board, cranked out thousands of inventions to solve military problems and aid the war effort, while academic scientists worked through the National Research Council (NRC) led by Robert Millikan.

Submarine detection was the most important problem that both the physicists and inventors hoped to solve, as German U-boats were decimating the crucial naval supply lines from the U.S. to England.

Edison's Board produced very few useful innovations, but NRC research resulted in a moderately successful sound-based methods for locating submarines and hidden ground-based artillery, as well as useful navigational and photographic equipment for aircraft.

Because of the success of academic science in solving specific military problems, the NRC was retained after the war's end, though it gradually decoupled from the military.
Many industrial and academic chemists and physicists came under military control during the Great War, but post-war research by the Royal Engineers Experimental Station at Porton Down and the continued operation of the National Research Council were exceptions to the overall pattern; wartime chemistry funding was a temporary redirection of a field largely driven by industry and later medicine, while physics grew closer to industry than to the military.

The discipline of modern meteorology, however, was largely built from military funding.

During World War I, the French civilian meteorological infrastructure was largely absorbed into the military.

The introduction of military aircraft during the war as well as the role of wind and weather in the success or failure of gas attacks meant meteorological advice was in high demand.

The French army (among others) created its own supplementary meteorological service as well, retraining scientists from other fields to staff it.

At war's end, the military continued to control French meteorology, sending weathermen to French colonial interests and integrating weather service with the growing air corps; most of the early-twentieth century growth in European meteorology was the direct result of military funding.

World War II would result in a similar transformation of American meteorology, initiating a transition from an apprenticeship system for training weathermen (based on intimate knowledge of local trends and geography) to the university-based, science-intensive system that has predominated since.
==
World War II ==
If World War
I was the chemists’ war, World War II was the physicists’ war.

As with other total wars, it is difficult to draw a line between military funding and more spontaneous military-scientific collaboration during World War II.

Well before the Invasion of Poland, nationalism was a powerful force in the German physics community (see Deutsche Physik); the military mobilization of physicists was all but irresistible after the rise of National Socialism.

German and Allied investigations of the possibility of a nuclear bomb began in 1939 at the initiative of civilian scientists, but by 1942 the respective militaries were heavily involved.

The German nuclear energy project had two independent teams, a civilian-controlled team under Werner Heisenberg and a military-controlled led by Kurt Diebner; the latter was more explicitly aimed at producing a bomb (as opposed to a power reactor) and received much more funding from the Nazis, though neither was ultimately successful.
In the U.S., the Manhattan Project and other projects of the Office of Scientific Research and Development resulted in a much more extensive military-scientific venture, the scale of which dwarfed previous military-funded research projects.

Theoretical work by a number of British and American scientists resulted in significant optimism about the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction.
As the physicists convinced military leaders of the potential of nuclear weapons, funding for actual development was ratcheted up rapidly.

A number of large laboratories were created across the United States for work on different aspects of the bomb, while many existing facilities were reoriented to bomb-related work; some were university-managed while others were government-run, but all were ultimately funded and directed by the military.

The May 1945 surrender of Germany, the original intended target for the bomb, did virtually nothing to slow the project's momentum.

After Japan's surrender immediately following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, many scientists returned to academia or industry, but the Manhattan Project infrastructure was too large—and too effective—to be dismantled wholesale; it became the model for future military-scientific work, in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Other wartime physics research, particularly in rocketry and radar technology, was less significant in popular culture but much more significant for the outcome of the war.

German rocketry was driven by the pursuit of Wunderwaffen, resulting in the V-2 ballistic missile; the technology as well as the personal expertise of the German rocketry community was absorbed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. rocket programs after the war, forming the basis of long-term military funded rocketry, ballistic missile, and later space research.

Rocket science was only beginning to make impact by the final years of the war.

German rockets created fear and destruction in London, but had only modest military significance, while air-to-ground rockets enhanced the power of American air strikes; jet aircraft also went into service by the end of the war.

Radar work before and during the war provided even more of an advantage for the Allies.

British physicists pioneered long-wave radar, developing an effective system for detecting incoming German air forces.

Work on potentially more precise short-wave radar was turned over to the U.S.; several thousand academic physicists and engineers not participating the Manhattan Project did radar work, particularly at MIT and Stanford, resulting in microwave radar systems that could resolve more detail in incoming flight formations.

Further refinement of microwave technology led to proximity fuzes, which greatly enhanced the ability of the U.S. Navy to defend against Japanese bombers.

Microwave production, detection and manipulation also formed the technical foundation to complement the institutional foundation of the Manhattan Project in much post-war defense research.

==
American Cold War science ==
In the years immediately following World War II, the military was by far the most significant patron of university science research in the U.S., and the national labs also continued to flourish.

After two years in political limbo (but with work on nuclear power and bomb manufacture continuing apace)
the Manhattan Project became a permanent arm of the government as the Atomic Energy Commission.

The Navy—inspired by the success of military-directed wartime research—created its own R&D organization, the Office of Naval Research, which would preside over an expanded long-term research program at Naval Research Laboratory as well as fund a variety of university-based research.

Military money following up the wartime radar research led to explosive growth in both electronics research and electronics manufacturing.

The Air Force became an independent service branch from the Army and established its own research and development system, and the Army followed suit (though it was less invested in academic science than the Navy or Air Force).

Meanwhile, the perceived communist menace of the Soviet Union caused tensions—and military budgets—to escalate rapidly.

The Department of Defense primarily funded what has been broadly described as “physical research,” but to reduce this to merely chemistry and physics is misleading.

Military patronage benefited a large number of fields, and in fact helped create a number of the modern scientific disciplines.

At Stanford and MIT, for example, electronics, aerospace engineering, nuclear physics, and materials science—all physics, broadly speaking—each developed in different directions, becoming increasingly independent of parent disciplines as they grew and pursued defense-related research agendas.

What began as interdepartmental laboratories became the centers for graduate teaching and research innovation thanks to the broad scope of defense funding.

The need to keep up with corporate technology research (which was receiving the lion's share of defense contracts) also prompted many science labs to establish close relationships with industry.

===
Computing ===
The complex histories of computer science and computer engineering were shaped, in the first decades of digital computing, almost entirely by military funding.

Most of the basic component technologies for digital computing were developed through the course of the long-running Whirlwind-SAGE program to develop an automated radar shield.

Virtually unlimited funds enabled two decades of research that only began producing useful technologies by the end of the 50s; even the final version of the SAGE command and control system had only marginal military utility.

More so than with previously-established disciplines receiving military funding, the culture of computer science was permeated with a Cold War military perspective.

Indirectly, the ideas of computer science also had a profound effect on psychology, cognitive science and neuroscience through the mind-computer analogy.

===
Geosciences and astrophysics ===
The history of earth science and the history of astrophysics were also closely tied to military purposes and funding throughout the Cold War.

American geodesy, oceanography, and seismology grew from small sub-disciplines in into full-fledged independent disciplines as for several decades, virtually all funding in these fields came from the Department of Defense.

A central goal that tied these disciplines together (even while providing the means for intellectual independence) was the figure of the Earth, the model of the earth's geography and gravitation that was essential for accurate ballistic missiles.

In the 1960s, geodesy was the superficial goal of the satellite program CORONA, while military reconnaissance was in fact a driving force.

Even for geodetic data, new secrecy guidelines worked to restrict collaboration in a field that had formerly been fundamentally international; the Figure of the Earth had geopolitical significance beyond questions of pure geoscience.

Still, geodesists were able to retain enough autonomy and subvert secrecy limitations enough to make use of the findings of their military research to overturn some of the fundamental theories of geodesy.

Like geodesy and satellite photography research, the advent of radio astronomy had a military purpose hidden beneath official astrophysical research agenda.

Quantum electronics permitted both revolutionary new methods of analyzing the universe and—using the same equipment and technology—the monitoring of Soviet electronic signals.
Military interest in (and funding of) seismology, meteorology and oceanography was in some ways a result of the defense-related payoffs of physics and geodesy.

The immediate goal of funding in these fields was to detect clandestine nuclear testing and track fallout radiation, a necessary precondition for treaties to limit the nuclear weapon technology earlier military research had created.

In particular, the feasibility of monitoring underground nuclear explosions was crucial to the possibility of a comprehensive rather than Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

But the military-funded growth of these disciplines continued even when no pressing military goals were driving them; as with other natural sciences, the military also found value in having ‘scientists on tap’ for unforeseen future R&D needs.

===
Biological sciences ===
The biological sciences were also affected by military funding, but, with the exception of nuclear physics-related medical and genetic research, largely indirectly.

The most significant funding sources for basic research before the rise of the military-industrial-academic complex were philanthropic organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation.

After World War II (and to some extent before), the influx of new industrial and military funding opportunities for the physical sciences prompted philanthropies to divest from physics research—most early work in high-energy physics and biophysics had been the product of foundation grants—and refocus on biological and medical research.

The social sciences also found limited military support from the 1940s to the 1960s, but much defense-minded social science research could be—and was—pursued without extensive military funding.

In the 1950s, social scientists tried to emulate the interdisciplinary organizational success of the physical sciences’ Manhattan Project with the synthetic behavioral science movement.

Social scientists actively sought to promote their usefulness to the military, researching topics related to propaganda (put to use in Korea), decision making, the psychological and sociological causes and effects of communism, and a broad constellation of other topics of Cold War significance.

By the 1960s, economists and political scientists offered up modernization theory for the cause of Cold War nation-building; modernization theory found a home in the military in the form of Project Camelot, a study of the process of revolution, as well as in the Kennedy administration’s approach to the Vietnam War.

Project Camelot was ultimately canceled because of the concerns it raised about scientific objectivity in the context of such a politicized research agenda; though natural sciences were not yet susceptible to implications of the corrupting influence of military and political factors, the social sciences were.

==
Historical debate ==
Historian Paul Forman, in his seminal 1987 article, proposed that not only had military funding of science greatly expanded the scope and significance of American physics, it also initiated "a qualitative change in its purposes and character."

Historians of science were beginning to turn to the Cold War relationship between science and the military for detailed study, and Forman's “distortionist critique” (as Roger Geiger has described it) served to focus the ensuing debates.

Forman and others (e.g., Robert Seidel, Stuart Leslie, and for the history of the social sciences, Ron Robin) view the influx of military money and the focus on applied rather than basic research as having had, at least partially, a negative impact on the course of subsequent research.

In turn, critics of the distortionist thesis, beginning with Daniel Kevles, deny that the military "seduced American physicists from, so to speak, a 'true basic physics'."

Kevles, as well as Geiger, instead view the effects of military funding relative to such funding simply being absent—rather than put to alternate scientific use.

Most recent scholarship has moved toward a tempered version of Forman's thesis, in which scientists retained significant autonomy despite the radical changes brought about by military funding.

== See also ==
History of weapons
Big Science
Funding of science
Historiography of science
History of radar
History of science and technology
History of technology
Military-industrial complex
Military science
Military technology
Military medicine
Military Wireless Museum in the Midlands


==
Notes and references ==
An academic discipline or field of study is a branch of knowledge, taught and researched as part of higher education.
A scholar's discipline is commonly defined by the university faculties and learned societies to which they belong and the academic journals in which they publish research.

Disciplines vary between well-established ones that exist in almost all universities and have well-defined rosters of journals and conferences, and nascent ones supported by only a few universities and publications.
A discipline may have branches, and these are often called sub-disciplines.

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to academic disciplines.
In each case an entry at the highest level of the hierarchy (e.g., Humanities) is a group of broadly similar disciplines; an entry at the next highest level (e.g., Music) is a discipline having some degree of autonomy and being the basic identity felt by its scholars; and lower levels of the hierarchy are sub-disciplines not normally having any role in the structure of the university's governance.

==
Humanities ==


===
Performing arts ===


===
Visual arts ===


===
History ===


===
Languages and literature ===


===
Law ===


===
Philosophy ===


===
Theology ===
Biblical studies
Biblical Hebrew, Koine Greek, Aramaic
Religious studies
Buddhist theology
Pali Studies
Christian theology
Anglican theology
Baptist theology
Catholic theology
Eastern Orthodox theology
Protestant theology
Hindu theology
Sanskrit Studies
Jewish theology
Muslim theology
Arabic Studies


==
Social Sciences ==


===
Anthropology ===
Biological anthropology
Linguistic anthropology
Cultural anthropology
Social anthropology
Archaeology


===
Economics ===


===
Geography ===


===
Political science ===


===
Psychology ===


===
Sociology ===


===
Social Work ===
Clinical Social Work
Community practice
Mental health
Psychosocial rehabilitation
Person-centered therapy
Family therapy
Financial social work


==
Natural Sciences ==


===
Biology ===


===
Chemistry ===


===
Earth science ===
Edaphology
Environmental chemistry
Environmental science
Gemology
Geochemistry
Geodesy
Physical geography (outline)
Atmospheric science / Meteorology (outline)
Biogeography / Phytogeography
Climatology /
Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography
Coastal geography / Oceanography
Edaphology / Pedology or Soil science
Geobiology
Geology (outline)
(Geomorphology, Mineralogy, Petrology, Sedimentology, Speleology, Tectonics, Volcanology)
Geostatistics
Glaciology
Hydrology
(outline)/
Limnology / Hydrogeology
Landscape ecology
Quaternary science
Geophysics (outline)
Paleontology
Paleobiology
Paleoecology


===
Space sciences ===
Astrobiology
Astronomy (outline)
Observational astronomy
Gamma ray astronomy
Infrared astronomy
Microwave astronomy
Optical astronomy
Radio astronomy
UV astronomy
X-ray astronomy
Astrophysics
Gravitational astronomy
Black holes
Interstellar medium
Numerical simulations
Astrophysical plasma
Galaxy formation and evolution
High-energy astrophysics
Hydrodynamics
Magnetohydrodynamics
Star formation
Physical cosmology
Stellar astrophysics
Helioseismology
Stellar evolution
Stellar nucleosynthesis
Planetary science


===
Physics ===


==
Formal Sciences ==


===
Computer Science ===
Also a branch of electrical engineering


===
Mathematics ===
Pure mathematics
Applied mathematics


== Applied Sciences ==


===
Business ===
Accounting
Business management
Finance
Marketing
Operations management


===
Engineering and technology ===


===
Medicine and health ===


==
See also ==
Academia (outline)
Academic genealogy
Curriculum
Interdisciplinarity
Transdisciplinarity
Professions
Classification of Instructional Programs
Joint Academic Coding System
List of fields of doctoral studies in the United States
List of academic fields
International Academic Association for the Enhancement of Learning in Higher Education


==
References ==
Abbott, Andrew (2001).
Chaos of Disciplines.
University of Chicago Press.
ISBN 978-0-226-00101-2.

Oleson, Alexandra; Voss, John (1979).
The Organization of knowledge in modern America, 1860-1920.
ISBN 0-8018-2108-8.

US Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences.
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP).
National Center for Education Statistics.

==
External links ==
Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP 2000): Developed by the U.S. Department of Education's National Center for Education Statistics to provide a taxonomic scheme that will support the accurate tracking, assessment, and reporting of fields of study and program completions activity.

Complete JACS (Joint Academic Classification of Subjects) from Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) in the United Kingdom
Australian and New Zealand Standard Research Classification (ANZSRC 2008)
(web-page)
Chapter 3 and Appendix 1: Fields of research classification.

Fields of Knowledge, a zoomable map allowing the academic disciplines and sub-disciplines in this article be visualised.

Sandoz, R. (ed.),
Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines, University of Geneva
This is a list of equipment of the Russian Ground Forces currently in service.

==
Individual equipment ==


==
Small arms ==


==
Artillery ==


== Vehicles ==


==
Unmanned vehicles ==


==
Future equipment ==


==
Future vehicles ==


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
GlobalSecurity
Warfare.be Russian Military Analysis
(Archived 18 May 2016)
Russian Army Military equipment and vehicles of Russia on armyrecognition.com
ЦАМТО /
Новости / Валерий Герасимов:
за
пятилетний период принято
на
вооружение более
300 новых образцов
ВиВТ
A directed-energy weapon (DEW) is a ranged weapon that damages its target with highly focused energy, including laser, microwaves, and particle beams.
Potential applications of this technology include weapons that target personnel, missiles, vehicles, and optical devices.
In the United States, the Pentagon, DARPA, the Air Force Research Laboratory, United States
Army Armament Research Development and Engineering Center, and the Naval Research Laboratory are researching directed-energy weapons and railguns to counter ballistic missiles, hypersonic cruise missiles, and hypersonic glide vehicles.

These systems of missile defense are expected to come online no sooner than the mid to late-2020s.
Russia, China, India, and the United Kingdom are also developing directed-energy weapons while Iran and Turkey claim to have directed-energy weapons in active service and the first usage of directed-energy weapons in a combat was claimed to have occurred in Libya in August 2019 by Turkey which claimed to use the ALKA Directed-energy weapon.
After decades of research and development, directed-energy weapons are still at the experimental stage and it remains to be seen if or when they will be deployed as practical, high-performance military weapons.

==
Operational advantages ==
Directed energy weapons could have several main advantages over conventional weaponry:
Directed-energy weapons can be used discreetly; radiation above and below the visible spectrum is invisible and does not generate sound.

Light is, for all practical purposes, essentially unaffected by gravity, windage and Coriolis force, giving it an almost perfectly flat trajectory.
This makes aim much more precise and extends the range to line-of-sight, limited only by beam diffraction and spread (which dilute the power and weaken the effect), and absorption or scattering by intervening atmospheric contents.

Lasers travel at light-speed and have near infinite range and are therefore suitable for use in space warfare.

Laser weapons potentially eliminate many logistical problems in terms of ammunition supply, as long as there is enough energy to power them.

Depending on several operational factors, directed-energy weapons may be cheaper to operate than conventional weapons in certain contexts.

==
Microwave weapons ==
Although some devices are labeled as microwave weapons, the microwave range is commonly defined as being between 300 MHz and 300 GHz, which is within the RF range—these frequencies having wavelengths of 1 millimeter to 1 meter.
Some examples of weapons which have been publicized by the military are as follows:

Active Denial System is a millimeter wave source that heats the water in a human target's skin and thus causes incapacitating pain.
It was developed by the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory and Raytheon for riot-control duty.
Though intended to cause severe pain while leaving no lasting damage, concern has been voiced as to whether the system could cause irreversible damage to the eyes.
There has yet to be testing for long-term side effects of exposure to the microwave beam.
It can also destroy unshielded electronics.
The device comes in various sizes, including attached to a Humvee.

Vigilant Eagle is a proposed airport defense system that directs high-frequency microwaves towards any projectile that is fired at an aircraft.
The system consists of a missile-detecting and tracking subsystem (MDT), a command and control system, and a scanning array.
The MDT is a fixed grid of passive infrared (IR) cameras.
The command and control system determines the missile launch point.
The scanning array projects microwaves that disrupt the surface-to-air missile's guidance system, deflecting it from the aircraft.

Bofors HPM Blackout is a high-powered microwave weapon that is said to be able to destroy at short distance a wide variety of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) electronic equipment and is purportedly non-lethal.

The effective radiated power (ERP) of the EL/M-2080 Green Pine radar makes it a hypothetical candidate for conversion into a directed-energy weapon, by focusing pulses of radar energy on target missiles.
The energy spikes are tailored to enter missiles through antennas or sensor apertures where they can fool guidance systems, scramble computer memories or even burn out sensitive electronic components.

AESA radars mounted on fighter aircraft have been slated as directed energy weapons against missiles, however, a senior US Air Force officer noted: "they aren't particularly suited to create weapons effects on missiles because of limited antenna size, power and field of view".
Potentially lethal effects are produced only inside 100 meters range, and disruptive effects at distances on the order of one kilometer.
Moreover, cheap countermeasures can be applied to existing missiles.

Counter-electronics High Power Microwave Advanced Missile Project
==
Laser weapons ==
A laser weapon is a directed-energy weapon based on lasers.

== Particle-beam weapons ==

Particle-beam weapons can use charged or neutral particles, and can be either endoatmospheric or exoatmospheric.
Particle beams as beam weapons are theoretically possible, but practical weapons have not been demonstrated yet.
Certain types of particle beams have the advantage of being self-focusing in the atmosphere.

Blooming is also a problem in particle-beam weapons.
Energy that would otherwise be focused on the target spreads out and the beam becomes less effective:
Thermal blooming occurs in both charged and neutral particle beams, and occurs when particles bump into one another under the effects of thermal vibration, or bump into air molecules.

Electrical blooming occurs only in charged particle beams, as ions of like charge repel one another.

===
Plasma weapons ===
Plasma weapons fire a beam, bolt, or stream of plasma, which is an excited state of matter consisting of atomic electrons & nuclei and free electrons if ionized, or other particles if pinched.

The MARAUDER (Magnetically Accelerated Ring to Achieve Ultra-high Directed-Energy and Radiation) used the Shiva Star project (a high energy capacitor bank which provided the means to test weapons and other devices requiring brief and extremely large amounts of energy) to accelerate a toroid of plasma at a significant percentage of the speed of light.
The Russian Federation is developing plasma weapons.

==
Sonic weapons ==
Tests performed on mice show the threshold for both lung and liver damage occurs at
about 184 dB. Damage increases rapidly as intensity is increased.
Noise-induced neurological disturbances in humans exposed to continuous low frequency tones for durations longer than 15 minutes involved development of immediate and long-term problems affecting brain tissue.
The symptoms resembled those of individuals who had suffered minor head injuries.
One theory for a causal mechanism is that the prolonged sound exposure resulted in enough mechanical strain to brain tissue to induce an encephalopathy.

===
Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) ===
The Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) is an acoustic hailing device developed by LRAD Corporation to send messages and warning tones over longer distances or at higher volume than normal loudspeakers.
LRAD systems are used for long-range communications in a variety of applications including as a means of non-lethal, non-kinetic crowd control.

According to the manufacturer's specifications, the systems weigh from 15 to 320 pounds (6.8 to 145.1 kg) and can emit sound in a 30°- 60° beam at 2.5 kHz.
==
History ==


===
Mirrors of Archimedes ===
According to a legend, Archimedes created a mirror with an adjustable focal length (or more likely, a series of mirrors focused on a common point) to focus sunlight on ships of the Roman fleet as they invaded Syracuse, setting them on fire.
Historians point out that the earliest accounts of the battle did not mention a "burning mirror", but merely stated that Archimedes's ingenuity combined with a way to hurl fire were relevant to the victory.
Some attempts to replicate this feat have had some success; in particular, an experiment by students at MIT showed that a mirror-based weapon was at least possible, if not necessarily practical.
The hosts of MythBusters tackled the Mirrors of Archimedes three times (in episodes 19, 57 and 172) and were never able to make the target ship catch fire, declaring the myth busted three separate times.

===
Robert Watson-Watt ===
In 1935, the British Air Ministry asked Robert Watson-Watt of the Radio Research Station whether a "death ray" was possible.
He and colleague Arnold Wilkins quickly concluded that it was not feasible, but
as a consequence suggested using radio for the detection of aircraft
and this started the development of radar in Britain.

===
The fictional "engine-stopping ray" ===
Stories in the 1930s and World War Two gave rise to the idea of an "engine-stopping ray".
They seemed to have arisen from the testing of the television transmitter in Feldberg, Germany.
Because electrical noise from car engines would interfere with field strength measurements, sentries would stop all traffic in the vicinity for the twenty minutes or so needed for a test.
Reversing the order of events in retelling the story created a "tale" where tourists car engine stopped first and then were approached by a German soldier who told them that they had to wait.
The soldier returned a short time later to say that the engine would now work and the tourists drove off.
Such stories were circulating in Britain around 1938 and during the war British Intelligence relaunched the myth as a "British engine-stopping ray," trying to spoof the Germans into researching what the British had supposedly invented in an attempt to tie up German scientific resources.

===
German World War II experimental weapons ===
During the early 1940s Axis engineers developed a sonic cannon that could cause fatal vibrations in its target body.
A methane gas combustion chamber leading to two parabolic dishes pulse-detonated at roughly 44 Hz.
This sound, magnified by the dish reflectors, caused vertigo and nausea at 200–400 meters (220–440 yd) by vibrating the middle ear bones and shaking the cochlear fluid within the inner ear.
At distances of 50–200 meters (160–660 ft), the sound waves could act on organ tissues and fluids by repeatedly compressing and releasing compressive resistant organs such as the kidneys, spleen, and liver.
(
It had little detectable effect on malleable organs such as the heart, stomach and intestines.)
Lung tissue was affected at only the closest ranges as atmospheric air is highly compressible and only the blood rich alveoli resist compression.
In practice, the weapon was highly vulnerable to enemy fire.
Rifle, bazooka and mortar rounds easily deformed the parabolic reflectors, rendering the wave amplification ineffective.
In the later phases of World War II, Nazi Germany increasingly put its hopes on research into technologically revolutionary secret weapons, the Wunderwaffe.

Among the directed-energy weapons the Nazis investigated were X-ray beam weapons developed under Heinz Schmellenmeier, Richard Gans and Fritz Houtermans.
They built an electron accelerator called Rheotron (invented by Max Steenbeck at Siemens-Schuckert in the 1930s, these were later called Betatrons by the Americans) to generate hard X-ray synchrotron beams for the Reichsluftfahrtministerium (RLM).
The intent was to pre-ionize ignition in aircraft engines and hence serve as anti-aircraft DEW and bring planes down into the reach of the flak.
The Rheotron was captured by the Americans in Burggrub on April 14, 1945.Another approach was Ernst Schiebolds 'Röntgenkanone' developed from 1943 in Großostheim near Aschaffenburg.
Richert Seifert & Co from Hamburg delivered parts.

===
Reported use in Sino-Soviet conflicts ===
The Central Intelligence Agency informed Secretary Henry Kissinger that it had twelve reports of Soviet forces using laser-based weapons against Chinese forces during the 1969 Sino-Soviet border clashes, though William Colby doubted that they had actually been employed.

===
Strategic Defense Initiative ===
In the 1980s, U.S. President Ronald Reagan proposed the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, which was nicknamed Star Wars.
It suggested that lasers, perhaps space-based X-ray lasers, could destroy ICBMs in flight.
Panel discussions on the role of high-power lasers in SDI took place at various laser conferences, during the 1980s, with the participation of noted physicists including Edward Teller.
Though the strategic missile defense concept has continued to the present under the Missile Defense Agency, most of the directed-energy weapon concepts were shelved.
However, Boeing has been somewhat successful with the Boeing YAL-1 and Boeing NC-135, the first of which destroyed two missiles in February 2010.
Funding has been cut to both of the programs.

===
Iraq War ===
During the Iraq War, electromagnetic weapons, including high power microwaves, were used by the U.S. military to disrupt and destroy Iraqi electronic systems and may have been used for crowd control.
Types and magnitudes of exposure to electromagnetic fields are unknown.

===
Alleged tracking of Space Shuttle Challenger ===
The Soviet Union invested some effort in the development of ruby and carbon dioxide lasers as anti-ballistic missile systems, and later as a tracking and anti-satellite system.
There are reports that the Terra-3 complex at Sary Shagan was used on several occasions to temporarily "blind" US spy satellites in the IR range.

It has been claimed (and proven false) that the USSR made use of the lasers at the Terra-3 site to target the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1984.
At the time, the Soviet Union were concerned that the shuttle was being used as a reconnaissance platform.
On 10 October 1984 (STS-41-G), the Terra-3 tracking laser was allegedly aimed at Challenger as it passed over the facility.
Early reports claimed that this was responsible for causing "malfunctions on the space shuttle and distress to the crew", and that the United States filed a diplomatic protest about the incident.
However, this story is comprehensively denied by the crew members of STS-41-G and knowledgeable members of the US intelligence community.
After the end of the Cold War, the Terra-3 facility was found to be a low-power laser testing site with limited satellite tracking capabilities, which is now abandoned and partially disassembled.

==
Planetary defense ==
In the United States, the Directed Energy Solar Targeting of Asteroids and exploRation (DE-STAR) Project was considered for non-military use to protect Earth from asteroids.

== Non-lethal weapons ==
The TECOM Technology Symposium in 1997 concluded on non-lethal weapons, "determining the target effects on personnel is the greatest challenge to the testing community", primarily because  "the potential of injury and death severely limits human tests".
Also, "directed-energy weapons that target the central nervous system and cause neurophysiological disorders may violate the Certain Conventional Weapons Convention of 1980.
Weapons that go beyond non-lethal intentions and cause 'superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering' may also violate the Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977."Some common bio-effects of non-lethal electromagnetic weapons include:

Difficulty breathing
Disorientation
Nausea
Pain
Vertigo
Other systemic discomfortInterference with breathing poses
the most significant, potentially lethal results.

Light and repetitive visual signals can induce epileptic seizures.
Vection and motion sickness can also occur.

Cruise ships are known to use sonic weapons (such as LRAD) to drive off pirates.
Russia has been reportedly using blinding laser weapons during its military intervention in Donbass.

== See also ==


===
Similar articles ===
Electronic warfare
Electromagnetic pulse
L3Harris
Technologies
Laser applications
List of laser articles
List of plasma (physics)
applications articles


===
Directed-energy weapons ===
Active Denial System (ADS), a non-lethal directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control
ALKA, possibly the first Directed-energy weapon to be used in combat
MEDUSA (weapon)


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Airpower Australia
Applied Energetics – Photonic and high-voltage energetics (formerly Ionatron)
Wired News (AP) article on weapons deployment in Iraq, Active Denial System and Stunstrike, July 10, 2005
Boeing Tests Laser-Mounted Humvee as IED Hunter, November 13, 2007
WSTIAC Quarterly, Vol.
7
, No.
1
– Directed Energy Weapons
Ogonek Report on '21st Century Weapons'
How 'Revolutionary' Is CHAMP, New Air Force Microwave Weapon?,
November 28, 2012
By David Axe
Lethal autonomous weapons (LAWs) are a type of autonomous military system that can independently search for and engage targets based on programmed constraints and descriptions.

LAWs are also known as lethal autonomous weapon systems (LAWS), autonomous weapon systems (AWS), robotic weapons, killer robots or slaughterbots.
LAWs may operate in the air, on land, on water, under water, or in space.
The autonomy of current systems as of 2018 was restricted in the sense that a human gives the final command to attack - though there are exceptions with certain "defensive" systems.

==
Being autonomous as a weapon ==
Being "autonomous"  has different meanings in different fields of study.
In engineering it may refer to the machine's ability to operate without human involvement.
In philosophy it may refer to an individual being morally independent.
In political science it may refer to an area's capability of self-governing.
In terms of military weapon development, the identification of a weapon as autonomous is not as clear as in other areas.

The specific standard entailed in the concept of being autonomous can vary hugely between different scholars, nations and organizations.

Various people have many definitions of what constitutes a lethal autonomous weapon.
Heather Roff, a writer for Case Western Reserve University School of Law, describes autonomous weapon systems as "armed weapons systems, capable of learning and adapting their 'functioning in response to changing circumstances in the environment in which [they are] deployed,' as well as capable of making firing decisions on their own.
"
This definition of autonomous weapon systems is a fairly high threshold compared to the definitions of scholars such as Peter Asaro and Mark Gubrud's definitions seen below.

Scholars such as Peter Asaro and Mark Gubrud are trying to set the threshold lower and judge more weapon systems as autonomous.
They believe that any weapon system that is capable of releasing a lethal force without the operation, decision, or confirmation of a human supervisor can be deemed autonomous.
According to Gubrud, a weapon system operating partially or wholly without human intervention is considered autonomous.
He argues that a weapon system does not need to be able to make decisions completely by itself in order to be called autonomous.
Instead, it should be treated as autonomous as long as it actively involves in one or multiple parts of the "preparation process", from finding the target to finally firing.
Other organizations, however, are setting the standard of autonomous weapon system in a higher position.
The Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom) defines autonomous weapon systems as "systems that are capable of understanding higher level intent and direction.
From this understanding and its perception of its environment, such a system is able to take appropriate action to bring about a desired state.
It is capable of deciding a course of action, from a number of alternatives, without depending on human oversight and control - such human engagement with the system may still be present, though.
While the overall activity of an autonomous unmanned aircraft will be predictable, individual actions may not be.
"As
a result, the composition of a treaty between states requires a commonly accepted labeling of what exactly constitutes an autonomous weapon.

==
Automatic defensive systems ==
The oldest automatically triggered lethal weapon is the land mine, used since at least the 1600s, and naval mines, used since at least the 1700s.

Anti-personnel mines are banned in many countries by the 1997 Ottawa Treaty, not including the United States, Russia, and much of Asia and the Middle East.

Some current examples of LAWs are automated "hardkill" active protection systems, such as a radar-guided CIWS systems used to defend ships that have been in use since the 1970s (e.g., the US Phalanx CIWS).
Such systems can autonomously identify and attack oncoming missiles, rockets, artillery fire, aircraft and surface vessels according to criteria set by the human operator.
Similar systems exist for tanks, such as the Russian Arena, the Israeli Trophy, and the German AMAP-ADS.
Several types of stationary sentry guns, which can fire at humans and vehicles, are used in South Korea and Israel.
Many missile defence systems, such as Iron Dome, also have autonomous targeting capabilities.
Automatic turrets installed on military vehicles are called remote weapon stations.

The main reason for not having a "human in the loop" in these systems is the need for rapid response.
They have generally been used to protect personnel and installations against incoming projectiles.

==
Autonomous offensive systems ==
Systems with a higher degree of autonomy would include drones or unmanned combat aerial vehicles, e.g.: "The unarmed BAE Systems Taranis jet-propelled combat drone prototype may lead to a Future Combat Air System that can autonomously search, identify, and locate enemies but can only engage with a target when authorized by mission command.
It can also defend itself against enemy aircraft" (Heyns 2013, §45).
The Northrop Grumman X-47B drone can take off and land on aircraft carriers (demonstrated in 2014); it is set to be developed into an Unmanned Carrier-Launched Airborne Surveillance and Strike (UCLASS) system.

According to The Economist, as technology advances, future applications of unmanned undersea vehicles might include mine clearance, mine-laying, anti-submarine sensor networking in contested waters, patrolling with active sonar, resupplying manned submarines, and becoming low-cost missile platforms.
In 2018 the U.S. Nuclear Posture Review alleged that Russia is developing a "new intercontinental, nuclear-armed, nuclear-powered, undersea autonomous torpedo" named "Status 6".
The Russian Federation is actively developing artificially intelligent missiles, drones, unmanned vehicles, military robots and medic robots.
Israeli Minister Ayoob Kara stated in 2017 that Israel is developing military robots, including ones as small as flies.
In October 2018, Zeng Yi, a senior executive at Chinese Defense Firm Norinco, gave a speech in which he said that "In future battlegrounds, there will be no people fighting," and that the use of lethal autonomous weapons in warfare is "inevitable."
In 2019, US Defense Secretary Mark Esper lashed out at China for selling drones capable of taking life with no human oversight.
The British Army deployed new unmanned vehicles and military robots in 2019.The US Navy is developing "ghost" fleets of unmanned ships.

== Ethical and legal issues ==


===
Standard used in US policy ===
Current US policy states: "Autonomous … weapons systems shall be designed to allow commanders and operators to exercise appropriate levels of human judgment over the use of force."

However, the policy requires that autonomous weapon systems that kill people or use kinetic force, selecting and engaging targets without further human intervention, be certified as compliant with "appropriate levels" and other standards, not that such weapon systems cannot meet these standards and are therefore forbidden.
"
Semi-autonomous" hunter-killers that autonomously identify and attack targets do not even require certification.

Deputy Defense Secretary Robert Work said in 2016 that the Defense Department would "not delegate lethal authority to a machine to make a decision", but might need to reconsider this since "authoritarian regimes" may do so.
In October 2016 President Barack Obama stated that early in his career he was wary of a future in which a US president making use of drone warfare could "carry on perpetual wars all over the world, and a lot of them covert, without any accountability or democratic debate".
In the US, security-related AI has fallen under the purview of the National Security Commission on Artificial Intelligence since 2018.
On October 31, 2019, the United States Department of Defense's Defense Innovation Board published the draft of a report outlining five principles for weaponized AI and making 12 recommendations for the ethical use of artificial intelligence by the Department of Defense that would ensure a human operator would always be able to look into the 'black box' and understand the kill-chain process.
A major concern is how the report will be implemented.

===
Possible violations of ethics and international acts ===
Stuart Russell, professor of computer science from University of California, Berkeley stated the concern he has with LAWS is that his view is that it is unethical and inhumane.
The main issue with this system is it is hard to distinguish between combatants and non-combatants.
There is concern by some (e.g.g Noel Sharkey 2012) about whether LAWs would violate International Humanitarian Law, especially the principle of distinction, which requires the ability to discriminate combatants from non-combatants, and the principle of proportionality, which requires that damage to civilians is proportional to the military aim.
This concern is often invoked as a reason to ban "killer robots" altogether - but it is doubtful that this concern can be an argument against LAWs that do not violate International Humanitarian Law.
LAWs are said by some to blur the boundaries of who is responsible for a particular killing, but Thomas Simpson and Vincent Müller argue that they may make it easier to record who gave which command.
Likewise, Steven Umbrello, Phil Torres and Angelo F. De Bellis argue that if the technical capacities of LAWs are at least as accurate as human soldiers, then given the psychological shortcomings of human soldiers in war warrants that only these types of ethical LAWs should be used.
Likewise, they propose using the value sensitive design approach as a potential framework for designing these laws to align with human values and International Humanitarian Law.

===
Campaigns to ban LAWs ===
The possibility of LAWs has generated significant debate, especially about the risk of "killer robots" roaming the earth - in the near or far future.
The group Campaign to Stop Killer Robots formed in 2013.
In July 2015, over 1,000 experts in artificial intelligence signed a letter warning of the threat of an artificial intelligence arms race and calling for a ban on autonomous weapons.
The letter was presented in Buenos Aires at the 24th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-15) and was co-signed by Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, Noam Chomsky, Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and Google DeepMind co-founder Demis Hassabis, among others.
According to PAX (One of the founding organisations of The Campaign to Stop Killer Robots), fully automated weapons (FAWs) will lower the threshold of going to war as soldiers are removed from the battlefield and the public is distanced from experiencing war, giving politicians and other decision-makers more space in deciding when and how to go to war.
They warn that once deployed, FAWs will make democratic control of war more difficult - something that author of Kill Decision - a novel on the topic - and IT specialist Daniel Suarez also warned about: according to him it might recentralize power into very few hands by requiring very few people to go to war.
There are websites protesting the development of LAWs by presenting  undesirable ramifications if research into the appliance of artificial intelligence to designation of weapons continues.
On these websites, news about ethical and legal issues are constantly updated for visitors to recap with recent news about international meetings and research articles concerning LAWs.
The Holy See has called for the international community to ban the use of LAWS on several occasions.
In November 2018, Archbishop Ivan Jurkovic, the permanent observer of the Holy See to the United Nations, stated that “In order to prevent an arms race and the increase of inequalities and instability, it is an imperative duty to act promptly: now is the time to prevent LAWS from becoming the reality of tomorrow’s warfare.”
The Church worries that these weapons systems have the capability to irreversibly alter the nature of warfare, create detachment from human agency and put in question the humanity of societies.
As of 29 March 2019, the majority of governments represented at a UN meeting to discuss the matter favoured a ban on LAWS.
A minority of governments, including those of Australia, Israel, Russia, the UK, and the US, opposed a ban.

===
No ban, but regulation ===
A third approach focuses on regulating the use of autonomous weapon systems in lieu of a ban.
Military AI arms control will likely require the institutionalization of new international norms embodied in effective technical specifications combined with active monitoring and informal ('Track II') diplomacy by communities of experts, together with a legal and political verification process.

== See also ==
Artificial intelligence arms race
List of fictional military robots
Slaughterbots


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Heyns, Christof (2013), ‘Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions’, UN General Assembly, Human Rights Council, 23 (3),
A/HRC/23/47.

Krishnan, Armin (2009), Killer robots:
Legality and ethicality of autonomous weapons (Aldershot:
Ashgate)
Müller, Vincent C. (2016), ‘Autonomous killer robots are probably good news’, in Ezio Di Nucci and Filippo
Santoni de Sio (eds.),
Drones and responsibility:
Legal, philosophical and socio-technical perspectives on the use of remotely controlled weapons, 67-81 (London: Ashgate).

Stuart Russell's campaign against LAWs
Sharkey, Noel E (2012), ‘Automating Warfare: lessons learned from the drones’, Journal of Law, Information & Science, 21 (2).

Simpson, Thomas W and Müller, Vincent C. (2016), ‘Just war and robots’ killings’, The Philosophical Quarterly 66 (263), 302–22.

Singer, Peter (2009), Wired for war:
The robotics revolution and conflict in the 21st Century (New York: Penguin)
US Department of Defense (2012), ‘
Directive 3000.09,
Autonomy in weapon systems’.
<2014
Killer Robots Policy Paper Final.docx>.

US Department of Defense (2013), ‘Unmanned Systems Integrated Road Map FY2013-2038’.
<http://www.defense.gov/pubs/DOD-USRM-2013.pdf%3E.
The Ethics of Autonomous Weapons Systems
(2014) Seminar at UPenn <https://www.law.upenn.edu/institutes/cerl/conferences/ethicsofweapons/schedule-required-readings.php>
Military organization or military organisation is the structuring of the armed forces of a state so as to offer such military capability as a national defense policy may require.
In some countries paramilitary forces are included in a nation's armed forces, though not considered military.
Armed forces that are not a part of military or paramilitary organizations, such as insurgent forces, often mimic military organizations, or use ad hoc structures, while formal military organization tends to use hierarchical forms.

==
History ==
The use of formalized ranks in a hierarchical structure came into widespread use with the Roman Army.

In modern times, executive control, management and administration of military organization is typically undertaken by governments through a government department within the structure of public administration, often known as a  ministry of defence or department of defense.
These in turn manage military branches that themselves command formations and units specialising in combat, combat support and combat-service support.

== Executive control, management and administration ==
The usually civilian or partly civilian executive control over the national military organization is exercised in democracies by an elected political leader as a member of the government's cabinet, usually known as a minister of defence.
In presidential systems, such as the United States, the president is the commander-in-chief, and the cabinet-level defense minister is second in command.
Subordinated to that position are often secretaries for specific major operational divisions of the armed forces as a whole, such as those that provide general support services to the military, including their dependants.

Then there are the heads of specific departmental agencies responsible for the provision and management of specific skill- and knowledge-based service such as strategic advice, capability development assessment, or military science provision of research, and design and development of technologies.
Within each departmental agency will be found administrative branches responsible for further agency business specialization work.

==
Military branches ==
In most countries the armed forces are divided into three military branches (also service, armed service, or military service): army, navy, and air force.

Many countries have a variation on the standard model of three basic military branches.
Some nations also organize their marines, special forces or strategic missile forces as independent armed services.
A nation's coast guard may also be an independent military branch of its military, although in many nations the coast guard is a law enforcement or civil agency.
A number of countries have no navy, for geographical reasons.

In larger armed forces the culture between the different branches of the armed forces can be quite different.

Most smaller countries have a single organization that encompasses all armed forces employed by the country in question.
Armies of developing countries tend to consist primarily of infantry, while developed countries armies tend to have larger units manning expensive equipment and only a fraction of personnel in infantry units.

It is worthwhile to make mention of the term joint.

In western militaries, a joint force is defined as a unit or formation comprising representation of combat power from two or more branches of the military.

===
Internal security forces ===
Gendarmeries, including equivalents such as internal troops, paramilitary forces and similar, are an internal security service common in most of the world, but uncommon in countries with English common law histories where civil police are employed to enforce the law, and there are tight restrictions on how the armed forces may be used to assist.

==
Commands, formations, and units ==
It is common, at least in the European and North American militaries, to refer to the building blocks of a military as commands, formations, and units.

In a military context, a command is a collection of units and formations under the control of a single officer.
Although during the Second World War a command was also a name given to a battle group in the US Army, in general it is an administrative and executive strategic headquarters which is responsible to the national government or the national military headquarters.
It is not uncommon for a nation's services to each consist of their own command (such as Land Component, Air Component, Naval Component, and Medical Component in the Belgian Army), but this does not preclude the existence of commands which are not service-based.

A formation is defined by the US Department of Defense as "two or more aircraft, ships, or units proceeding together under a commander".
Formin in the Great Soviet Encyclopedia emphasised its combined-arms nature:
"Formations are those military organisations which are formed from different speciality Arms and Services troop units to create a balanced, combined combat force.
The formations only differ in their ability to achieve different scales of application of force to achieve different strategic, operational and tactical goals and mission objectives.
"
It is a composite military organization that includes a mixture of integrated and operationally attached sub-units, and is usually combat-capable.
Example of formations include: divisions, brigades, battalions, wings, etc.
Formation may also refer to tactical formation, the physical arrangement or disposition of troops and weapons.
Examples of formation in such usage include: pakfront, panzerkeil, testudo formation, etc.

A typical unit is a homogeneous military organization (either combat, combat-support or non-combat in capability) that includes service personnel predominantly from a single arm of service, or a branch of service, and its administrative and command functions are self-contained.
Any unit subordinate to another unit is considered its sub-unit or minor unit.
It is not uncommon for unit and formation to be used synonymously in the United States.
In Commonwealth of Nations practice, formation is not used for smaller organizations like battalions which are instead called "units", and their constituent platoons or companies are referred to as sub-units.
In the Commonwealth, formations are divisions, brigades, etc.

Different armed forces, and even different branches of service of the armed forces, may use the same name to denote different types of organizations.
An example is the "squadron".
In most navies a squadron is a formation of several ships; in most air forces it is a unit; in the U.S. Army it is a battalion-sized cavalry unit; and in Commonwealth armies a squadron is a company-sized sub-unit.

==
Table of organization and equipment ==
A table of organization and equipment (TOE or TO&E) is a document published by the U.S. Army Force Management Support Agency that prescribes the organization, manning, and equipage of units from divisional size and down, but also including the headquarters of Corps and Armies.

It also provides information on the mission and capabilities of a unit as well as the unit's current status.
A general TOE is applicable to a type of unit (for instance, infantry) rather than a specific unit (the 3rd Infantry Division).
In this way, all units of the same branch (such as infantry) follow the same structural guidelines.

==
Modern hierarchy ==


===
Army hierarchy ===
The following table gives an overview of some of the terms used to describe army hierarchy in armed forces across the world.
Whilst it is recognized that there are differences between armies of different nations, many are modeled on the British or American models, or both.
However, many military units and formations go back in history for a long time, and were devised by various military thinkers throughout European history.

For example, the modern Corps was first introduced in France about 1805 by Napoleon as a more flexible tactical grouping of two or more divisions during the Napoleonic Wars.

Rungs may be skipped in this ladder: for example, typically NATO forces skip from battalion to brigade.
Likewise, only large military powers may have organizations at the top levels and different armies and countries may also use traditional names, creating considerable confusion: for example, a British or Canadian armored regiment (battalion) is divided into squadrons (companies) and troops (platoons), whereas an American cavalry squadron (battalion) is divided into troops (companies) and platoons.
In the French system (used by many African countries) the company is divided into sections (platoons) composed of 3 x "groupes de combat" of 7 soldiers, plus a group of vehicle crews and a HQ that includes 2 x snipersArmy, army group, region, and theatre are all large formations that vary significantly between armed forces in size and hierarchy position.

While divisions were the traditional level at which support elements (field artillery, hospital, logistics and maintenance, etc.)
were added to the unit structure, since World War II, many brigades now have such support units, and since the 1980s, regiments also have been receiving support elements.

A regiment with such support elements is called a regimental combat team in US military parlance, or a battlegroup in the UK and other forces.
Canadian Army doctrine also includes the combat team which is a company of infantry augmented with tanks, or a squadron of tanks augmented with infantry, or the combination of a full company of infantry with a full squadron of tanks.

During World War II the Red Army used the same basic organizational structure.

However, in the beginning many units were greatly underpowered and their size was actually one level below on the ladder that is usually used elsewhere; for example, a division in the early-WWII Red Army would have been about the size of most nations' regiments or brigades.
At the top of the ladder, what other nations would call an army group, the Red Army called a front.
By contrast, during the same period the German Wehrmacht Army Groups, particularly on the Eastern Front, such as Army Group Centre significantly exceeded the above numbers, and were more cognate with the Soviet Strategic Directions.
===
Naval hierarchy ===
Naval organization at the flotilla level and higher is less commonly abided by, as ships operate in smaller or larger groups in various situations that may change at a moment's notice.

However, there is some common terminology used throughout navies to communicate the general concept of how many vessels might be in a unit.

Navies are generally organized into groups for a specific purpose, usually strategic, and these organizational groupings appear and disappear frequently based on the conditions and demands placed upon a navy.

This contrasts with army organization where units remain static, with the same men and equipment, over long periods of time.

The five-star ranks of admiral of the fleet and fleet admiral have largely been out of regular use since the 1990s, with the exception of ceremonial or honorary appointments.
Currently, all major navies are commanded by an admiral (four-star rank) or vice-admiral (three-star rank) depending on relative size.
Smaller naval forces, such as the RNZN, or those navies that are effectively coast guards, are commanded by a rear-admiral (two-star rank), commodore (one-star rank) or even a captain.

Aircraft carriers are typically commanded by a captain.
Submarines and destroyers are typically commanded by a captain or commander.

Some destroyers, particularly smaller destroyers such as frigates (formerly known as destroyer escorts) are usually commanded by officers with the rank of commander.
Corvettes, the smallest class of warship, are commanded by officers with the rank of commander or lieutenant-commander.
Auxiliary ships, including gunboats, minesweepers, patrol boats, military riverine craft, tenders and torpedo boats are usually commanded by lieutenants, sub-lieutenants or warrant officers.

Usually, the smaller the vessel, the lower the rank of the ship's commander.

For example, patrol boats are often commanded by ensigns, while frigates are rarely commanded by an officer below the rank of commander.

Historical navies were far more rigid in structure.

Ships were collected in divisions, which in turn were collected in numbered squadrons, which comprised a numbered fleet.

Permission for a vessel to leave one unit and join another would have to be approved on paper.

The modern U.S. Navy is primarily based on a number of standard groupings of vessels, including the carrier strike group and the expeditionary strike group.
Additionally, naval organization continues aboard a single ship.
The complement forms three or four departments (such as tactical and engineering),
each of which has a number of divisions, followed by work centers.

===
Air Force hierarchy ===
The organizational structures of air forces vary between nations: some air forces (such as the United States Air Force and the Royal Air Force) are divided into commands, groups and squadrons; others (such as the Soviet Air Force) have an Army-style organizational structure.

The modern Royal Canadian Air Force uses Air Division as the formation between wings and the entire air command.

Like the RAF, Canadian wings consist of squadrons.

==
Task force ==
A task force is a unit or formation created as a temporary grouping for a specific operational purpose.

Aside from administrative hierarchical forms of organization that have evolved since the early 17th century in Europe, fighting forces have been grouped for specific operational purposes into mission-related organizations such as the German Kampfgruppe or the U.S. Combat Team (Army) and Task Force (Navy) during the Second World War, or the Soviet Operational manoeuvre group during the Cold War.
In the British and Commonwealth armies the battlegroup became the usual grouping of companies during the Second World War and the Cold War.

Within NATO, a Joint Task Force (JTF) would be such a temporary grouping that includes elements from more than one armed service, a Combined Task Force (CTF)
would be such a temporary grouping that includes elements from more than one nation, and
a Combined Joint Task Force (CJTF) would be such a temporary grouping that includes elements of more than one armed service and more than one nation.

== See also ==
Chalk (military)
Command and control
Military administration


== Notes ==


==
References ==
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to war:
War – organised and often prolonged armed conflict that is carried out by states or non-state actors – is characterised by extreme violence, social disruption, and economic destruction.
War should be understood as an actual, intentional and widespread armed conflict between political communities, and therefore is defined as a form of political violence or intervention.
Warfare – refers to the common activities and characteristics of types of war, or of wars in general.

== Types of war ==


===
Types of warfare ===
Asymmetric warfare
Expeditionary warfare
Expeditionary maneuver warfare


====
Warfare by objective ====
Defensive warfare
Offensive warfare


====
Warfare by strategic doctrine ====
====
Warfare by terrain ====
====
Warfare by equipment or weapon type ====


====
Warfare by era ====
====
Warfare by stages ====
First-generation warfare – refers to battles fought with massed manpower, using line and column tactics with uniformed soldiers governed by the state.
It includes the earliest stages of organized, state-controlled armed forces waging war in the modern era.

Second-generation warfare – tactics of warfare used after the invention of the rifled musket and breech-loading weapons and continuing through the development of the machine gun and indirect fire.

Third-generation warfare – focuses on using speed and surprise to bypass the enemy's lines and collapse their forces from the rear.
Essentially, this was the end of linear warfare on a tactical level, with units seeking not simply to meet each other face to face but to outmaneuver each other to gain the greatest advantage.

Fourth-generation warfare – conflict characterized by a blurring of the lines between war and politics, soldier and civilian.
It includes any war in which one of the major participants is not a state but rather a violent non-state actor.
Fourth-generation warfare is characterized by the nation states' loss of their near-monopoly on combat forces, returning to modes of conflict common in pre-modern times.

====
Other ====
Champion warfare
Underwater warfare


== History of war ==


===
Warfare by era ==
=
See:
Warfare by era, above
===
Wars ===


====
Wars by death toll ====
List of wars by death toll


====
Wars by date ====


====
Wars by region ====


====
Wars by type of conflict ====


===
Battles ===
Lists of battles
List of battles by casualties
List of orders of battle
List of sieges


===
Factions and forces ===


== Weapons of war ==


==
Military theory ==
Military theory
Philosophy of war
Principles of war
War cycles


===
Military organization ===


====
Operational level of war ====
Blitzkrieg
Soviet deep battle
Maneuver warfare
Operational manoeuvre group


=====
Military operations =====
List of military operations
Military operation plan
Military operations other than war


=====
=
Types of military operations ======
Types of military operations, by scope:

Theater
– operation over a large, often continental area of operation and represents a strategic national commitment to the conflict such as Operation Barbarossa, with general goals that encompass areas of consideration outside of the military such as the economic and political impacts.

Campaign – subset of the theatre operation, or a more limited geographic and operational strategic commitment such as Battle of Britain, and need not represent total national commitment to a conflict, or have broader goals outside of the military impacts.

Battle – subset of a campaign that will have specific military goals and geographic objectives, as well as clearly defined use of forces such as the Battle of Gallipoli, which operationally was a combined arms operation originally known as the "Dardanelles landings" as part of the Dardanelles Campaign, where about 480,000 Allied troops took part.

Engagement – tactical combat event of contest for specific area or objective by actions of distinct units.
For example, the Battle of Kursk, also known from its German designation as Operation Citadel, included many separate engagements, several of which were combined into the Battle of Prokhorovka.
The "Battle of Kursk" in addition to describing the initial German offensive operation (or simply an offensive), also included two Soviet counter-offensive operations Operation Kutuzov and Operation Polkovodets Rumyantsev.

Strike – single attack, upon a specified target.
This often forms part of a broader engagement.
Strikes have an explicit goal, such as, rendering facilities inoperable (e.g. airports), to assassinating enemy leaders, or to limit supply to enemy troops.

===
Military strategy ===
Attrition warfare
Battlespace
Military deception
Strategic defence
Offensive (military)
Strategic goal (military)
Naval strategy


====
Grand strategy ====
Containment
Economic warfare
Military science
Philosophy of war
Strategic studies
Total war
====
Military tactics ====


==
Politics of war ==
Casus belli – Latin expression meaning the justification for acts of war.
In theory, present international law allows only three situations as legal cause to go to war: out of self-defense, defense of an ally under a mutual defense pact, or sanctioned by the UN.

Declaration of war
War effort
War economy
Surrender
Capitulation an agreement in time of war for the surrender to a hostile armed force of a particular body of troops, a town or a territory.

Strategic surrender – surrender to avoid a last, chaotic round of fighting that would have the characteristics of a rout, allowing the victor to obtain his objective without paying the costs of a last battle.

Unconditional surrender – surrender without conditions, except for those provided by international law.

Victory
Debellatio – when a war ends because of the complete destruction of a belligerent state.

No quarter – when a victor shows no clemency or mercy and refuses to spare the life of the vanquished when they surrender at discretion.
Under the laws of war "... it is especially forbidden ... to declare that no quarter will be given".

Pyrrhic victory – victory with such a devastating cost
that it carries the implication that another such victory will ultimately lead to defeat.

===
Philosophy of war ===
Philosophy of war – examines war beyond the typical questions of weaponry and strategy, inquiring into such things as the meaning and etiology of war, the relationship between war and human nature, and the ethics of war.

Militarism – belief that war is not inherently bad but can be a beneficial aspect of society.

Realism – its core proposition is a skepticism as to whether moral concepts such as justice can be applied to the conduct of international affairs.
Proponents of realism believe that moral concepts should never prescribe, nor circumscribe, a state's behaviour.
Instead, a state should place an emphasis on state security and self-interest.
One form of realism – descriptive realism – proposes that states cannot act morally, while another form – prescriptive realism – argues that the motivating factor for a state is self-interest.
Just wars that violate Just Wars principles effectively constitute a branch of realism.

Revolution and Civil War – Just War Theory states that a just war must have just authority.
To the extent that this is interpreted as a legitimate government, this leaves little room for revolutionary war or civil war, in which an illegitimate entity may declare war for reasons that fit the remaining criteria of Just War Theory.
This is less of a problem if the "just authority" is widely interpreted as "the will of the people" or similar.
Article 3 of the 1949 Geneva Conventions side-steps this issue by stating that if one of the parties to a civil war is a High Contracting Party (in practice, the state recognised by the international community,) both Parties to the conflict are bound "as a minimum, the following [humanitarian] provisions."
Article 4 of the Third Geneva Convention also makes clear that the treatment of prisoners of war is binding on both parties even when captured soldiers have an "allegiance to a government or an authority not recognized by the Detaining Power."

Absolutism – holds that there are various ethical rules that are absolute.
Breaking such moral rules is never legitimate and therefore is always unjustifiable.

Pacifism – belief that war of any kind is morally unacceptable or pragmatically not worth the cost.
Pacifists extend humanitarian concern not just to enemy civilians but also to combatants, especially conscripts.
For example, Ben Salmon believed all war to be unjust.
He was sentenced to death during World War I (later commuted to 25 years hard labor) for desertion and spreading propaganda.

Right of self-defence – maintains (based on rational self-interest) that the use of retaliatory force is justified against repressive nations that break the zero aggression principle.
In addition, if a free country is itself subject to foreign aggression, it is morally imperative for that nation to defend itself and its citizens by whatever means necessary.
Thus, any means to achieve a swift and complete victory over the enemy is imperative.
This view is prominently held by Objectivists.

Consequentialism – moral theory most frequently summarized in the words "the end justifies the means," which tends to support the just war theory (unless the just war causes less beneficial means to become necessary, which further requires worst actions for self-defense with bad consequences).
=== Laws of war ===
Laws of war
War crimes
List of war crimes


===
Prisoners of war ===
===
Effects of war ===
Effects of war

Casualties
Casualty
Casualty classifications
KIA –
Killed In Action
DOW - Died Of Wounds
MIA –
Missing In Action
WIA – Wounded in action
Assassination
List of genocides by death toll


==
War and culture ==


==
War-related media ==


===
War publications ===
The Art of War
On War


===
War films ===
List of war films and TV specials – lists movies and shows by the war depicted in them, the sections arranged chronologically


==
Persons influential in war ==
List of military writers


==
See also ==


===
War ===
===
Wars ===


==
References ==
Charles Phillips and Alan Axelrod: Encyclopedia of Wars.
Facts On File, Inc., 2005, ISBN 0-8160-2851-6.
(
With about 1,800 wars, this is probably the most complete overview in English language).

R. Ernest Dupuy, Trevor N. Dupuy:
The Harper Encyclopedia of Military History.
From 3500 B.C. to the Present.
4th Edition, HarperCollins Publisher, 1993, ISBN 978-0062700568.
(
With about 1,300 wars this is probably the second most complete overview in English language, with the added value to summarize about 4,500 battles).

Vittorio Ferretti:
Weltchronik der Kriege und Demozide - Ein Abriss der Ursachen, Abläufe und Folgen von über 5.000 gewalttätig ausgetragenen Konflikten bis zum Jahr 2000.
Amazon, 2014, ISBN 978-3000403538.
(
With over 5,000 conflicts, this German book is by far the most complete overview published in any language till now.
Its added value is to include democides into its scope).

==
External links ==

World History Database Listing of all wars
Newspaper by Martin John Callanan translated into different languages listing all wars "[1]"
Correlates of War Project
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
Complex Emergency Database (CE-DAT) –
A database on the human impact of conflicts and other complex emergencies.

World War
I primary source collection
International humanitarian law – International Committee of the Red Cross website
Customary international humanitarian law International Committee of the Red Cross
International humanitarian law database – Treaties and States Parties
Customary IHL Database
 War zone safety travel guide from Wikivoyage
Military Institute of Technology (MILIT), Pune is an inter-services institution of the Ministry of Defence of the Republic of India.
MILIT is considered as soul of earstwhile Institute of Armament Studies (IAT), Girinagar established in year 1952.
It conducts prestigious Defence Services Technical Staff Course and trains officers of the three Services of Indian Armed Forces and officers from friendly foreign countries for command and staff appointments.

==
History ==
The fore-runner of MILIT is the Institute of Armament Studies established within the campus of College of Military Engineering (CME), Dapodi, Pune in 1952.
The Institute then was conducting only the Technical Staff Officers' Course for the Army.
In the ensuing years, several courses were added to the Institute curriculum based on the needs of the three Services, Defence Research and Development Organisation, DGQA, DAQA and Defence PSUs etc.

In 1967, the institute was renamed as "Institute of Armament Technology" (IAT), which moved into the picturesque location of Girinagar, on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake; its present location.
The institute is spread over 496 acres (201 ha) in scenic beautiful location, overlooking Khadakwasla dam, in Sahyadri hills.
From the relatively narrow scope of Armament Studies alone in the Fifties, the role of the institute was considerably enlarged by the Defence R&D Council in 1964 and further in 1981.

On the basis of accreditation by the All India Council of Technical Education (AICTE), Pune University recognised eight courses for the award of ME degree in 1982.
The institute acquired the status of a Deemed University in 1999.
It became autonomous w.e.f.
1 April 2006 and was rechristened as Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT), a Deemed to be University (DU).
At the same time, thoughts about bifurcating Military Training Wing started mushrooming and same was implemented om 19 Jan 2012.

To have an Institute completely dedicated to the needs of the three Services, a case was initiated to bifurcate MILIT from DIAT (DU).

The major Milestones leading to final formation of MILIT are given subsequently.
==
Campus ==
The institute is located on Pune-Sinhagad-Panshet road on the Southern Bank of Khadakwasla Lake at Girinagar, a scenicbeautiful place.
There is an all-weather road between NDA and MILIT.
MILIT Campus is serviced by Pune Municipal Transport bus services route
No 49, 50, 51 and 52.

The campus is spread over 496 acres, divided into Technical Complex and Residential Complex.

The Technical Complex is spread over 100 acres and houses the Academic Block, Administrative Headquarters, 51 Laboratories, library, etc.
of DIAT (DU) and MILIT, Pune.

Residential Complex is spread over 396 acres and has accommodation for 200 staff and student officers with the ancillaries like Officers' Mess, Officers' Institute, JCOs' Mess, MI Room, Sports Complex, CSD Canteen, Helipad, Gole Market with Bank, Post Office,
Gas Agency etc.
KV, Girinagar and MILIT Tiny Tots Primary School are also located in the campus.
Climate – Situated at a height of about 650 meters above mean sea level
, Girinagar has a pleasant and temperate climate.
However, the possibility of chilly nights cannot be ruled out from Nov to Jan.
The temperature varies from 8–40 Celsius during the year.
Summer, Monsoon and Winter seasons extend from Mar–Jun, Jul–Oct and Nov–Feb respectively.

==
Courses ==
In order to meet the specific and futuristic training requirements of Armed Forces, DIAT (DU) was bifurcated to form Military Institute of Training (MILIT), Pune.

MILIT is mandated to conduct 23 courses of varying durations from three days to 48 weeks for the Officers of the three services.

First Technical Staff Course was conducted in Yr 1953–54, later the name of the course was changed to Technical Staff Officer's Course (TSOC)
TSOC-01 was conducted in Yr 1975–76.

On 01 Jul 2018, TSOC-44 course was redesignated as Defence Services Technical Staff Course (DSTSC-01).
The  DSTSC-01 is the pioneer course of all Arms and Inter -Services mid seniority bracket of Officers whose Non Tech and Tech phase commenced from 4 June 18 and 2 July 18 respectively.
The student officers are being equipped, trained and nurtured by exposing them to cutting-edge technologies, latest procurement procedures and concrete military training so as to mould the course to face, handle and emerge victorious in all future challenges.

== See also ==
Indian National Defence University
Military Academies in
India
Sainik school


==
References ==
https://ids.nic.in/milit.php

Pune military institute of technology adopts Donje village, Indian Express
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/pune/First-batch-of-tech-staff-officers-pass-out-of-Military-Institute-of-Technology/articleshow/13424150.cms
https://www.robolab.in/clients/military-institute-of-technology-pune/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/events/pune/military-institute-of-technology-at-defexpo-2018/articleshow/63882547.cms?utm_source=whatsapp&utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=TOIMobile
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/seminar-on-challenges-of-self-reliance-in-defence-requirements-organised-5175747/
https://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/128-officers-pass-out-from-military-institute-of-technology-2802674/
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village-5120085/
https://www.nyoooz.com/news/pune/1072795/pune-military-institute-of-technology-adopts-donje-village/
https://www.punekarnews.in/valedictory-function-at-milit/
http://www.punekarnews.in/148-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/
http://www.uniindia.com/~/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-from-milit/States/news/1234974.html
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/146-armed-forces-officers-pass-out-milit-city-18347
http://www.dainikprabhat.com/%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%95%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%b7%e0%a4%ae-%e0%a4%b8%e0%a5%88%e0%a4%a8%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%af-%e0%a4%a6%e0%a4%b2%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%b8%e0%a4%be%e0%a4%a0%e0%a5%80-%e0%a4%86%e0%a4%b0%e0%a5%8d%e0%a4%9f/
http://www.sakaltimes.com/pune/milit-organises-workshop-ai-25090
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/pune/pune-over-22-officers-from-three-services-take-part-in-the-sixth-chapter-of-capstar-5365619/
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/military-officials-deliberate-digitisation-of-terrorism-social-media-misuse/articleshow/65903393.cms?utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=iOSapp&utm_source=WhatsApp.com
https://twitter.com/HQ_IDS_India/status/1033041483644002305https://www.punekarnews.in/milit-handle-bar-cycling-club-to-organise-a-farewell-ride-for-avm-vivek-rajhans-tomorrow/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-military-institute-of-technology-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.mypunepulse.com/milit-celebrates-10th-raising-day/
https://www.punekarnews.in/pune-maj-gen-hari-singh-is-the-new-commandant-of-military-institute-of-technology/


==
External links ==
https://www.ids.nic.in/
https://www.nda.nic.in/
http://www.unipune.ac.in/
Applied science is the use of the scientific method and knowledge to attain practical goals.
It includes a broad range of disciplines such as engineering and medicine.
Applied science is often contrasted with basic science, which is focused on advancing scientific theories and laws that explain and predict events in the natural world.

Applied science can also apply formal science, such as statistics and probability theory, as in epidemiology.
Genetic epidemiology is an applied science applying both biological and statistical methods.

==
Applied research ==
Applied research is the practical application of science.
It accesses and uses accumulated theories, knowledge, methods, and techniques, for a specific, state-, business-, or client-driven purpose.

Applied research is contrasted with pure research (basic research) in discussion about research ideals, methodologies, programs, and projects.
Applied research usually has specific commercial objectives related to products, procedures, or services.
The comparison of pure research and applied research provides a basic framework and direction for businesses to follow.

Applied research deals with solving practical problems and generally employs empirical methodologies.
Because applied research resides in the messy real world, strict research protocols may need to be relaxed.
For example, it may be impossible to use a random sample.
Thus, transparency in the methodology is crucial.
Implications for interpretation of results brought about by relaxing an otherwise strict canon of methodology should also be considered.
Since applied research has a provisional close-to-the-problem and close-to-the-data orientation, it may also use a more provisional conceptual framework such as working hypotheses or pillar questions.

The OECD's Frascati Manual describes applied research as one of the three forms of research, along with basic research & experimental development.
Due to its practical focus, applied research information will be found in the literature associated with individual disciplines.

== Branches ==
Engineering fields include thermodynamics, heat transfer, fluid mechanics, statics, dynamics, mechanics of materials, kinematics, electromagnetism, materials science, earth sciences, engineering physics.

Medical sciences, for instance medical microbiology and clinical virology, are applied sciences that apply biology toward medical knowledge and inventions, but not necessarily medical technology, whose development is more specifically biomedicine or biomedical engineering.

==
In education ==
In Canada, the Netherlands and other places
the Bachelor of Applied Science (BASc) is equivalent to the Bachelor of Engineering, and is classified as a professional degree.

The BASc tends to focus more on the application of the engineering sciences.

In Australia and New Zealand, this degree is awarded in various fields of study and is considered a highly specialized professional degree.

In the United Kingdom's educational system, Applied Science refers to a suite of "vocational" science qualifications that run alongside "traditional" General Certificate of Secondary Education or A-Level Sciences.
Applied Science courses generally contain more coursework (also known as portfolio or internally assessed work) compared to their traditional counterparts.
These are an evolution of the GNVQ qualifications that were offered up to 2005.

These courses regularly come under scrutiny and are due for review following the Wolf Report 2011;
however, their merits are argued elsewhere.
In the United States, The College of William & Mary offers an undergraduate minor as well as Master of Science and Doctor of Philosophy
degrees in "applied science.
"
Courses and research cover varied fields including neuroscience, optics, materials science and engineering, nondestructive testing, and nuclear magnetic resonance.
University of Nebraska–
Lincoln offers a Bachelor of Science in applied science, an online completion Bachelor of Science in applied science and a Master of Applied Science.
Course work is centered on science, agriculture and natural resources with a wide range of options including ecology, food genetics, entrepreneurship, economics, policy, animal science and plant science.
In New York City, the Bloomberg administration awarded the consortium of Cornell-Technion $100 million in City capital to construct the universities' proposed Applied Sciences campus on Roosevelt Island.

==
See also ==
Exact sciences
Basic research
Hard and soft
science
Invention
Secondary research


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Applied sciences at Wikimedia Commons
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to technology: collection of tools, including machinery, modifications, arrangements and procedures used by humans.
Engineering is the discipline that seeks to study and design new technology.
Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments.

== Components of technology ==
Knowledge
Engineering
Process
Science
Skill
Tools
Utensil
Equipment
Invention
Machinery
Structures (buildings, roads, bridges, canals, dams, etc.)

Man-made systems (see system)
Infrastructure
Public utility
==
Branches of technology ==
Aerospace – flight or transport above the surface of the Earth.

Space exploration – the physical investigation of the space more than 100 km above the Earth by either manned or unmanned spacecraft.

Applied physics – physics which is intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge or a connection between "pure" physics and engineering.

Agriculture – cultivation of plants, animals, and other living organisms.

Fishing – activity of trying to catch fish.
Fish are normally caught in the wild.
Techniques for catching fish include hand gathering, spearing, netting, angling and trapping.

Fisheries – a fishery is an entity engaged in raising or harvesting fish which is determined by some authority to be a fishery.
According to the FAO, a fishery is typically defined in terms of the "people involved, species or type of fish, area of water or seabed, method of fishing, class of boats, purpose of the activities or a combination of the foregoing features".

Fishing industry –  industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products.
It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors.

Forestry – art and science of tree resources, including plantations and natural stands.
The main goal of forestry is to create and implement systems that allow forests to continue a sustainable provision of environmental supplies and services.

Organic gardening and farming
Sustainable agriculture
Communication –
Books –
Telecommunication – the transfer of information at a distance, including signaling, telegraphy, telephony, telemetry, radio, television, and data communications.

Radio – Aural or encoded telecommunications.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

Technology of television –
Television broadcasting – Visual and aural telecommunications.

Computing – any goal-oriented activity requiring, benefiting from, or creating computers.
Computing includes designing and building hardware and software systems; processing, structuring, and managing various kinds of information; doing scientific research on and with computers; making computer systems behave intelligently; creating and using communications and entertainment media; and more.

Computer engineering –  discipline that integrates several fields of electrical engineering and computer science required to develop computer systems, from designing individual microprocessors, personal computers, and supercomputers, to circuit design.

Computers – general purpose devices that can be programmed to carry out a finite set of arithmetic or logical operations.
Since a sequence of operations can be readily changed, computers can solve more than one kind of problem.

Computer science – the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and of practical techniques for their implementation and application in computer systems.

Artificial intelligence – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Natural language processing –
Object recognition –
in computer vision, this is the task of finding a given object in an image or video sequence.

Cryptography – the technology to secure communications in the presence of third parties.

Human-computer interaction
Information technology – the acquisition, processing, storage and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numerical information by a microelectronics-based combination of computing and telecommunications.

Software engineering – the systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Programming – the process of designing, writing, testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code of computer programs.

Software development – development of a software product, which entails computer programming (process of writing and maintaining the source code),
but also encompasses a planned and structured process from the conception of the desired software to its final manifestation.

Web design and web development –
C++ – one of the most popular programming languages with application domains including systems software, application software, device drivers, embedded software, high-performance server and client applications, and entertainment software such as video games.

Perl – high-level, general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming language.

Used for text processing, CGI scripting, graphics programming, system administration, network programming, finance, bioinformatics, and more.

Software – one or more computer programs and data held in the storage of the computer for one or more purposes.
In other words, software is a set of programs, procedures, algorithms and its documentation concerned with the operation of a data processing system.

Free software – software that can be used, studied, and modified without restriction.

Search engines – information retrieval systems designed to help find information stored on a computer system.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

World Wide Web –
Computer industry
Apple Inc. – manufacturer and retailer of computers, hand-held computing devices, and related products and services.

Google – Google Inc. and its Internet services including Google Search.

Construction – building or assembly of any physical structure.

Design – the art and science of creating the abstract form and function for an object or environment.

Architecture – the art and science of designing buildings.

Electronics – Electronics comprises the physics, engineering, technology and applications that deal with the emission, flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter.

Energy –
In physics, energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on, or to heat, the object.

Energy development – ongoing effort to provide abundant, efficient, and accessible energy resources through knowledge, skills, and construction.

Energy storage – the storage of a form of energy that can then be used later.

Nuclear technology – the technology and application of the spontaneous and induced reactions of atomic nuclei.

Wind energy – wind energy is the use of wind to provide the mechanical power through wind turbines to turn electric generators and traditionally to do other work, like milling or pumping.

Solar energy – Solar energy is radiant light and heat from the Sun that is harnessed using a range of ever-evolving technologies such as solar heating, photovoltaics, solar thermal energy, solar architecture, molten salt power plants and artificial photosynthesis.

Engineering – the application of science, mathematics, and technology to produce useful goods and systems.

Chemical engineering – the technology and application of chemical processes to produce useful materials.

Computer engineering – Computer engineering (CE) is a branch of engineering that integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software.

Control engineering – Control engineering or control systems engineering is an engineering discipline that applies automatic control theory to design systems with desired behaviors in control environments.

Electrical engineering – the technology and application of electromagnetism, including electricity, electronics, telecommunications, computers, electric power, magnetics, and optics.

Climate engineering –  the large-scale manipulation of a specific process central to controlling Earth
’s climate for the purpose of obtaining a specific benefit.

Software engineering – the technology and application of a systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Firefighting – act of extinguishing fires.
A firefighter fights fires to prevent destruction of life, property and the environment.
Firefighting is a professional technical skill.

Forensic science – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health
Biotechnology – applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Ergonomics – the study of designing equipment and devices that fit the human body, its movements, and its cognitive abilities.

Hydrology – The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Industry – production of an economic good or service.

Automation – use of machinery to replace human labor.

Industrial machinery –
Machines – devices that perform or assist in performing useful work.

Manufacturing – use of machines, tools and labor to produce goods for use or sale.
The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.

Robotics – deals with the design, construction, operation, structural disposition, manufacture and application of robots.

Object recognition
Information science –
Cartography – the study and practice of making maps.
Combining science, aesthetics, and technique, cartography builds on the premise that reality can be modeled in ways that communicate spatial information effectively.

Library science – technology related to libraries and the information fields.

Military science – the study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Mining – extraction of mineral resources from the earth.

Nanotechnology –
The study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with structures sized between 1 and 100 nanometre in at least one dimension, and involves developing materials or devices possessing at least one dimension within that size.

Prehistoric technology – technologies that emerged before recorded history (i.e., before the development of writing).

Quantum technology  –
Sustainability – capacity to endure.
In ecology, the word describes how biological systems remain diverse and productive over time.
Long-lived and healthy wetlands and forests are examples of sustainable biological systems.
For humans, sustainability is the potential for long-term maintenance of well being, which has environmental, economic, and social dimensions.

Transport – the transfer of people or things from one place to another.

Rail transport –
means of conveyance of passengers and goods by way of wheeled vehicles running on rail tracks consisting of steel rails installed on sleepers/ties and ballast.

Vehicles – mechanical devices for transporting people or things.

Automobiles – human-guided powered land-vehicles.

Bicycles – human-powered land-vehicles with two or more wheels.

Motorcycles – single-track, engine-powered, motor vehicles.
They are also called motorbikes, bikes, or cycles.

Vehicle components
Tires – ring-shaped coverings that fit around wheel rims


==
Technology by region ==
Science and technology in Africa
Science and technology in Algeria
Science and technology in Angola
Science and technology in Morocco
Science and technology in South Africa
Science and technology in Asia
Science and technology in Bangladesh
Science and technology in China
Science and technology in India
Science and technology in Indonesia
Science and technology in Iran
Science and technology in Israel
Science and technology in Japan
Science and technology in Malaysia
Science and technology in Pakistan
Science and technology in the Philippines
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Turkey
Science and technology in Europe
Science and technology in Albania
Science and technology in Belgium
Science and technology in Brussels
Science and technology in Flanders
Science and technology in Wallonia
Science and technology in Bulgaria
Science and technology in France
Science and technology in Germany
Science and technology in Hungary
Science and technology in Iceland
Science and technology in Italy
Science and technology in Portugal
Science and technology in Romania
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Spain
Science and technology in Switzerland
Science and technology in Ukraine
Science and technology in the United Kingdom
Science and technology in North America
Science and technology in Canada
Science and technology in the United States
Science and technology in Jamaica
Science and technology in South America
Science and technology in Argentina
Science and technology in Colombia
Science and technology in Venezuela


==
History of technology ==
History of technology
Timelines of technology
Man vs. Technology
Technology museum –


===
History of technology by period ===
Prehistoric technology (outline)
Control of fire by early humans
Ancient technology – c. 800 BCE – 476 CE
Ancient Egyptian technology –
Obelisk making technology in ancient Egypt –
Ancient Greek technology – c. 800 BCE – 146 BCE
Ancient Roman technology – c. 753 BCE – 476 CE
Science and technology of the Han dynasty – 206 BCE – 220
CE
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty – 618–907
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
960–1279 CE
Medieval technology – 5th to 15th century
Byzantine technology – 5th to 15th century
Islamic Golden Age – 8th to 13th century
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire – 14th to 20th century
Industrial revolution – 18th to 19th century
Second Industrial Revolution – 1820–1914
Technology during World War I – 1914–1918
Technology during World War II – 1939–1945
Allied technological cooperation during World War II –
American military technology during World War II –
German military technology during World War II –
1970s in science and technology
1980s in science and technology
1990s in science and technology
2000s in science and technology
2010s in science and technology


====
Technological ages ====
Stone Age –
Bronze Age –
Iron Age –
The Renaissance –
Industrial Age –
Information Age –


===
Media about the history of technology ===
Connections – documentary television series and 1978 book ("Connections" based on the series) created, written and presented by science historian James Burke.
It took an interdisciplinary approach to the history of science and invention and demonstrated how various discoveries, scientific achievements, and historical world events were built from one another successively in an interconnected way to bring about particular aspects of modern technology.
There were 3 seasons produced, and they aired in 1978, 1994, and 1997.

The Day the Universe Changed –
documentary television series written and presented by science historian James Burke, originally broadcast in 1985 by the BBC.
The series' primary focus is on the effect of advances in science and technology on western society in its philosophical aspects.
Ran for one season, in 1986.
===
History of technology by region ===
History of science and technology in the Mediterranean
Ancient Greek technology –
Ancient Roman technology –
Timeline of Polish science and technology –
History of science and technology in Africa –
History of science and technology in Asia
History of science and technology in China –
Science and technology of the Han dynasty –
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty –
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
History of science and technology in the People's Republic of China –
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent –
Science and technology in ancient India –
History of science and technology in Korea –
Science and Technology in the Ottoman Empire –
Science and technology in the Soviet Union –
History of science and technology in North America
United States technological and industrial history –
History of science and technology in Mexico –
Technological and industrial history of Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 20th-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 21st-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of the People's Republic of China –
Technological and industrial history of the United States –


===
History of technology by field ===
History of invention
History of aerospace
History of artificial intelligence
History of agriculture
History of agricultural science
History of architecture, timeline
History of biotechnology
History of cartography
History of chemical engineering
History of communication
History of computing, timeline
History of computer science
History of computing hardware
History of the graphical user interface
History of hypertext, timeline
History of the Internet, Internet phenomena
History of the World Wide Web
History of operating systems
History of programming languages,
timeline
History of software engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of energy development
History of engineering
History of industry
History of library and information science
History of microscopy
History of manufacturing
History of the factory
History of mass production
History of materials science, timeline
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of motor and engine technology
History of military science
History of transport, timeline
History of biotechnology –
Timeline of biotechnology –
History of display technology –
History of film technology –
History of information technology auditing –
History of military technology –
History of nanotechnology –
History of science and technology –
History of web syndication technology –
Timeline of agriculture and food technology –
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology –
Timeline of communication technology –
Timeline of diving technology –
Timeline of heat engine technology –
Timeline of hypertext technology –
Timeline of lighting technology –
Timeline of low-temperature technology –
Timeline of materials technology –
Timeline of medicine and medical technology –
Timeline of microscope technology –
Timeline of motor and engine technology –
Timeline of particle physics technology –
Timeline of photography technology –
Timeline of rocket and missile technology –
Timeline of telescope technology –
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and
observing technology –
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology –
Timeline of time measurement technology –
Timeline of transportation technology –


==
Hypothetical technology ==
Potential technology of the future includes:
Hypothetical technology –
Femtotechnology – hypothetical term used in reference to structuring of matter on the scale of a femtometer, which is 10−15 m.
This is a smaller scale in comparison to nanotechnology and picotechnology which refer to 10−9 m and 10−12 m respectively.
Work in the femtometer range involves manipulation of excited energy states within atomic nuclei (see nuclear isomer) to produce metastable (or otherwise stabilized) states with unusual properties.

==
Philosophy of technology ==
Philosophy of technology –
Appropriate technology –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Jacques Ellul –
Paradigm –
Posthumanism –
Precautionary principle –
Singularitarianism –
Techno-progressivism –
Technocentrism –
Technocracy –
Technocriticism –
Technological determinism –
Technological evolution –
Technological nationalism –
Technological singularity –
Technology readiness level –
Technorealism –
Theories of technology –
Transhumanism –


==
Management of technology ==
Human enhancement –
Science and technology –
Strategy of Technology –
Technology management –
Technology integration –
Technology intelligence –
Technology life cycle –
Technology roadmap –


===
Advancement of technology ===
DARPA
Emerging technologies
List of emerging technologies
Horizon scanning
Hypothetical technology
Innovation
Invention
Inventor
Research and development
Technological superpowers
Technological transitions
==
Politics of technology ==
Politics and technology

AI takeover
Accelerating change
Format war
Information privacy
IT law
PEST analysis
Robot rights
Technological singularity
Technological sovereignty


==
Economics of technology ==
Energy accounting
Nanosocialism
Post-scarcity economy
Technocracy
Technocapitalism
Technological diffusion
Technology acceptance model
Technology lifecycle
Technology transfer


==
Technology education ==
Technology education


==
Technology organizations ==


===
Science and technology think tanks ===
Applied
Biomathematics
Battelle Memorial Institute
Cicada 3301
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Edge Foundation,
Inc.
Eudoxa
Federation of American Scientists
Free Software Foundation
GTRI Office of Policy Analysis and Research
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
Institute for Science and International Security
Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels
Keck Institute for Space Studies
Kestrel Institute
Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology
Moore Center for Theoretical Cosmology and Physics
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
Piratbyrån
RAND Corporation
Regional Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Res4Med
Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science
Swecha
Wau Holland Foundation


==
Technology media ==
For historical treatments, see Media about the history of technology, aboveTechnology journalism –


===
Books on technology ===
Engines of Creation –


===
Technology periodicals ===
Engadget –
TechCrunch –
Wired –


===
Websites ===
The Verge


===
Fictional technology ===
Fictional technology –
In Death technology –
Technology in Star Trek –
Technology in Star Wars –
Technology in science fiction –
Technology of Robotech –
List of technology in the Dune universe –


==
Persons influential in technology ==
List of engineers
List of inventors
List of scientists


==
See also ==
Outline of applied science


==
Further reading ==
Ambrose, Stanley H. (2 March 2001). "
Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution" (PDF).
Science.
291 (5509)
: 1748–53.
Bibcode:2001Sci...
291.1748A.
doi:10.1126/science.1059487.
PMID 11249821.
S2CID 6170692.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007.
Retrieved 10 March 2007.

Huesemann, M.H., and J.A. Huesemann (2011).
Technofix:
Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, ISBN 0865717044.

Kremer, Michael (1993). "
Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990".
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
108 (3): 681–716.
doi:10.2307/2118405.
JSTOR 2118405..
Kevin Kelly.
What Technology Wants.
New York, Viking Press, 14 October 2010, hardcover, 416 pages.
ISBN 978-0670022151
Mumford, Lewis.
(
2010).
Technics and Civilization.
University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226550273.

Rhodes, Richard.
(
2000).
Visions of Technology: A Century of Vital Debate about Machines, Systems, and the Human World.
Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0684863111.

Teich, A.H. (2008).
Technology and the Future.
Wadsworth Publishing, 11th edition, ISBN 0495570524.

Wright, R.T. (2008).
Technology.
Goodheart-Wilcox Company, 5th edition, ISBN 1590707184.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Technology newsBBC on technology
Bloomberg on technology
MIT Technology Review
New York Times technology section
Wired

Acoustic resonance technology –
Advanced steam technology –
Applications of nanotechnology –
Architectural technology –
Assisted reproductive technology –
Assistive technology –
Assistive technology and sports –
Automatic box-opening technology –
Barcode technology in healthcare –
Baseball telecasts technology –
Bead probe technology –
Beam lead technology –
Bio-fermentation technology –
Biomedical technology –
Biotechnology –
Biotechnology in pharmaceutical manufacturing –
Bleeding edge technology –
Braille technology –
Brain technology –
CASY cell counting technology –
Calm technology –
Ceramic mixing technology –
BOINC client–server technology –
Chirotechnology –
Circuit rider (technology) –
Civic technology –
Clean coal technology –
Clean technology –
Close coupled field technology –
Clothing technology –
Coal upgrading technology –
Community technology –
Computer technology for developing areas –
Construction collaboration technology –
Contesting technology –
Cultural technology –
Cycling probe technology –
Cytotechnology –
DNA nanotechnology –
Dance technology – application of modern information technology in activities related to dance: in dance education, choreography, performance, and research.

Demand flow technology –
Design technology –
Digital newspaper technology –
Digital scent technology –
Domestic technology –
Downhole oil–water separation technology –
Dual-use technology –
Dynamic video memory technology –
Ecotechnology –
Educational technology –
Electric transportation technology –
Electrical engineering technology –
Electrofluidic display technology –
Electron beam technology –
Electrothermal-chemical technology –
Enabling technology –
Energy applications of nanotechnology –
Energy security and renewable technology –
Energy technology –
Entertainment technology –
Environmental biotechnology –
Environmental technology –
Expandable tubular technology –
Field-induced polymer electroluminescent technology –
Food technology –
Frame technology (software engineering) –
G-Technology –
General purpose technology –
Genetic use restriction technology –
Germinal choice technology –
Gerontechnology –
Goal-line technology –
Green nanotechnology –
Greenfish recirculation technology –
Group technology –
Gustatory technology –
Haptic technology –
Headspace technology –
Health information technology –
Health technology –
Heart nanotechnology –
High-technology swimwear fabric –
Holiday lighting technology –
Honda advanced technology –
Human performance technology –
Hurdle technology –
Hybridoma technology –
Hyper-interactive teaching technology –
Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention –
Imaging technology –
Immersive technology –
Induction plasma technology –
Industrial technology –
Information and communications technology –
Information and communications technology in Kosovo –
Information processing technology and aging –
Information technology –
Intelligent Interweaving technology –
Internet services technology –
IsaKidd refining technology –
Keyboard technology –
Language technology –
Large-screen television technology –
Lithic technology –
Logovisual technology –
Low carbon technology –
Low technology –
Marine technology –
Mature technology –
Mechanical engineering technology –
Media technology –
Membrane technology –
Metamaterials surface antenna technology –
Microblade technology –
Microtechnology –
Military technology –
Mobile technology –
Molecular nanotechnology –
Music instrument technology –
Music technology –
NX technology –
Nana technology –
Nanobiotechnology –
Nanotechnology –
Near-infrared signature management technology –
Neurotechnology –
Non-profit technology –
Nuclear technology –
Omniview technology –
Open-source-appropriate technology –
Orphaned technology –
Orthodontic technology –
Particle technology –
Performance acceleration technology –
Persuasive technology –
Phage-ligand technology –
Pharmacopeia biotechnology –
Phonetic search technology –
Photoimageable thick-film technology –
Phytotechnology –
Picotechnology –
Plasma deep drilling technology –
Point-to-point laser technology –
Positioning technology –
Presentation technology –
Primatte chromakey technology –
Process analytical technology –
Pull technology –
Pulsion technology –
Pumpable ice technology –
Push technology –
Quantum technology –
Radio access technology –
Rapid transit technology –
Reproductive technology –
Resolution enhancement technology –
Rotary technology –
Rubber technology –
Search engine technology –
Self-drying concrete technology –
Semantic technology –
Site-specific recombinase technology –
Social technology –
Soft energy technology –
Space technology –
Speech technology –
Stealth technology –
Subsea (technology) –
Surface-mount technology –
Suspension array technology –
Tamper-evident technology –
Telepresence technology –
Tennis technology –
Terahertz spectroscopy and technology –
Terotechnology –
Thick film technology –
Thick-film dielectric electroluminescent technology –
Through-hole technology –
Time release technology –
Travel technology –
Trenchless technology –
Use of technology in treatment of mental disorders –
Vehicle safety technology –
Video sensor technology –
Visual technology –
Wearable technology –
Wet nanotechnology –
Wire rope spooling technology –
Workflow technology –
X-Wind technology –
Xpress technology –
Advanced technology –
Appropriate technology –
Alternative technology –
Antechnology –
Al Gore and information technology –
Assistive technology service provider –
Best available technology –
Biotechnology and genetic engineering in Bangladesh –
Biotechnology consulting –
Biotechnology industry in China –
Brazilian science and technology –
Buddhist influences on print technology –
Bullying in information technology –
Chief technology officer –
Community technology center –
Comparison of display technology –
Competitions and prizes in biotechnology –
Consumer adoption of technological innovations –
Corporate governance of information technology –
Counterparty (technology) –
Critique of technology –
Democratization of technology –
Differential technological development –
Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions –
Drexler–Smalley
debate on molecular nanotechnology –
Economic and Technological Development Zones –
Educational technology in Saudi Arabia –
Ethics of technology –
Environmental impact of nanotechnology –
Etiquette in technology –
Fail-safes in nanotechnology –
Feminism and technology –
Glossary of legal terms in technology –
Goans in science and technology –
Health impact of nanotechnology –
Health technology assessment –
Hydrogen energy vision and technology roadmap –
Impact of nanotechnology –
Industrial applications of nanotechnology –
Information technology architecture –
Information technology audit –
Information technology consulting –
Information technology controls –
Information technology in Bangladesh –
Information technology in India –
Information technology in Morocco –
Information technology in Pakistan –
Information technology management –
Information technology operations –
Information technology outsourcing –
Information technology planning –
Information technology security audit –
Information technology specialist –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Investment-specific technological progress –
List of DNA nanotechnology research groups –
List of United States technological universities –
List of advertising technology companies –
List of archaic technological nomenclature –
List of atheists in science and technology –
List of biotechnology companies –
List of computer technology code names –
List of cultural, intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions –
List of information technology acronyms –
List of institutions using the term "institute of technology" or "polytechnic" –
List of nanotechnology organizations –
List of philosophers of technology –
List of science and technology articles by continent –
List of steam technology patents –
List of technology centers –
List of the largest information technology companies –
Marx's notebooks on the history of technology –
Medical technology assessment –
Mobile technology in Africa –
Muslim women in science and technology –
Nanotechnology education –
Nanotechnology in fiction –
Next generation of display technology –
Operations and technology management –
Participatory technology development –
Radio and television technology in Turkey –
Regulation of nanotechnology –
Religious response to assisted reproductive technology –
Response time (technology) –
Science, technology and society –
Science, technology, society and environment education –
Sexism in the technology industry –
Social construction of technology –
Social shaping of technology –
Societal impact of nanotechnology –
Technological alliance –
Technological apartheid –
Technological applications of superconductivity –
Technological change –
Technological convergence –
Technological determinism –
Technological dualism –
Technological escalation –
Technological evolution –
Technological fix –
Technological history of the Roman military –
Technological innovation system –
Technological momentum –
Technological nationalism –
Technological paradigm –
Technological rationality –
Technological revolution –
Technological self-efficacy –
Technological singularity –
Technological somnambulism –
Technological studies –
Technological theory of social production –
Technological transitions –
Technological unemployment –
Technological utopianism –
Technology acceptance model –
Technology adoption lifecycle –
Technology alignment –
Technology and Construction Court –
Technology and Culture –
Technology and Entertainment Software –
Technology and Livelihood Education –
Technology and society –
Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life:
A Philosophical Inquiry –
Technology assessment –
Technology aware design –
Technology brokering –
Technology company –
Technology demonstration –
Technology doping –
Technology dynamics –
Technology education –
Technology evangelist –
Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes –
Technology for peace –
Technology forecasting –
Technology fusion –
Technology gap –
Technology governance –
Technology policy –
Technology readiness level –
Technology roadmap –
Technology scouting –
Technology shock –
Technology stack –
Technology strategy –
Technology support net –
Technology trajectory –
Technology-enhanced active learning –
Technology transfer –
Technology transfer in computer science –
Technology treadmill –
Technology tree –
Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology –
The Beatles' recording technology –Technology CAD –
Techno-lodge
Techno-organic virus
Techno-progressivism
Techno-thriller
Technoavia
Technobabble
Technobots
Technoboy
Technocapitalism
Technocentrism
Technoclash
Technocosmos
Technocracy
Technocracy movement
Technocrane
Technocriticism
Technoculture
Technodelic
Technodiktator
Technodon
Technodrome
Technoethics
Technoetic
Technofile
Technoflash
Technogaianism
Technogamia
Technogel
Technogenesis
Technographic segmentation
Technogym
Technogypsie
Technolangue/Easy
Technoliberalism
Technolibertarianism
Technologic
Technologie
Technologist
Technomage
Technomancer
Technomancy
Technomarket
Technomate
Technometrics
Technomimetics
Technomyrmex
Technomyrmex albipes
Technomyrmex gorgona
Technopaganism
Technoparade
Technopark
Technophilia
Technophobia
Technophoby
Technopol
Technopole
Technopolis
Technopoly
Technoport
Technopromexport
Technora
Technorama
Technorati
Technorealism
Technoromanticism
Technos
Technos
acxel
Technosaurus
Technoscience
Technoself
Technoseum
Technosexual
Technosignature
Technosoft
Technosol
Technosphere
Technostress
Technostructure
Technothlon
Technotise
Technotronic
Technovore
Technozion
This is a list of active German Navy ships as of March 2020.
There are approximately 65 ships in commission including; 10 frigates, 5 corvettes, 2 minesweepers, 10 minehunters, 6 submarines, 11 replenishment ships and 20 miscellaneous auxiliary vessels.

==
Current ships ==


==
See also ==
Currently active military equipment by country
Kampfschwimmer, combat divers/combat swimmers
List of ships of the German navies
List of ship classes of the Bundesmarine and Deutsche Marine


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official Website of German Navy in English
Die Flotte 2006
- official fleet listing and presentation in German and English
A government is the system or group of people governing an organized community, generally a state.

In the case of its broad associative definition, government normally consists of legislature, executive, and judiciary.
Government is a means by which organizational policies are enforced, as well as a mechanism for determining policy.
Each government has a kind of constitution, a statement of its governing principles and philosophy.

While all types of organizations have governance, the term government is often used more specifically, to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments and subsidiary organizations.

Historically prevalent forms of government include monarchy, aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, theocracy and tyranny.
The main aspect of any philosophy of government is how political power is obtained, with the two main forms being electoral contest and hereditary succession.

== Definitions and etymology ==
A government is the system to govern a state or community.

The word government derives, ultimately, from the Greek verb κυβερνάω [kubernáo]
(meaning to steer with gubernaculum (rudder), the metaphorical sense being attested in Plato's Ship of State).

The Columbia Encyclopedia defines government as "a system of social control under which the right to make laws, and the right to enforce them, is vested in a particular group in society".
While all types of organizations have governance, the word government is often used more specifically to refer to the approximately 200 independent national governments on Earth, as well as their subsidiary organizations.
Finally, government is also sometimes used in English as a synonym for governance.

==
History ==
The moment and place that the phenomenon of human government developed is lost in time; however, history does record the formations of early governments.
About 5,000 years ago, the first small city-states appeared.
By the third to second millenniums BC, some of these had developed into larger governed areas: Sumer, Ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley Civilization, and the Yellow River Civilization.
The development of agriculture and water control projects were a catalyst for the development of governments.
On occasion a chief of a tribe was elected by various rituals or tests of strength to govern his tribe, sometimes with a group of elder tribesmen as a council.
The human ability to precisely communicate abstract, learned information allowed humans to become ever more effective at agriculture, and that allowed for ever increasing population densities.
David Christian explains how this resulted in states with laws and governments.

As farming populations gathered in larger and denser communities, interactions between different groups increased and the social pressure rose until, in a striking parallel with star formation, new structures suddenly appeared, together with a new level of complexity.
Like stars, cities and states reorganize and energize the smaller objects within their gravitational field.

Starting at the end of the 17th century, the prevalence of republican forms of government grew.
The Glorious Revolution in England, the American Revolution, and the French Revolution contributed to the growth of representative forms of government.
The Soviet Union was the first large country to have a Communist government.
Since the fall of the Berlin Wall, liberal democracy has become an even more prevalent form of government.
In the nineteenth and twentieth century, there was a significant increase in the size and scale of government at the national level.
This included the regulation of corporations and the development of the welfare state.

==
Political science ==


===
Classification ===
In political science, it has long been a goal to create a typology or taxonomy of polities, as typologies of political systems are not obvious.
It is especially important in the political science fields of comparative politics and international relations.
Like all categories discerned within forms of government, the boundaries of government classifications are either fluid or ill-defined.

Superficially, all governments have an official or ideal form.
The United States is a constitutional republic, while the former Soviet Union was a socialist republic.
However self-identification is not objective, and as Kopstein and Lichbach argue, defining regimes can be tricky.
For example, Voltaire argued that "the Holy Roman Empire is neither Holy, nor Roman, nor an Empire".
Identifying a form of government is also difficult because many political systems originate as socio-economic movements and are then carried into governments by parties naming themselves after those movements; all with competing political-ideologies.
Experience with those movements in power, and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government, can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.

Other complications include general non-consensus or deliberate "distortion or bias" of reasonable technical definitions to political ideologies and associated forms of governing, due to the nature of politics in the modern era.
For example: The meaning of "conservatism" in the United States has little in common with the way the word's definition is used elsewhere.
As Ribuffo notes, "what Americans now call conservatism much of the world calls liberalism or neoliberalism"; a "conservative" in Finland would be labeled a "socialist" in the United States.
Since the 1950s conservatism in the United States has been chiefly associated with the Republican Party.
However, during the era of segregation many Southern Democrats were conservatives, and they played a key role in the Conservative Coalition that controlled Congress from 1937 to 1963.

=== Social-political ambiguity ===
Opinions vary by individuals concerning the types and properties of governments that exist.
"
Shades of gray" are commonplace in any government and its corresponding classification.
Even the most liberal democracies limit rival political activity to one extent or another while the most tyrannical dictatorships must organize a broad base of support thereby creating difficulties for "pigeonholing" governments into narrow categories.
Examples include the claims of the United States as being a plutocracy rather than a democracy since some American voters believe elections are being manipulated by wealthy Super PACs.

===
Dialectical forms ===
The Classical Greek philosopher Plato discusses five types of regimes: aristocracy, timocracy, oligarchy, democracy and tyranny.
Plato also assigns a man to each of these regimes to illustrate what they stand for.
The tyrannical man would represent tyranny for example.
These five regimes progressively degenerate starting with aristocracy at the top and tyranny at the bottom.

== Forms ==
One method of classifying governments is through which people have the authority to rule.

This can either be one person (an autocracy, such as monarchy), a select group of people (an aristocracy), or the people as a whole (a democracy, such as a republic).

Thomas Hobbes stated on their classification:
The difference of Commonwealths consisteth in the difference of the sovereign, or the person representative of all and every one of the multitude.
And because the sovereignty is either in one man, or in an assembly of more than one; and into that assembly either every man hath right to enter, or not every one, but
certain men distinguished from the rest
; it is manifest there can be but three kinds of Commonwealth.
For the representative must needs be one man, or more; and if more, then it is the assembly of all, or but of a part.
When the representative is one man, then is the Commonwealth a monarchy; when an assembly of all that will come together, then it is a democracy, or popular Commonwealth; when an assembly of a part only, then it is called an aristocracy.
Other kind of Commonwealth there can be none: for either one, or more, or all, must have the sovereign power (which I have shown to be indivisible) entire.

===
Autocracy ===
An autocracy is a system of government in which supreme power is concentrated in the hands of one person, whose decisions are subject to neither external legal restraints nor regularized mechanisms of popular control (except perhaps for the implicit threat of a coup d'état or mass insurrection).

===
Aristocracy ===
Aristocracy (Greek ἀριστοκρατία aristokratía, from  ἄριστος aristos "excellent", and κράτος kratos "power") is a form of government that places power in the hands of a small, privileged ruling class.
Many monarchies were aristocracies, although in modern constitutional monarchies the monarch himself or herself has little real power.
The term aristocracy could also refer to the non-peasant, non-servant, and non-city classes in the feudal system.

===
Democracy ===
Democracy is a system of government where the citizens exercise power by voting.
In a direct democracy, the citizens as a whole form a governing body and vote directly on each issue.
In a representative democracy the citizens elect representatives from among themselves.
These representatives meet to form a governing body, such as a legislature.
In a constitutional democracy the powers of the majority are exercised within the framework of a representative democracy, but the constitution limits the majority and protects the minority, usually through the enjoyment by all of certain individual rights, e.g. freedom of speech, or freedom of association.

====
Republics ====
A republic is a form of government in which the country is considered a "public matter" (Latin: res publica), not the private concern or property of the rulers, and where offices of states are subsequently directly or indirectly elected or appointed rather than inherited.

The people, or some significant portion of them, have supreme control over the government and where offices of state are elected or chosen by elected people.
A common simplified definition of a republic is a government where the head of state is not a monarch.
Montesquieu included both democracies, where all the people have a share in rule, and aristocracies or oligarchies, where only some of the people rule, as republican forms of government.
Other terms used to describe different republics include democratic republic, parliamentary republic, semi-presidential republic, presidential republic, federal republic, and Islamic republic.

====
Federalism ====
Federalism is a political concept in which a group of members are bound together by covenant with a governing representative head.
The term "federalism" is also used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between a central governing authority and constituent political units, variously called states, provinces or otherwise.
Federalism is a system based upon democratic principles and institutions in which the power to govern is shared between national and provincial/state governments, creating what is often called a federation.
Proponents are often called federalists.

==
Economic systems ==
Historically, most political systems originated as socioeconomic ideologies.
Experience with those movements in power and the strong ties they may have to particular forms of government can cause them to be considered as forms of government in themselves.

==
Maps ==


=
=
See also ==


===
Principles ===
Certain major characteristics are defining of certain types; others are historically associated with certain types of government.

Rule according to higher law
(unwritten ethical principles) vs. written constitutionalism
Separation of church and state or free church vs. state religion
Civilian control of the military vs. stratocracy
Totalitarianism or authoritarianism vs. libertarianism
Majority rule or parliamentary sovereignty vs. constitution or bill of rights with separation of powers and supermajority
rules to prevent tyranny of the majority and protect minority rights
Androcracy (patriarchy) or gynarchy (matriarchy) vs. gender quotas, gender equality provision, or silence on the matter


===
Autonomy ===
This list focuses on differing approaches that political systems take to the distribution of sovereignty, and the autonomy of regions within the state.

== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Government at Wikimedia Commons
Government at the Encyclopædia Britannica
The Phrontistery Word List: Types of Government and Leadership
Types of Governments from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
Other classifications examples from Historical Atlas of the 20th Century
World Affairs: Types of Government
CBBC Newsround: types of government
Bill Moyers:
Plutocracy
Rising
Phobiocracy by Chris Claypoole
During the First Indochina War (1946 –1954), Vietnam War (1955–1975), Cambodian–Vietnamese War (1977–1989), Sino-Vietnamese War (1979) and the Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979– 1991 (1979–1991), the Vietnam People's Ground Force relied almost entirely on Soviet-derived weapons and equipment systems.
With the end of the Cold War in 1992 Soviet military equipment subsidies ended and Vietnam began the use of hard currency and barter to buy weapons and equipment.

Vietnam prioritises economic development and growth while maintaining defense spending.
The government does not conduct procurement phases or major upgrades of weapons.
From the end of the 1990s the Government of Vietnam has announced the acquisition of a number of strategic systems equipped with modern weapons.
Accordingly, Vietnam has been slow to develop naval and air forces to control shallow waters and its exclusive economic zone (EEZ).
Currently most defence procurement programs focus on remedying this priority.
For example, Vietnam has purchased a number of combat aircraft and warships with the capability to operate in high seas.
Vietnam also plans to develop its defence industry, with priority placed on the Navy, combined with assistance from its former communist allies, India, and Japan.
Since 2015, Vietnam has begun exploring purchases of U.S. and European weapons while facing numerous political, historical, and financial barriers, as they cannot continue to rely on Soviet and Chinese weapons especially due to the increasing tensions in the South China Sea dispute.

==
Uniform equipment ==


==
Infantry weapons ==


==
Vehicles
==
==
Procurement ==
In 2006, Israel reported to the United Nations Register Organisation of Conventional Arms (UNROCA)
that two of its light armoured vehicles had been sold to Vietnam.
A number of Israeli companies won a bid to modernise and upgrade T-54/55 tanks as well as establishing factories in the country.
Israel's program includes upgrading armour, night vision system and a fire control system upgrade (produced in Poland).
In May 2002, Vietnam and Ukraine reached an agreement of military technical co-operation which extended to 2005.
Accordingly, Ukraine will support Vietnam primarily to upgrade its armour and artillery, and improve weapons co-production and repair facilities.
In February 2005, the Ministry of Defence of Finland ceded to Vietnam about 70 T-54 and T-55 tanks from the Soviet era.
In early March 2005, Poland signed a contract to sell to Vietnam 150 T-72 tanks which would have been used to support training, ammunition, equipment maintenance, and repair, but this contract was cancelled in 2006 because Vietnam wanted to focus more on its Navy and Air Force.
In addition to upgrading tanks, the Ministry of Defence of Vietnam signed a military co-operation agreement with Russia.
The Vietnamese have also developed the capacity to produce their own equipment and repair existing equipment.

==
References ==
The list of active ships of the Argentine Navy includes ships currently in commission with the Navy, or operated by the Navy on behalf of other organizations.

As of 2017, there were 41 commissioned ships in the navy, including 4 destroyers, 2 amphibious support ships and 2 submarines (though both boats were non-operational as of 2020).
The total displacement of the fleet (including auxiliaries) was approximately 128,461 tonnes.

==
Warships ==


===
Submarines ===
Note:
The submarine fleet is suffering from lack of maintenance and training.
The submarines accumulated a total of only 19 hours submerged in 2012 against a minimum requirement of 190 days.
As of 2020, the entire fleet is inactive.

===
Destroyers ===
Note:
Argentina uses the classification destructores (destroyers) for the Almirante Brown class, despite them being analogous to medium frigates by most international classifications.

===
Corvettes ===


===
Patrol vessels ===


===
Amphibious support ships ===


==
Auxiliary vessels
==


==
See also ==
List of auxiliary ships of the Argentine Navy
List of ships of the Argentine Navy
Lists of currently active military equipment by country


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Notes ===


===
Bibliography ===
Amendolara Bourdette, Ignacio (2005).
Guia de los buques de la Armada Argentina 2005–2006 (in Spanish and English).
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
ISBN 987-43-9400-5.
==
Further reading ==
Saunders, Stephen (2015).
IHS Jane's Fighting Ships 2015-2016.
Janes Fighting Ships (116th Revised ed.).
Janes Information Group.
ISBN 978-0-7106-3143-5.

Garcia Pedroche, Sergio; Nuñez Padin, Jorge Felix (2004).

Nuñez Padin, Jorge Felix (ed.).
ARA B1 "Patagonia".
Fuerzas Navales (in Spanish).
Nº1.
Bahia Blanca, Argentina: Fuerzas Aeronavales.

==
External links ==
"Buques de la Armada Argentina 1900–2013"
[(List of) Ships of the Argentine Navy 1900–2013].
Historia y Arqueologia Marítima (Histarmar)
(in Spanish).
Fundación Histarmar – Carlos Mey.
Science and technology studies or science, technology and society studies (STS) are the study of how society, politics, and culture affect scientific research and technological innovation, and how these, in turn, affect society, politics and culture.

==
History ==
Like most interdisciplinary fields of study, STS emerged from the confluence of a variety of disciplines and disciplinary subfields, all of which had developed an interest—typically, during the 1960s or 1970s—in viewing science and technology as socially embedded enterprises.

The key disciplinary components of STS took shape independently, beginning in the 1960s, and developed in isolation from each other well into the 1980s, although Ludwik Fleck's (1935) monograph Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact anticipated many of STS's key themes.

In the 1970s
Elting E. Morison founded the STS program at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which served as a model.
By 2011, 111 STS research centres and academic programs were counted worldwide.

===
Key themes ===
History of technology, that examines technology in its social and historical context.
Starting in the 1960s, some historians questioned technological determinism, a doctrine that can induce public passivity to technologic and scientific "natural" development.

At the same time, some historians began to develop similarly contextual approaches to the history of medicine.

History and philosophy of science (1960s).
After the publication of Thomas Kuhn's well-known The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), which attributed changes in scientific theories to changes in underlying intellectual paradigms, programs were founded at the University of California, Berkeley and elsewhere
that brought historians of science and philosophers together in unified programs.

Science, technology, and society.
In the mid- to late-1960s, student and faculty social movements in the U.S., UK, and European universities helped to launch a range of new interdisciplinary fields (such as women's studies) that were seen to address relevant topics that the traditional curriculum ignored.
One such development was the rise of "science, technology, and society" programs, which are also—confusingly—known by the STS acronym.
Drawn from a variety of disciplines, including anthropology, history, political science, and sociology, scholars in these programs created undergraduate curricula devoted to exploring the issues raised by science and technology.
Feminist scholars in this and other emerging STS areas addressed themselves to the exclusion of women from science and engineering.

Science, engineering, and public policy studies emerged in the 1970s from the same concerns that motivated the founders of the science, technology, and society movement:
A sense that science and technology were developing in ways that were increasingly at odds with the public's best interests.
The science, technology, and society movement tried to humanize those who would make tomorrow's science and technology, but this discipline took a different approach
: It would train students with the professional skills needed to become players in science and technology policy.
Some programs came to emphasize quantitative methodologies, and most of these were eventually absorbed into systems engineering.
Others emphasized sociological and qualitative approaches, and found that their closest kin could be found among scholars in science, technology, and society departments.
During the 1970s and 1980s, leading universities in the US, UK, and Europe began drawing these various components together in new, interdisciplinary programs.
For example, in the 1970s, Cornell University developed a new program that united science studies and policy-oriented scholars with historians and philosophers of science and technology.
Each of these programs developed unique identities due to variation in the components that were drawn together, as well as their location within the various universities.
For example, the University of Virginia's STS program united scholars drawn from a variety of fields (with particular strength in the history of technology); however, the program's teaching responsibilities—it is located within an engineering school and teaches ethics to undergraduate engineering students—means that all of its faculty share a strong interest in engineering ethics.

===
The "turn to technology" (and beyond) ===
A decisive moment in the development of STS was the mid-1980s addition of technology studies to the range of interests reflected in science.
During that decade, two works appeared en seriatim that signaled what Steve Woolgar was to call the "turn to technology".
In a seminal 1984 article, Trevor Pinch and Wiebe Bijker attached the sociology of scientific knowledge to technology by showing how the sociology of technology could proceed along the theoretical and methodological lines established by the sociology of scientific knowledge.
This was the intellectual foundation of the field they called the social construction of technology.
Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman primed the pump by publishing a collection of articles attesting to the influence of society on technological design (Social Shaping of Technology, 1985).The
"turn to technology" helped to cement an already growing awareness of underlying unity among the various emerging STS programs.
More recently, there has been an associated turn to ecology, nature, and materiality in general, whereby the socio-technical and natural/material co-produce each other.
This is especially evident in work in STS analyses of biomedicine (such as Carl May and Annemarie Mol) and ecological interventions (such as Bruno Latour, Sheila Jasanoff, Matthias Gross, and S. Lochlann Jain).

==
Important concepts ==


===
Social construction(s) ===
Social constructions are human-created ideas, objects, or events created by a series of choices and interactions.
These interactions have consequences that change the perception that different groups of people have on these constructs.
Some examples of social construction include class, race, money, and citizenship.

The following also alludes to the notion that not everything is set, a circumstance or result could potentially be one way or the other.
According to the article "What is Social Construction?"
by Laura Flores, "Social construction work is critical of the status quo.
Social constructionists about X tend to hold that:
X need not have existed, or need not be at all as it is.
X, or X as it is at present, is not determined by the nature of things; it is not inevitableVery often they go further, and urge that:
X is quite as bad as it is.

We would be much better off if X were done away with, or at least radically transformed.
"In
the past, there have been viewpoints that were widely regarded as fact until being called to question due to the introduction of new knowledge.
Such viewpoints include the past concept of a correlation between intelligence and the nature of a human's ethnicity or race (X may not be at all as it is).An example of the evolution and interaction of various social constructions within science and technology can be found in the development of both the high-wheel bicycle, or velocipede, and then of the bicycle.

The velocipede was widely used in the latter half of the 19th century.
In the latter half of the 19th century, a social need was first recognized for a more efficient and rapid means of transportation.

Consequently, the velocipede was first developed, which was able to reach higher translational velocities than the smaller non-geared bicycles of the day, by replacing the front wheel with a larger radius wheel.
One notable trade-off was a certain decreased stability leading to a greater risk of falling.
This trade-off resulted in many riders getting into accidents by losing balance while riding the bicycle or being thrown over the handle bars.

The first "social construction" or progress of the velocipede caused the need for a newer "social construction" to be recognized and developed into a safer bicycle design.

Consequently, the velocipede was then developed into what is now commonly known as the "bicycle" to fit within society's newer "social construction," the newer standards of higher vehicle safety.
Thus the popularity of the modern geared bicycle design came as a response to the first social construction, the original need for greater speed, which had caused the high-wheel bicycle to be designed in the first place.

The popularity of the modern geared bicycle design ultimately ended the widespread use of the velocipede itself, as eventually it was found to best accomplish the social-needs/ social-constructions of both greater speed and of greater safety.

===
Technoscience ===
Technoscience is a subset of Science, Technology, and Society studies that focuses on the inseparable connection between science and technology.
It states that fields are linked and grow together, and scientific knowledge requires an infrastructure of technology in order to remain stationary or move forward.
Both technological development and scientific discovery drive one another towards more advancement.
Technoscience excels at shaping human thought and behavior by opening up new possibilities that gradually or quickly come to be perceived as necessities.
Recently, an Italian sociologist has studied the relationship with the history of science, which is underestimated by modern STS sociologists.
Instead, it is worth emphasising the links that exist between the production of books on the history of science and technology and the study of the relationship between science and technology within a framework of social developments.
We must always consider the generational leap between historical periods and scientific discoveries, machine building, creation of tools in relation to technological change occurring in very specific situations.
From this point of view, the study of the motives of scientific history is important for studying the development of technoscience.
And also for its sociological benefit ( Cfr.
Guglielmo Rinzivillo, Raccontare la tecnoscienza.
Storia di macchine, strumenti e idee per fare funzionare il mondo, Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura, 2020,
ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5; ISSN 2284-0567).
===
Technosocial ===
"Technological action is a social process."
Social factors and technology are intertwined so that they are dependent upon each other.
This includes the aspect that social, political, and economic factors are inherent in technology and that social structure influences what technologies are pursued.
In other words, "technoscientific phenomena combined inextricably with social/political/ economic/psychological phenomena, so 'technology' includes a spectrum of artifacts, techniques, organizations, and systems.
"
Winner expands on this idea by saying "in the late twentieth century technology and society, technology and culture, technology and politics are by no means separate."
====
Examples ====
Ford Pinto – Ford Motor Company sold and produced the Pinto during the 1970s.
A flaw in the automobile design of the rear gas tank caused a fiery explosion upon impact.
The exploding fuel tank killed and injured hundreds of people.
Internal documents of test results, proved Ford CEO Lee Iacocca and engineers were aware of the flaw.
The company decided to ignore improving their technology because of profit-driven motives, strict internal control, and competition from foreign competitors such as Volkswagen.
Ford Motor Company conducted a cost-benefit analysis to determine if altering the Ford Pinto model was feasible.
An analysis conducted by Ford employees argued against a new design because of increased cost.
Employees were also under tight control by the CEO who rushed the Pinto through production lines to increase profits.
Ford finally changed after public scrutiny.
Safety organizations later influenced this technology by requiring stricter safety standards for motor vehicles.

DDT/toxins – DDT was a common and highly effective insecticide used during the 1940s until its ban in the early 1970s.
It was utilized during World War 2 to combat insect-borne human disease that plagued military members and civilian populations.
People and companies soon realized other benefits of DDT for agricultural purposes.
Rachel Carson became worried of wide spread use on public health and the environment.
Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring left an imprint on the industry by claiming linkage of DDT to many serious illness such as cancer.
Carson's book drew criticism from chemical companies who felt their reputation and business threatened by such claims..
DDT was eventually banned by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) after a long and arduous process of research on the chemical substance.
The main cause for the removal of DDT was the public deciding that any benefits were outweighed by the potential health risk.

Autopilots/computer-aided tasks (CATs) – From a security point of view
the effects of making a task more computer driven is in the favor of technological advance because there is less reaction time required and computational error than a human pilot.
Due to reduced error and reaction times flights on average, using autopilot, have been shown to be safer.
Thus the technology has a direct impact on people by increasing their safety, and society affects technology because people want to be safer so they are constantly trying to improve the autopilot systems.

Cell phones – Cell phone technology emerged in the early 1920s after advancements were made in radio technology.
Engineers at Bell Laboratories, the research, and development division of AT&T discovered that cell towers can transmit and receive signals to and from many directions.
The discovery by Bell Labs revolutionized the capabilities and outcomes of cellular technology.
Technology only improved once mobile phone users could communicate outside of a designated area.
First-generation mobile phones were first created and sold by Motorola.
Their phone was only intended for use in cars.
Second-generation mobile phone capabilities continued to improve because of the switch to digital.
Phones were faster which enhanced the communication capabilities of customers.
They were also sleeker and weighed less than bulky first-generation technology.
Technological advances boosted customer satisfaction and broadened cell phone companies' customer base.
Third-generation technology changed the way people interact with others.
Now customers had access to Wi-Fi, texting and other applications.
Mobile phones are now entering into the fourth generation.
Cellular and mobile phones revolutionized the way people socialize and communicate in order to establish a modern social structure.
People have affected the development of this technology by demanding features such as larger screens, touch capabilities, and internet accessibility.

Internet –  The internet arose because of extensive research on ARPANET between various universities, corporations, and ARPA (Advanced Research Project Agency), an agency of the Department of Defense.
Scientists theorized a network of computers connected to each other.
Computing capabilities contributed to developments and the creation of the modern day computer or laptop.
The internet has become a normal part of life and business, to such a degree that the United Nations views it as a basic human right.
The internet is becoming larger, one way is that more things are being moved into the digital world due to demand, for example online banking.
It has drastically changed the way most people go about daily habits.

===
Deliberative democracy ===
Deliberative democracy is a reform of representative or direct democracies which mandates discussion and debate of popular topics which affect society.

Deliberative democracy is a tool for making decisions.

Deliberative democracy can be traced back all the way to Aristotle's writings.
More recently, the term was coined by Joseph Bessette in his 1980 work Deliberative Democracy:
The Majority Principle in Republican Government, where he uses the idea in opposition to the elitist interpretations of the United States Constitution with emphasis on public discussion.
Deliberative democracy can lead to more legitimate, credible, and trustworthy outcomes.

Deliberative democracy allows for "a wider range of public knowledge", and it has been argued that this can lead to "more socially intelligent and robust" science.
One major shortcoming of deliberative democracy is that many models insufficiently ensure critical interaction.
According to Ryfe, there are five mechanisms that stand out as critical to the successful design of deliberative democracy:
Rules of equality, civility, and inclusivity may prompt deliberation even when our first impulse is to avoid it.

Stories anchor reality by organizing experience and instilling a normative commitment to civic identities and values, and function as a medium for framing discussions.

Leadership provides important cues to individuals in deliberative settings, and can keep groups on a deliberative track when their members slip into routine and habit.

Individuals are more likely to sustain deliberative reasoning when they have a stake in the outcomes.

Apprenticeship teaches citizens to deliberate well.
We might do well to imagine education as a form of apprenticeship learning, in which individuals learn to deliberate by doing it in concert with others more skilled in the activity.

====
Importance ====
Recently, there has been a movement towards greater transparency in the fields of policy and technology.
Jasanoff comes to the conclusion that there is no longer a question of if there needs to be increased public participation in making decisions about science and technology, but now there needs to be ways to make a more meaningful conversation between the public and those developing the technology.

====
In practice ====
Bruce Ackerman and James S. Fishkin offered an example of a reform in their paper "Deliberation Day.
"
The deliberation is to enhance public understanding of popular, complex and controversial issues through devices such as Fishkin's deliberative polling, though implementation of these reforms is unlikely in a large government such as that of the United States.
However, things similar to this have been implemented in small, local governments like New England towns and villages.
New England town hall meetings are a good example of deliberative democracy in a realistic setting.
An ideal deliberative democracy balances the voice and influence of all participants.
While the main aim is to reach consensus, deliberative democracy should encourage the voices of those with opposing viewpoints, concerns due to uncertainties, and questions about assumptions made by other participants.
It should take its time and ensure that those participating understand the topics on which they debate.
Independent managers of debates should also have substantial grasp of the concepts discussed, but must "[remain] independent and impartial as to the outcomes of the process."

===
Tragedy of the commons ===
In 1968, Garrett Hardin popularised the phrase "tragedy of the commons.
"
It is an economic theory where rational people act against the best interest of the group by consuming a common resource.
Since then, the tragedy of the commons has been used to symbolize the degradation of the environment whenever many individuals use a common resource.
Although Garrett Hardin was not an STS scholar, the concept of the tragedy of the commons still applies to science, technology and society.
In a contemporary setting, the Internet acts as an example of the tragedy of the commons through the exploitation of digital resources and private information.
Data and internet passwords can be stolen much more easily than physical documents.
Virtual spying is almost free compared to the costs of physical spying.
Additionally, net neutrality can be seen as an example of tragedy of the commons in an STS context.
The movement for net neutrality argues that the Internet should not be a resource that is dominated by one particular group, specifically those with more money to spend on Internet access.

A counterexample to the tragedy of the commons is offered by Andrew Kahrl.
Privatization can be a way to deal with the tragedy of the commons.
However, Kahrl suggests that the privatization of beaches on Long Island, in an attempt to combat the overuse of Long Island beaches, made the residents of Long Island more susceptible to flood damage from Hurricane Sandy.
The privatization of these beaches took away from the protection offered by the natural landscape.
Tidal lands that offer natural protection were drained and developed.
This attempt to combat the tragedy of the commons by privatization was counter-productive.
Privatization actually destroyed the public good of natural protection from the landscape.

===
Alternative modernity ===
Alternative modernity is a conceptual tool conventionally used to represent the state of present western society.
Modernity represents the political and social structures of the society, the sum of interpersonal discourse, and ultimately a snapshot of society's direction at a point in time.
Unfortunately conventional modernity is incapable of modeling alternative directions for further growth within our society.
Also, this concept is ineffective at analyzing similar but unique modern societies such as those found in the diverse cultures of the developing world.
Problems can be summarized into two elements: inward failure to analyze growth potentials of a given society, and outward failure to model different cultures and social structures and predict their growth potentials.

Previously, modernity carried a connotation of the current state of being modern, and its evolution through European colonialism.
The process of becoming "modern" is believed to occur in a linear, pre-determined way, and is seen by Philip Brey as a way to interpret and evaluate social and cultural formations.
This thought ties in with modernization theory, the thought that societies progress from "pre-modern" to "modern" societies.

Within the field of science and technology, there are two main lenses with which to view modernity.
The first is as a way for society to quantify what it wants to move towards.
In effect, we can discuss the notion of "alternative modernity" (as described by Andrew Feenberg) and which of these we would like to move towards.
Alternatively, modernity can be used to analyze the differences in interactions between cultures and individuals.
From this perspective, alternative modernities exist simultaneously, based on differing cultural and societal expectations of how a society (or an individual within society) should function.
Because of different types of interactions across different cultures, each culture will have a different modernity.

===
Pace of innovation ===
Pace of Innovation is the speed at which technological innovation or advancement is occurring, with the most apparent instances being too slow or too rapid.
Both these rates of innovation are extreme and therefore have effects on the people that get to use this technology.

===
No innovation without representation ===
"No innovation without representation" is a democratic ideal of ensuring that everyone involved gets a chance to be represented fairly in technological developments.

Langdon Winner states that groups and social interests likely to be affected by a particular kind of technological change ought to be represented at an early stage in defining exactly what that technology will be.
It is the idea that relevant parties have a say in technological developments and are not left in the dark.

Spoken about by Massimiano Bucchi
This ideal does not require the public to become experts on the topics of science and engineering, it only asks that the opinions and ideas be heard before making drastic decisions, as talked about by Steven L. Goldman.

===
Privileged positions of business and science ===
The privileged positions of business and science refer to the unique authority that persons in these areas hold in economic, political, and technosocial affairs.
Businesses have strong decision-making abilities in the function of society, essentially choosing what technological innovations to develop.
Scientists and technologists have valuable knowledge, the ability to pursue the technological innovations they want.
They proceed largely without public scrutiny and as if they had the consent of those potentially affected by their discoveries and creations.

===
Legacy thinking ===
Legacy thinking is defined as an inherited method of thinking imposed from an external source without objection by the individual, because it is already widely accepted by society.

Legacy thinking can impair the ability to drive technology for the betterment of society by blinding people to innovations that do not fit into their accepted model of how society works.

By accepting ideas without questioning them, people often see all solutions that contradict these accepted ideas as impossible or impractical.

Legacy thinking tends to advantage the wealthy, who have the means to project their ideas on the public.

It may be used by the wealthy as a vehicle to drive technology in their favor rather than for the greater good.

Examining the role of citizen participation and representation in politics provides an excellent example of legacy thinking in society.
The belief that one can spend money freely to gain influence has been popularized, leading to public acceptance of corporate lobbying.
As a result, a self-established role in politics has been cemented where the public does not exercise the power ensured to them by the Constitution to the fullest extent.
This can become a barrier to political progress as corporations who have the capital to spend have the potential to wield great influence over policy.
Legacy thinking, however, keeps the population from acting to change this, despite polls from Harris Interactive that report over 80% of Americans to feel that big business holds too much power in government.
Therefore, Americans are beginning to try to steer away from this line of thought, rejecting legacy thinking, and demanding less corporate, and more public, participation in political decision making.

Additionally, an examination of net neutrality functions as a separate example of legacy thinking.
Starting with dial-up, the internet has always been viewed as a private luxury good.
Internet today is a vital part of modern-day society members.
They use it in and out of life every day.
Corporations are able to mislabel and greatly overcharge for their internet resources.
Since the American public is so dependent upon internet there is little for them to do.
Legacy thinking has kept this pattern on track despite growing movements arguing that the internet should be considered a utility.
Legacy thinking prevents progress because it was widely accepted by others before us through advertising that the internet is a luxury and not a utility.
Due to pressure from grassroots movements the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has redefined the requirements for broadband and internet in general as a utility.
Now AT&T and other major internet providers are lobbying against this action and are in-large able to delay the onset of this movement due to legacy thinking's grip on American culture and politics.

For example, those who cannot overcome the barrier of legacy thinking may not consider the privatization of clean drinking water as an issue.
This is partial because access to water has become such a given fact of the matter to them.
For a person living in such circumstances, it may be widely accepted to not concern themselves with drinking water because they have not needed to be concerned with it in the past.
Additionally, a person living within an area that does not need to worry about their water supply or the sanitation of their water supply is less likely to be concerned with the privatization of water.

This notion can be examined through the thought experiment of "veil of ignorance".
Legacy thinking causes people to be particularly ignorant about the implications behind the "you get what you pay for" mentality applied to a life necessity.
By utilizing the "veil of ignorance", one can overcome the barrier of legacy thinking as it requires a person to imagine that they are unaware of their own circumstances, allowing them to free themselves from externally imposed thoughts or widely accepted ideas.

====
Related concepts ====
Technoscience –
The perception that science and technology are intertwined and depend on each other.

Technosociety –  An industrially developed society with a reliance on technology.

Technological utopianism – A positive outlook on the effect technology has on social welfare.
Includes the perception that technology will one day enable society to reach a utopian state.

Technosocial systems – people and technologies that combine to work as heterogeneous but functional wholes.

Critical Technical Practice – the practice of technological creation while simultaneously critiquing and maintaining awareness of the inherent biases and value systems which become embedded in those technologies.
====
Classifications ====
Technological optimism –
The opinion that technology has positive effects on society and should be used in order to improve the welfare of people.

Technological pessimism –
The opinion that technology has negative effects on society and should be discouraged from use.

Technological neutrality – "maintains that a given technology has no systematic effects on society: individuals are perceived as ultimately responsible, for better or worse, because technologies are merely tools people use for their own ends."

Technological determinism – "maintains that technologies are understood as simply and directly causing particular societal outcomes."

Scientism – The belief in the total separation of facts and values.

Technological progressivism – technology is a means to an end itself and an inherently positive pursuit.

==
Academic programs ==
STS is taught in several countries.
According to the STS wiki, STS programs can be found in twenty countries, including 45 programs in the United States, three programs in India, and eleven programs in the UK.
STS programs can be found in Canada, Germany, Israel, Malaysia, and Taiwan.
Some examples of institutions offering STS programs are Stanford University, Harvard University, the University of Oxford, Mines ParisTech, Bar-Ilan University, and York University.

==
Professional associations ==
The field has professional associations in regions and countries around the world.

===
In Europe ===
In Europe, the European Association for the Study of Science and Technology (EASST) was founded in 1981 to "improve scholarly communication and exchange in the field", "increase the visibility of the subject to policy-makers and to the general public", and "stimulate and support teaching on the subject at all levels".
Similarly, the European Inter-University Association on Society, Science and Technology (ESST) researches and studies science and technology in society, in both historical and contemporary perspectives.

In European nation states and language communities, a range of STS associations exist, including in the UK, Spain, Germany, Austria, Turkey.
For instance, in 2015, the UK-based Association for Studies in Innovation, Science and Technology
(AsSIST-UK) was established, Chaired by Andrew Webster (York) and Robin Williams (Edinburgh) principally to foster stronger integration between the innovation studies and STS fields.
In 2021 it had a membership of 380.
It holds annual conferences and has built strong links to policy practitioners in Westminster.

In Italy, STS Italia – The Italian Society for Social Studies of Science and Technology was founded in 2005.
Its mission is "to build up an Italian network of researchers oriented to study Science and Technology starting from the social dynamics which characterize and interweave science and technology themselves".
===
In Asia ===
The Asia Pacific Science Technology & Society Network (APSTSN) primarily has members from Australasia, Southeast and East Asia and Oceania.

In Japan, the Japanese Society for Science and Technology Studies (JSSTS) was founded in 2001.

===
In Latin America ===
Estudios Sociales de la Ciencia y la Tecnología (ESOCITE) is the biggest association of Science and Technology studies.
The study of STS (CyT in Spanish, CTS in Portuguese) here was shaped by authors like Amílcar Herrera and Jorge Sabato and Oscar Varsavsky in Argentina, José Leite Lopes in Brazil, Miguel Wionczek in Mexico, Francisco Sagasti in Peru, Máximo Halty Carrere in Uruguay and Marcel Roche in Venezuela.

===
In North America ===
Founded in 1975, the Society for Social Studies of Science initially provided scholarly communication facilities, including a journal (Science, Technology, and Human Values) and annual meetings that were mainly attended by science studies scholars.
The society has since grown into the most important professional association of science and technology studies scholars worldwide.
The Society for Social Studies of Science members also include government and industry officials concerned with research and development as well as science and technology policy; scientists and engineers who wish to better understand the social embeddedness of their professional practice; and citizens concerned about the impact of science and technology in their lives.

Founded in 1958, the Society for the History of Technology initially attracted members from the history profession who had interests in the contextual history of technology.
After the "turn to technology" in the mid-1980s, the society's well-regarded journal (Technology and Culture) and its annual meetings began to attract considerable interest from non-historians with technology studies interests.

Less identified with STS, but also of importance to many STS scholars, are the History of Science Society, the Philosophy of Science Association, and the American Association for the History of Medicine.

Additionally, within the US there are significant STS-oriented special interest groups within major disciplinary associations, including the American Anthropological Association, the American Political Science Association, the National Women's Studies Association, and the American Sociological Association.

==
Journals ==
Notable peer-reviewed journals in STS include: 

Student journals in STS include: 


==
Notable scholars ==


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Bauchspies, Wenda; Croissant, Jennifer; Restivo, Sal (2005).
Science, Technology, and Society: A Sociological Approach.
Wiley-Blackwell.
ISBN 9780631232100.

Bijker, Wiebe; Hughes, Thomas; Pinch, Trevor, eds.
(
1987).
The Social Construction of Technological Systems:
New Directions in the Sociology and History of Technology.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ISBN 978-0262022620.

Felt, Ulrike; Fouché, Rayvon; Miller, Clark A.; Smith-Doerr, Laruel, eds.
(
2017).
The Handbook of Science and Technology Studies (4th ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
ISBN 9780262035682.

Fuller, Steve (1993).
Philosophy, Rhetoric, and the End of Knowledge:
The Coming of Science and Technology Studies.
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
(
2nd edition, with James H. Collier, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2004)
Hess, David J. (1997).
Science Studies:
An Advanced Introduction.
New York:
NYU Press.
ISBN 9780814735640.

Jasanoff, Sheila; Markle, Gerald; Petersen, James; Pinch, Trevor, eds.
(
1994).
Handbook of Science and Technology Studies.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
ISBN 978-0803940215.

Kuhn, Thomas (1962).
The structure of scientific revolutions.
Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Latour, Bruno (1987).
Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society.
Cambridge, Massachusetts:
Harvard University Press.

Restivo, Sal, ed.
(
2005).
Science, Technology, and Society: An Encyclopedia.
New York:
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 9780195141931.

Guglielmo Rinzivillo (2020),
Raccontare la tecnoscienza.
Storia di macchine, strumenti e idee per fare funzionare il mondo, Roma, Edizioni Nuova Cultura; ISBN 978-88-3365-349-5; ISSN 2284-0567).
==
External links ==
STSWiki (devoted to building resources, such as a worldwide list of STS programs and scholars)
STS-Wiki of (Dutch) STS PhD research school
(this page is partly a private wiki)
Argentinean Network for Science and Technology Studies
Instituto de Estudios sobre
la Ciencia y la Tecnología - Universidad Nacional de Quilmes
Science and Technology Studies Department - University College London


===
Journals ===
The People's Liberation Army (PLA, Chinese: 中国人民解放军) is the regular armed forces of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and of the PRC's founding and ruling political party, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
Besides the Central Military Commission (CMC) and several minor units directly under it, the PLA has five major service branches: the Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, Rocket Force, and the Strategic Support Force.
A majority of military units around the country are assigned to one of five theater commands by geographical location.
The PLA is the world's largest military force and constitutes the second largest defense budget in the world.
It is also one of the fastest modernizing militaries in the world, and has been termed as a potential military superpower, with significant regional defense and rising global power projection capabilities.
Per Credit Suisse in 2015, the PLA is the world's third-most powerful military.
PRC law explicitly affirms the leadership of the party over the armed forces of the People's Republic and designates the CMC (Central Military Commission) as the nationwide military command of the People's Republic of China.
The Party CMC operates under the name of the State CMC for legal and governmental functions and as the ceremonial Ministry of National Defense for diplomatic functions.
The PLA is obliged to follow the principle of the Communist Party's absolute civilian control of the military under the doctrine of "the party commands the gun" (Dǎng zhǐhuī qiāng-党指挥枪)-taken from a speech given by Mao Zedong during an emergency meeting of top party leadership on the 7th of August 1927 at the beginning of the Chinese civil war.
Its commander-in-chief is the Chairman of the Central Military Commission (customarily also the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party).
Since 1949, China has used nine different military strategies, which the PLA calls "strategic guidelines".

The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993.
In times of national emergency, the People's Armed Police and the China Militia act as a reserve and support element for the People's Liberation Army Ground Force.

== Mission ==
Former paramount leader Hu Jintao stated the missions of the PLA as:
The insurance the leadership of the party
The protection of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, internal security and national development of the People's Republic of China
Safeguarding the country's interests
And the maintenance and safeguarding of world peace


==
History ==


===
Second Sino-Japanese War ===
The People's Liberation Army was founded on 1 August 1927 during the Nanchang uprising when troops of the Kuomintang (KMT) rebelled under the leadership of Zhu De,
He Long, Ye Jianying and Zhou Enlai after the Shanghai massacre of 1927 by Chiang Kai-shek.
They were then known as the Chinese Workers' and Peasants' Red Army, or simply the Red Army.
Between 1934 and 1935, the Red Army survived several campaigns led against it by Chiang Kai-Shek and engaged in the Long March.

During the Second Sino-Japanese War from 1937 to 1945, the Communist military forces were nominally integrated into the National Revolutionary Army of the Republic of China forming two main units known as the Eighth Route Army and the New Fourth Army.
During this time, these two military groups primarily employed guerrilla tactics, generally avoiding large-scale battles with the Japanese with some exceptions while at the same time consolidating their ground by absorbing nationalist troops and paramilitary forces behind Japanese lines into their forces.
After the Japanese surrendered in 1945, the Communist Party merged the Eighth Route Army and New Fourth Army, renaming the new million-strong force the "People's Liberation Army".
They eventually won the Chinese Civil War, establishing the People's Republic of China in 1949.
The PLA then saw a huge reorganisation with the establishment of the Air Force leadership structure in November 1949 followed by the Navy leadership the following April.
In 1950, the leadership structures of the artillery, armoured troops, air defence troops, public security forces, and worker–soldier militias were also established.
The chemical warfare defence forces, the railroad forces, the communications forces, and the strategic forces, as well as other separate forces (like engineering and construction, logistics and medical services), were established later on, all these depended on the leadership of the Communist Party and the National People's Congress via the Central Military Commission (and until 1975 the National Defense Council).
=== 1950s, 1960s and 1970s ===
During the 1950s, the PLA with Soviet assistance began to transform itself from a peasant army into a modern one.
Since 1949, China has used nine different military strategies, which the PLA calls "strategic guidelines".

The most important came in 1956, 1980, and 1993.
Part of this process was the reorganisation that created thirteen military regions in 1955.
The PLA also contained many former National Revolutionary Army units and generals who had defected to the PLA.
Ma Hongbin and his son Ma Dunjing were the only two Muslim generals who led a Muslim unit, the 81st corps, to ever serve in the PLA.
Han Youwen, a Salar Muslim general, also defected to the PLA.
In November 1950, some units of the PLA under the name of the People's Volunteer Army intervened in the Korean War as United Nations forces under General Douglas MacArthur approached the Yalu River.
Under the weight of this offensive, Chinese forces drove MacArthur's forces out of North Korea and captured Seoul, but were subsequently pushed back south of Pyongyang north of the 38th Parallel.
The war also served as a catalyst for the rapid modernization of the PLAAF.
In 1962, the PLA ground force also fought India in the Sino-Indian War, achieving all objectives.

Prior to the Cultural Revolution, military region commanders tended to remain in their posts for long periods of time.
As the PLA took a stronger role in politics, this began to be seen as somewhat of a threat to the party's (or, at least, civilian) control of the military.
The longest-serving military region commanders were Xu Shiyou in the Nanjing Military Region (1954–74), Yang Dezhi in the Jinan Military Region (1958–74), Chen Xilian in the Shenyang Military Region (1959–73), and Han Xianchu in the Fuzhou Military Region (1960–74).
The establishment of a professional military force equipped with modern weapons and doctrine was the last of the Four Modernizations announced by Zhou Enlai and supported by Deng Xiaoping.
In keeping with Deng's mandate to reform, the PLA has demobilized millions of men and women since 1978 and has introduced modern methods in such areas as recruitment and manpower, strategy, and education and training.
In 1979, the PLA fought Vietnam over a border skirmish in the Sino-Vietnamese War where both sides claimed victory.

During the Sino-Soviet split, strained relations between China and the Soviet Union resulted in bloody border clashes and mutual backing of each other's adversaries.
China and Afghanistan had neutral relations with each other during the King's rule.
When the pro-Soviet Afghan Communists seized power in Afghanistan in 1978, relations between China and the Afghan communists quickly turned hostile.
The Afghan pro-Soviet communists supported China's enemies in Vietnam and blamed China for supporting Afghan anti-communist militants.
China responded to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan by supporting the Afghan mujahideen and ramping up their military presence near Afghanistan in Xinjiang.
China acquired military equipment from the United States to defend itself from Soviet attack.
The People's Liberation Army Ground Force trained and supported the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan War, moving its training camps for the mujahideen from Pakistan into China itself.
Hundreds of millions of dollars worth of anti-aircraft missiles, rocket launchers, and machine guns were given to the Mujahidin by the Chinese.
Chinese military advisors and army troops were also present with the Mujahidin during training.

===
Since 1980 ===
In 1981, the PLA conducted its largest military exercise in North China since the founding of the People's Republic.
In the 1980s, China shrunk its military considerably to free up resources for economic development, resulting in the relative decline in resources devoted to the PLA.
Following the PLA's suppression of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, ideological correctness was temporarily revived as the dominant theme in Chinese military affairs.
Reform and modernisation have today resumed their position as the PLA's primary objectives, although the armed forces' political loyalty to the CCP has remained a leading concern.
Another area of concern to the political leadership was the PLA's involvement in civilian economic activities.
These activities were thought to have impacted PLA readiness and has led the political leadership to attempt to divest the PLA from its non-military business interests.

Beginning in the 1980s, the PLA tried to transform itself from a land-based power centred on a vast ground force to a smaller, more mobile, high-tech one capable of mounting operations beyond its borders.
The motivation for this was that a massive land invasion by Russia was no longer seen as a major threat, and the new threats to China are seen to be a declaration of independence by Taiwan, possibly with assistance from the United States, or a confrontation over the Spratly Islands.
In 1985, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the CMC, the PLA changed from being constantly prepared to "hit early, strike hard and to fight a nuclear war" to developing the military in an era of peace.
The PLA reoriented itself to modernization, improving its fighting ability, and to become a world-class force.
Deng Xiaoping stressed that the PLA needed to focus more on quality rather than on quantity.
The decision of the Chinese government in 1985 to reduce the size of the military by one million was completed by 1987.
Staffing in military leadership was cut by about 50 percent.
During the Ninth Five Year Plan (1996–2000) the PLA was reduced by a further 500,000.
The PLA had also been expected to be reduced by another 200,000 by 2005.
The PLA has focused on increasing mechanisation and informatization so as to be able to fight a high-intensity war.

Former CMC chairman Jiang Zemin in 1990 called on the military to "meet political standards,
be militarily competent, have a good working style, adhere strictly to discipline, and provide vigorous logistic support"
(Chinese: 政治合格、军事过硬、作风优良、纪律严明、保障有力
; pinyin:
zhèngzhì hégé,
jūnshì guòyìng, zuòfēng yōuliáng, jìlǜ yánmíng, bǎozhàng yǒulì).
The 1991 Gulf War provided the Chinese leadership with a stark realisation that the PLA was an oversized, almost-obsolete force.
The possibility of a militarised Japan has also been a continuous concern to the Chinese leadership since the late 1990s.
In addition, China's military leadership has been reacting to and learning from the successes and failures of the American military during the Kosovo War, the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and the Iraqi insurgency.
All these lessons inspired China to transform the PLA from a military based on quantity to one based on quality.
Chairman Jiang Zemin officially made a "Revolution in Military Affairs" (RMA) part of the official national military strategy in 1993 to modernise the Chinese armed forces.
A goal of the RMA is to transform the PLA into a force capable of winning what it calls "local wars under high-tech conditions" rather than a massive, numbers-dominated ground-type war.
Chinese military planners call for short decisive campaigns, limited in both their geographic scope and their political goals.
In contrast to the past, more attention is given to reconnaissance, mobility, and deep reach.
This new vision has shifted resources towards the navy and air force.
The PLA is also actively preparing for space warfare and cyber-warfare.

For the past 10 to 20 years, the PLA has acquired some advanced weapons systems from Russia, including Sovremenny class destroyers, Sukhoi Su-27 and Sukhoi Su-30 aircraft, and Kilo-class diesel-electric submarines.
It has also started to produce several new classes of destroyers and frigates including the Type 052D class guided missile destroyer.
In addition, the PLAAF has designed its very own Chengdu J-10 fighter aircraft and a new stealth fighter, the Chengdu J-20.
The PLA launched the new Jin class nuclear submarines on 3 December 2004 capable of launching nuclear warheads that could strike targets across the Pacific Ocean and have two aircraft carriers, one commissioned in 2012 and a second launched in 2017.

In 2015, the PLA formed new units including the PLA Ground Force, the PLA Rocket Force and the PLA Strategic Support Force.
The PLA on 1 August 2017 marked the 90th anniversary since its establishment, before the big anniversary it mounted its biggest parade yet and the first outside of Beijing, held in the Zhurihe Training Base in the Northern Theater Command (within the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region), the first time it had ever been done to mark PLA Day as past parades had already been on 1 October, National Day of the PRC.

===
Peacekeeping Operations ===
The People's Republic of China has sent the PLA to various hotspots as part of China's role as a prominent member of the United Nations.
Such units usually include engineers and logistical units and members of the paramilitary People's Armed Police and have been deployed as part of peacekeeping operations in Lebanon, the Republic of the Congo, Sudan, Ivory Coast, Haiti, and more recently, Mali and South Sudan.

===
Notable Campaigns ===
1927–1950:
Chinese Civil War
1937–1945:
Second Sino-Japanese War
1949
: Yangtze incident against British warships on the Yangtze river.

1949:
Incorporation of Xinjiang into the People's Republic of China
1950: Incorporation of Tibet into the People's Republic of China
1950–1953:
Korean War under the banner of the Chinese People's Volunteer Army.

1954–1955: First Taiwan Strait Crisis.

1955–1970: Vietnam War.

1958:
Second Taiwan Strait Crisis at Quemoy and Matsu.

1962: Sino-Indian War.
1967:
Border skirmishes with India.

1969: Sino-Soviet border conflict.

1974:
Battle of the Paracel Islands with South Vietnam.

1979: Sino-Vietnamese War.

1979–1990: Sino-Vietnamese conflicts 1979–1990.

1988:
Johnson South Reef Skirmish with Vietnam.

1989:
Enforcement of martial law in Beijing during the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989.

1990:
Baren Township riot.

1995–1996
: Third Taiwan Strait Crisis.

1997: PLA Control of Hong Kong's Military Defense
1999: PLA Control of Macau's Military Defense
2007–present:
UNIFIL peacekeeping operations in Lebanon
2009–present
: Anti-piracy operations in the Gulf of Aden
2014: Search and rescue efforts for Flight MH370
2014: UN Peacekeeping operations in Mali
2015: UNMISS peacekeeping operations in South Sudan


== Organization ==


===
National Military Command ===
The state military system upholds the principle of the CCP's absolute leadership over the armed forces.
The party and the State jointly established the CMC that carries out the task of supreme military leadership over the armed forces.
The 1954 Constitution stated that the State President directs the armed forces and made the State President the chairman of the Defense Commission.
The Defense Commission is an advisory body and does not hold any actual power over the armed forces.
On 28 September 1954, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party re-established the CMC as the commanding organ of the PLA.
From that time onward, the current system of a joint system of party and state leadership of the military was established.
The Central Committee of the Communist Party leads in all military affairs.
The State President directs the state military forces and the development of the military forces which is managed by the State Council.

To ensure the absolute leadership of the Communist Party over the armed forces, every level of party committee in the military forces implements the principles of democratic centralism.
In addition, division-level and higher units establish political commissars and political organisations, ensuring that the branch organisations are in line.
These systems combined the party organisation with the military organisation to achieve the party's leadership and administrative leadership.
This is seen as the key guarantee to the absolute leadership of the party over the military.

In October 2014 the People's Liberation Army Daily reminded readers of the Gutian Congress, which stipulated the basic principle of the Party controlling the military, and called for vigilance as "[f]oreign hostile forces preach the nationalization and de-politicization of the military, attempting to muddle our minds and drag our military out from under the Party's flag."
===
Leadership ===
The leadership by the CCP is a fundamental principle of the Chinese military command system.
The PLA reports not to the State Council but rather to two Central Military Commissions, one belonging to the state and one belonging to the party.

In practice, the two central military commissions usually do not contradict each other because their membership is usually identical.
Often, the only difference in membership between the two occurs for a few months every five years, during the period between a party congress, when Party CMC membership changes, and the next ensuing National People's Congress, when the state CMC changes.
The CMC carries out its responsibilities as authorised by the Constitution and National Defense Law.
The leadership of each type of military force is under the leadership and management of the corresponding part of the Central Military Commission of the CCP Central Committee.
Forces under each military branch or force such as the subordinate forces, academies and schools, scientific research and engineering institutions and logistical support organisations are also under the leadership of the CMC.
This arrangement has been especially useful as China over the past several decades has moved increasingly towards military organisations composed of forces from more than one military branch.
In September 1982, to meet the needs of modernisation and to improve co-ordination in the command of forces including multiple service branches and to strengthen unified command of the military, the CMC ordered the abolition of the leadership organisation of the various military branches.
Today, the PLA has air force, navy and second artillery leadership organs.

In 1986, the People's Armed Forces Department, except in some border regions, was placed under the joint leadership of the PLA and the local authorities.
Although the local party organisations paid close attention to the People's Armed Forces Department, as a result of some practical problems, the CMC decided that from 1 April 1996, the People's Armed Forces Department would once again fall under the jurisdiction of the PLA.

According to the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, the CMC is composed of the following: the Chairman, Vice-Chairmen and Members.
The Chairman of the Central Military Commission has overall responsibility for the commission.

The Central Military Commission of the Chinese Communist Party and the Central Military Commission of the People's Republic of China
Chairman
Xi Jinping (also
General Secretary, President and Commander-in-chief of Joint Battle
Command)Vice Chairmen
Air Force General Xu Qiliang
General Zhang YouxiaMembers
Minister of National Defense – General Wei Fenghe
Chief of the Joint staff – General Li Zuocheng
Director of the Political Work Department – Admiral Miao Hua
Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection –
General Zhang Shengmin


===
Central Military Commission ===
In December 1982, the fifth National People's Congress revised the state constitution to state that the State Central Military Commission leads all the armed forces of the state.
The chairman of the State CMC is chosen and removed by the full NPC while the other members are chosen by the NPC standing committee.
However, the CMC of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party remained the party organisation that directly commands the military and all the other armed forces.

In actual practice, the party CMC, after consultation with the democratic parties, proposes the names of the State CMC members of the NPC so that these people after going through the legal processes can be elected by the NPC to the State Central Military Commission.
That is to say, that the CMC of the Central Committee and the CMC of the State are one group and one organisation.
However, looking at it organizationally, these two CMCs are subordinate to two different systems – the party system and the state system.
Therefore, the armed forces are under the absolute leadership of the Communist Party and are also the armed forces of the state.
This is a unique joint leadership system that reflects the origin of the PLA as the military branch of the Communist Party.
It only became the national military when the People's Republic of China was established in 1949.

By convention, the chairman and vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission are civilian members of the Chinese Communist Party, but they are not necessarily the heads of the civilian government.
Both Jiang Zemin and Deng Xiaoping retained the office of chairman even after relinquishing their other positions.
All of the other members of the CMC are uniformed active military officials.
Unlike other nations, the Minister of National Defense is not the head of the military, but is usually a vice-chairman of the CMC.

In 2012, to attempt to reduce corruption at the highest rungs of the leadership of the Chinese military, the commission banned the service of alcohol at military receptions.

===
2016
Military Reforms ===
On 1 January 2016, the CMC released a guideline on deepening national defense and military reform, about a month after CMC Chairman Xi Jinping called for an overhaul of the military administration and command system at a key meeting setting the stage for one of the most sweeping military reforms since the founding of the country.

On 11 January 2016 in one of the most sweeping military reforms since the founding of the People's Republic the PLA was restructured and a joint staff department directly attached to the CMC, the highest leadership organization in the military was created.
The previous four general headquarters of the PLA were disbanded and completely reformed.
They were divided into  15 functional departments instead — a significant expansion from the domain of the General Office, which is now a single department within the Central Military Commission .

General Office (办公厅)
Joint Staff Department (联合参谋部)
Political Work Department (政治工作部)
Logistic Support Department (后勤保障部)
Equipment Development Department (装备发展部)
Training and Administration Department (训练管理部)
National Defense Mobilization Department (国防动员部)
Discipline Inspection Commission (纪律检查委员会)
Politics and Legal Affairs Commission (政法委员会)
Science and Technology Commission (科学技术委员会)
Office for Strategic Planning (战略规划办公室)
Office for Reform and Organizational Structure (改革和编制办公室)
Office for International Military Cooperation (国际军事合作办公室)
Audit Office (审计署)
Agency for Offices Administration
(机关事务管理总局)Included among the 15 departments are three commissions.
The CMC Discipline Inspection Commission is charged with rooting out corruption.

===
Theater Commands ===
Until 2016, China's territory was divided into seven military regions, but they were reorganized into five theater commands in early 2016.
This reflects a change in their concept of operations from primarily ground-oriented to mobile and coordinated movement of all services.
The five new theatre commands are:

Eastern Theater Command
Western Theater Command
Northern Theater Command
Southern Theater Command
Central Theater CommandThe PLA garrisons in Hong Kong and Macau both come under the Southern Theater Command.

The military reforms have also introduced a major change in the areas of responsibilities.
Rather than separately commanding their own troops, service branches are now primarily responsible for administrative tasks (like equipping and maintaining the troops).
It is the theater commands now that have the command authority.
This should, in theory, facilitate the implementation of joint operations across all service branches.
Coordination with civilian national security groups such as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is achieved primarily by the leading groups of the Chinese Communist Party.
Particularly important are the leading groups on foreign affairs, which include those dealing with Taiwan.

==
Service Branches ==
The PLA encompasses five main service branches: the Ground Force, the Navy, the Air Force, the Rocket Force, and the Strategic Support Force.
Following the 200,000 troop reduction announced in 2003, the total strength of the PLA has been reduced from 2.5 million to just under 2.3 million.
Further reforms will see an additional 300,000 personnel reduction from its current strength of 2.28 million personnel.
The reductions will come mainly from non-combat ground forces, which will allow more funds to be diverted to naval, air, and strategic missile forces.

This shows China's shift from ground force prioritisation to emphasising air and naval power with high-tech equipment for offensive roles over disputed coastal territories.
In recent years, the PLA has paid close attention to the performance of US forces in Afghanistan and Iraq.
As well as learning from the success of the US military in network-centric warfare, joint operations, C4ISR, and hi-tech weaponry, the PLA is also studying unconventional tactics that could be used to exploit the vulnerabilities of a more technologically advanced enemy.
This has been reflected in the two parallel guidelines for the PLA ground forces development.
While speeding up the process of introducing new technology into the force and retiring the older equipment, the PLA has also placed an emphasis on asymmetric warfare, including exploring new methods of using existing equipment to defeat a technologically superior enemy.

In addition to the four main service branches, the PLA is supported by two paramilitary organisations: the People's Armed Police (including the China Coast Guard) and the Militia (including the maritime militia).
===
Ground Force (PLAGF) ===
The PLA is estimated to have a ground force composing of 975,000 personnel, approximately half of the PLA's total manpower of around 2 million.
The ground forces are divided among the five theatre commands as named above.
In times of crisis, the ground Force is reinforced by numerous reserve and paramilitary units.
The PLAGF reserve component is composed of 510,000 personnel divided into 30 infantry and 12 anti-aircraft artillery (AAA) divisions.
In recent years two amphibious mechanised divisions were also established in Nanjing and Guangzhou military regions.
At least 40 percent of PLA divisions and brigades are now mechanised or armoured, twice the percentage before 2015.

While much of the PLA Ground Force was being reduced over the past few years, technology-intensive elements such as special operations forces (SOF), army aviation, surface-to-air missiles (SAMs), and electronic warfare units have all experienced rapid expansion.
The latest operational doctrine of the PLA ground forces highlights the importance of information technology, electronic and information warfare, and long-range precision strikes in future warfare.
The older generation telephone/radio-based command, control, and communications (C3) systems are being replaced by an integrated battlefield information networks featuring local/wide-area networks (LAN/WAN), satellite communications, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)-based surveillance and reconnaissance systems, and mobile command and control centres.
On 1 January 2016, as part of military reforms, China created for the first time a separate headquarters for the ground forces.
China's ground forces have never had their own headquarters until now.
Previously, the People's Liberation Army's Four General Departments served as the de facto army headquarters, functioning together as the equivalent of a joint staff, to which the navy, air force and the newly renamed Rocket Force would report.
The Commander of the PLA Ground Force is Han Weiguo.
The Political Commissar is Liu Lei.

===
Navy (PLAN) ===
Until the early 1990s, the navy performed a subordinate role to the PLA Land Forces.
Since then it has undergone rapid modernisation.
The 250,000 strong People's Liberation Army Navy (PLAN) is organised into three major fleets: the North Sea Fleet headquartered at Qingdao, the East Sea Fleet headquartered at Ningbo, and the South Sea Fleet headquartered in Zhanjiang.
Each fleet consists of a number of surface ship, submarine, naval air force, coastal defence, and marine units.
The navy includes a 25,000 strong Marine Corps (organised into seven brigades), a 26,000 strong Naval Aviation Force operating several hundred attack helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft.
As part of its overall programme of naval modernisation, the PLAN is in the stage of developing a blue water navy.
In November 2012, then Party General Secretary Hu Jintao reported to the Chinese Communist Party 18th National Congress
his desire to "enhance our capacity for exploiting marine resource and build China into a strong maritime power".
===
Air Force (PLAAF) ===
The 395,000 strong People's Liberation Army Air Force is organised into five Theater Command Air Forces (TCAF) and 24 air divisions.
The largest operational units within the Aviation Corps is the air division, which has 2 to 3 aviation regiments, each with 20 to 36 aircraft.
The surface-to-air missile (SAM) Corps is organised into SAM divisions and brigades.
There are also three airborne divisions manned by the PLAAF.
J-XX and XXJ are names applied by Western intelligence agencies to describe programs by the People's Republic of China to develop one or more fifth-generation fighter aircraft.

===
Rocket Force (PLARF) ===
The People's Liberation Army Rocket Force (PLARF) is the main strategic missile force of the PLA and consists of at least 120,000 personnel.
It controls China's nuclear and conventional strategic missiles.
China's total nuclear arsenal size is estimated to be between 100 and 400 thermonuclear warheads.

===
Strategic Support Force (PLASSF) ===
Founded on 31 December 2015 as part of the first wave of reforms of the PLA, the People's Liberation Army Strategic Support Force was established as the newest and latest branch of the PLA.
Personnel numbers are estimated at 175,000.
Initial announcements regarding the Strategic Support Force did not provide much detail, but Yang Yujun of the Chinese Ministry of Defense described it as an integration of all current combat support forces including but limited to: space, cyber, electronic and intelligence branches.
Additionally, commentators have speculated that the new service branch will include high-tech operations forces such as space, cyberspace and electronic warfare operations units, independent of other branches of the military.
Yin Zhuo, rear admiral of the People's Liberation Army Navy and member of the eleventh Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) said that "the major mission of the PLA Strategic Support Force is the provision of support to the combat operations so that the PLA can gain regional advantages in the aerospace, space, network and electromagnetic space warfare and ensure integrated operations in the conduction of US joint warfare style operations."
==
Conscription and terms of service ==
Technically, military service with the PLA is obligatory for all Chinese citizens.
In practice, mandatory military service has not been implemented since 1949 as the People's Liberation Army has been able to recruit sufficient numbers voluntarily.
All 18-year-old males have to register themselves with the government authorities, in a way similar to the Selective Service System of the United States.
In practice, registering does not mean that the person doing so must join the People's Liberation Army.
Article 55 of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China prescribes conscription by stating: "It is a sacred duty of every citizen of the People's Republic of China to defend his or her motherland and resist invasion.
It is an honoured obligation of the citizens of the People's Republic of China to perform military service and to join the militia forces.
"
The 1984 Military Service Law spells out the legal basis of conscription, describing military service as a duty for "all citizens without distinction of race... and religious creed".
This law has not been amended since it came into effect.
Technically, those 18–22 years of age enter selective compulsory military service, with a 24-month service obligation.
In reality, numbers of registering personals are enough to support all military posts in China, creating "volunteer
conscription".
Residents of the Special administrative regions, Hong Kong and Macau, are exempted from joining the military.

==
Military Intelligence ==


===
Joint Staff Department ===
The Joint Staff Department carries out staff and operational functions for the PLA and had major responsibility for implementing military modernisation plans.
Headed by chief of general staff, the department serves as the headquarters for the entire PLA and contained directorates for the five armed services: Ground Forces, Air Force, Navy, Rocket Forces and Support Forces.
The Joint Staff Department included functionally organised subdepartments for operations, training, intelligence, mobilisation, surveying, communications and politics, the departments for artillery, armoured units, quartermaster units and joint forces engineering units were later dissolved, with the former two forming now part of the Ground Forces, the engineering formations now split amongst the service branches and the quartermaster formations today form part of the Joint Logistics Forces.

Navy Headquarters controls the North Sea Fleet, East Sea Fleet, and South Sea Fleet.
Air Force Headquarters generally exercised control through the commanders of the five theater commands.
Nuclear forces were directly subordinate to the Joint Staff Department through the Rocket Forces commander and political commissar.
Conventional main, regional, and militia units were controlled administratively by the theater commanders, but the Joint Staff Department in Beijing could assume direct operational control of any main-force unit at will.
Thus, broadly speaking, the Joint Staff Department exercises operational control of the main forces, and
the theater commanders controlled as always the regional forces and, indirectly, the militia.
The post of principal intelligence official in the top leadership of the Chinese military has been taken up by a number of people of several generations, from Li Kenong in the 1950s to Xiong Guangkai in the late 1990s; and their public capacity has always been assistant to the deputy chief of staff or assistant to the chief of staff.

Ever since the CCP officially established the system of "theater commands" for its army in the 2010s as a successor to the "major military regions" policy of the 1950s,
the intelligence agencies inside the Army have, after going through several major evolutions, developed into the present three major military intelligence setups:
The central level is composed of the Second and Third Departments under the Joint Staff Headquarters and the Liaison Department under the Political Work Department.

At the Theater Command level intelligence activities consist of the Second Bureau established at the same level as the Operation Department under the headquarters, and the Liaison Department established under the Political Work Department.

The third system includes a number of communications stations directly established in the garrison areas of all the theater commands by the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters.
The Second Bureau under the headquarters and the Liaison Department under the Political Work Departments of the theater commands are only subjected to the "professional leadership" of their "counterpart" units under the Central Military Commission and are still considered the direct subordinate units of the major military region organizationally.
Those entities whose names include the word "institute", all research institutes under the charge of the Second and the Third Departments of the Joint Staff Headquarters, including other research organs inside the Army, are at least of the establishment size of the full regimental level.
Among the deputy commanders of a major Theater command in China, there is always one who is assigned to take charge of intelligence work, and the intelligence agencies under his charge are directly affiliated to the headquarters and the political department of the corresponding theater command.

The Conference on Strengthening Intelligence Work held from 3 September 1996 – 18 September 1996 at the Xishan Command Center of the Ministry of State Security and the General Staff Department.
Chi Haotian delivered a report entitled "Strengthen Intelligence Work in a New International Environment To Serve the Cause of Socialist Construction."
The report emphasised the need to strengthen the following four aspects of intelligence work:

Efforts must be made to strengthen understanding of the special nature and role of intelligence work, as well as understanding of the close relationship between strengthening intelligence work on the one hand, and of the Four Modernizations of the motherland, the reunification of the motherland, and opposition to hegemony and power politics on the other.

The United States and the West have all along been engaged in infiltration, intervention, sabotage, and intelligence gathering against China on the political, economic, military, and ideological fronts.
The response must strengthen the struggle against their infiltration, intervention, sabotage, and intelligence gathering.

Consolidating intelligence departments and training a new generation of intelligence personnel who are politically reliable, honest and upright in their ways, and capable of mastering professional skills, the art of struggle, and advanced technologies.

Strengthening the work of organising intelligence in two international industrial, commercial, and financial ports—Hong Kong and Macau.
Although the four aspects emphasised by Chi Haotian appeared to be defensive measures, they were in fact both defensive and offensive in nature.

====
Second Department ====
The Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters is responsible for collecting military intelligence.
Activities include military attachés at Chinese embassies abroad, clandestine special agents sent to foreign countries to collect military information, and the analysis of information publicly published in foreign countries.
This section of the PLA Joint Staff Headquarters act in similar capacity to its civilian counterpart the Ministry of State Security.

The Second Department oversees military human intelligence (HUMINT) collection, widely exploits
open source (OSINT) materials, fuses HUMINT, signals intelligence (SIGINT), and imagery intelligence data, and disseminates finished intelligence products to the CMC and other consumers.
Preliminary fusion is carried out by the Second Department's Analysis Bureau which mans the National Watch Center, the focal point for national-level indications and warning.
In-depth analysis is carried out by regional bureaus.
Although traditionally the Second Department of the Joint Staff Department was responsible for military intelligence, it is beginning to increasingly focus on scientific and technological intelligence in the military field, following the example of Russian agencies in stepping up the work of collecting scientific and technological information.

The research institute under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters is publicly known as the Institute for International Strategic Studies; its internal classified publication "Foreign Military Trends" ("外军动态", Wai Jun Dongtai) is published every 10 days and transmitted to units at the division level.

The PLA Institute of International Relations at Nanjing comes under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Department and is responsible for training military attachés, assistant military attachés and associate military attachés as well as secret agents to be posted abroad.
It also supplies officers to the military intelligence sections of various military regions and group armies.
The institute was formed from the PLA "793" Foreign Language Institute, which moved from Zhangjiakou after the Cultural Revolution and split into two institutions at Luoyang and Nanjing.

The Institute of International Relations was known in the 1950s as the School for Foreign Language Cadres of the Central Military Commission, with the current name being used since 1964.
The training of intelligence personnel is one of several activities at the institute.
While all graduates of the Moscow Institute of International Relations were employed by the KGB, only some graduates of the Beijing Institute of International Relations are employed by the Ministry of State Security.
The former Institute of International Relations, since been renamed the Foreign Affairs College, is under the administration of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and is not involved in secret intelligence work.
The former Central Military Commission foreign language school had foreign faculty members who were either Communist Party sympathizers or were members of foreign communist parties.
But the present Institute of International Relations does not hire foreign teachers, to avoid the danger that its students might be recognised when sent abroad as clandestine agents.

Those engaged in professional work in military academies under the Second Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters usually have a chance to go abroad, either for advanced studies or as military officers working in the military attaché's office of Chinese embassies in foreign countries.
People working in the military attaché's office of embassies are usually engaged in collecting military information under the cover of "military diplomacy".
As long as they refrain from directly subversive activities, they are considered as well-behaved "military diplomats".

Some bureaus under the Second Department which are responsible for espionage in different regions, of which the First Bureau is responsible for collecting information in the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau, and also in Taiwan.
Agents are dispatched by the Second Department to companies and other local corporations to gain cover.

The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group assigned to Hong Kong and Macau in the mid-1980s mostly operated in the mass media, political, industrial, commercial, and religious circles, as well as in universities and colleges.
The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group was mainly responsible for the following three tasks:
Finding out and keeping abreast of the political leanings of officials of the Hong Kong and Macau governments, as well as their views on major issues, through social contact with them and through information provided by them.

Keeping abreast of the developments of foreign governments' political organs in Hong Kong, as well as of foreign financial, industrial, and commercial organisations.

Finding out and having a good grasp of the local media's sources of information on political, military, economic, and other developments on the mainland, and deliberately releasing false political or military information to the media to test the outside response.
The "Autumn Orchid" intelligence group was awarded a Citation for Merit, Second Class, in December 1994.
It was further awarded another Citation for Merit, Second Class, in 1997.
Its current status is not publicly known.
During the 2008 Chinese New Year celebration CCTV held for Chinese diplomatic establishments, the head of the Second Department of the Joint Headquarters was revealed for the first time to the public: the current head was Major General Yang Hui (杨晖).

====
Third Department ====
The Third Department of the Joint Staff Department is responsible for monitoring the telecommunications of foreign armies and producing finished intelligence based on the military information collected.

The communications stations established by the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters are not subject to the jurisdiction of the provincial military district and the major theater command of where they are based.
The communications stations are entirely the agencies of the Third Department of the Joint Staff Headquarters which have no affiliations to the provincial military district and the military region of where they are based.
The personnel composition, budgets, and establishment of these communications stations are entirely under the jurisdiction of the Third Department of the General PLA General Staff Headquarters, and are not related at all with local troops.

China maintains the most extensive SIGINT network of all the countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
As of the late 1990s, SIGINT systems included several dozen ground stations, half a dozen ships, truck-mounted systems, and airborne systems.
Third Department headquarters is in the vicinity of the GSD First Department (Operations Department), AMS, and NDU complex in the hills northwest of the Summer Palace.
As of the late 1990s, the Third Department was allegedly manned by approximately 20,000 personnel, with most of their linguists trained at the Luoyang Institute of Foreign Languages.

Ever since the 1950s, the Second and Third Departments of the Joint Staff Headquarters have established a number of institutions of secondary and higher learning for bringing up "special talents.
"
The PLA Foreign Language Institute at Luoyang comes under the Third Department of the Joint Staff Department and is responsible for training foreign language officers for the monitoring of foreign military intelligence.
The institute was formed from the PLA "793" Foreign Language Institute, which moved from Zhangjiakou after the Cultural Revolution and split into two institutions at Luoyang and Nanjing.

Though the distribution order they received upon graduation indicated the "Joint Staff Headquarters", many of the graduates of these schools found themselves being sent to all parts of the country, including remote and uninhabited backward mountain areas.
The reason is that the monitoring and control stations under the Third Department of the PLA General Staff Headquarters are scattered in every corner of the country.

The communications stations located in the Shenzhen base of the PLA Hong Kong Garrison started their work long ago.
In normal times, these two communications stations report directly to the Central Military Commission and the Joint Staff Headquarters.
Units responsible for co-ordination are the communications stations established in the garrison provinces of the military regions by the Third Department of the PLA General Staff Headquarters.

By taking direct command of military communications stations based in all parts of the country, the CCP Central Military Commission and the Joint Staff Headquarters can not only ensure a successful interception of enemy radio communications, but can also make sure that none of the wire or wireless communications and contacts among major military regions can escape the detection of these communications stations, thus effectively attaining the goal of imposing a direct supervision and control over all the theater commands, all provincial military districts, and all group armies.

=====
Monitoring stations =====
China's main SIGINT effort is in the Third Department of the Joint Staff Department of the Central Military Commission, with additional capabilities, primarily domestic, in the Ministry of State Security (MSS).
SIGINT stations, therefore, are scattered through the country, for domestic as well as international interception.
Prof. Desmond Ball, of the Australian National University, described the largest stations as the main Technical Department SIGINT net control station on the northwest outskirts of Beijing, and the large complex near Lake Kinghathu in the extreme northeast corner of China.

As opposed to other major powers, China focuses its SIGINT activities on its region rather than the world.
Ball wrote, in the eighties, that China had several dozen SIGINT stations aimed at the Soviet Union, Japan, Taiwan, Southeast Asia and India, as well as internally.
Of the stations apparently targeting Russia, there are sites at Jilemutu and Jixi in the northeast, and at Erlian and Hami near the Mongolian border.
Two Russian-facing sites in Xinjiang, at Qitai and Korla may be operated jointly with resources from the US CIA's Office of SIGINT Operations, probably focused on missile and space activity.
Other stations aimed at South and Southeast Asia are on a net controlled by Chengdu, Sichuan.
There is a large facility at Dayi, and, according to Ball, "numerous" small posts along the Indian border.
Other significant facilities are located near Shenyang, near Jinan and in Nanjing and Shanghai.
Additional stations are in the Fujian and Guangdong military districts opposite Taiwan.

On Hainan Island, near Vietnam, there is a naval SIGINT facility that monitors the South China sea, and a ground station targeting US and Russian satellites.
China also has ship and aircraft platforms in this area, under the South Sea Fleet headquarters at Zhanjiang immediately north of the island.
Targeting here seems to have an ELINT as well as COMINT flavor.
There are also truck-mounted mobile ground systems, as well as ship, aircraft, and limited satellite capability.
There are at least 10 intelligence-gathering auxiliary vessels.

As of the late nineties, the Chinese did not appear to be trying to monitor the United States Pacific Command to the same extent as does Russia.
In future, this had depended, in part, on the status of Taiwan.

====
Fourth Department ====
The Fourth Department (ECM and Radar) of the Joint Staff Headquarters Department has the electronic intelligence (ELINT) portfolio within the PLA's SIGINT apparatus.
This department is responsible for electronic countermeasures, requiring them to collect and maintain data bases on electronic signals.
25 ELINT receivers are the responsibility of the Southwest Institute of Electronic Equipment (SWIEE).
Among the wide range of SWIEE ELINT products is a new KZ900 airborne ELINT pod.
The GSD 54th Research Institute supports the ECM Department in development of digital ELINT signal processors to analyse parameters of radar pulses.

===
Special forces ===
China's special ground force is called PLASF (People's Liberation Army Special Operations Forces).
Typical units include consist of highly trained soldiers, a team commander, assistant commander, sniper, spotter, machine-gun support, bomber, and a pair of assault groups.
China's counter terrorism unit members are drawn from the public security apparatus rather than the military.
The name of such units change frequently.
As of 2020, it is known as the Immediate Action Unit (IAU).China has reportedly developed a force capable of carrying out long-range airborne operations, long-range reconnaissance, and amphibious operations.
Formed in China's Guangzhou military region and known by the nickname "South Blade", the force supposedly receives army, air force, and naval training, including flight training, and is equipped with "hundreds of high-tech devices", including global-positioning satellite systems.
All force members officers are military staff college graduates, and 60 percent are said to have university degrees.
Soldiers are reported to be cross-trained in various specialties, and training encompassing a wide range of operating environments.
It is far from clear whether this unit is considered operational by the Chinese.
It is also not clear how such a force would be employed.
Among the missions stated missions include: "responding to contingencies in various regions" and "cooperating with other services in attacks on islands".
According to the limited reporting, the organisation appears to be in a phase of testing and development and may constitute an experimental unit.
While no size for the force has been revealed, there have been Chinese media claims that "over 4,000 soldiers of the force are all-weather and versatile fighters and parachutists who can fly airplanes and drive terrain vehicles and amphibious boats".
===
Other branches ===
The Third Department and the Navy co-operate on shipborne intelligence collection platforms.

PLAAF Sixth Research Institute:
Air Force SIGINT collection is managed by the PLAAF Sixth Research Institute in Beijing.

== Weapons and equipment ==
According to the United States Defense Department, China is developing kinetic-energy weapons, high-powered lasers, high-powered microwave weapons, particle-beam weapons, and electromagnetic pulse weapons with its increase of military fundings.
The PLA has said of reports that its modernisation is dependent on sales of advanced technology from American allies, senior leadership have stated "Some have politicized China's normal commercial cooperation with foreign countries, damaging our reputation.
"
These contributions include advanced European diesel engines for Chinese warships, military helicopter designs from Eurocopter, French anti-submarine sonars and helicopters, Australian technology for the Houbei class missile boat, and Israeli supplied American missile, laser and aircraft technology.
According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute's data, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–14, an increase of 143 percent from the period 2005–2009.
SIPRI also calculated that China surpassed Russia to become the world's second largest arms exporter by 2020.
China's share of global arms exports hence increased from 3 to 5 percent.
China supplied major arms to 35 states in 2010–14.
A significant percentage (just over 68 percent) of Chinese exports went to three countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh and Myanmar.
China also exported major arms to 18 African states.
Examples of China's increasing global presence as an arms supplier in 2010–14 included deals with Venezuela for armoured vehicles and transport and trainer aircraft, with Algeria for three frigates, with Indonesia for the supply of hundreds of anti-ship missiles and with Nigeria for the supply of a number of unmanned combat aerial vehicles.
Following rapid advances in its arms industry, China has become less dependent on arms imports, which decreased by 42 percent between 2005–2009 and 2010–14.
Russia accounted for 61 percent of Chinese arms imports, followed by France with 16 percent and Ukraine with 13 per cent.
Helicopters formed a major part of Russian and French deliveries, with the French designs produced under licence in China.
Over the years, China has struggled to design and produce effective engines for combat and transport vehicles.
It continued to import large numbers of engines from Russia and Ukraine in 2010–14 for indigenously designed combat, advanced trainer and transport aircraft, and for naval ships.
It also produced British-, French- and German-designed engines for combat aircraft, naval ships and armoured vehicles, mostly as part of agreements that have been in place for decades.

===
Cyberwarfare ===
There is a belief in the Western military doctrines that the PLA have already begun engaging countries using cyber-warfare.
There has been a significant increase in the number of presumed Chinese military initiated cyber events from 1999 to the present day.
Cyberwarfare has gained recognition as a valuable technique because it is an asymmetric technique that is a part of Chinese Information Operations.

As is written by two PLAGF Colonels, Qiao Liang and Wang Xiangsui in the book 'Unrestricted Warfare', "Methods that are not characterised by the use of the force of arms, nor by the use of military power, nor even by the presence of casualties and bloodshed, are just as likely to facilitate the successful realisation of the war's goals, if not more so.
While China has long been suspected of cyber spying, on 24 May 2011 the PLA announced the existence of having 'cyber capabilities'.
In February 2013, the media named "Comment Crew" as a hacker military faction for China's People's Liberation Army.
In May 2014, a Federal Grand Jury in the United States indicted five Unit 61398 officers on criminal charges related to cyber attacks on private companies based in the United States after alleged investigations by the FBI who exposed their identities in collaboration with US intelligence agencies such as the CIA.In February 2020, the United States government indicted members of China's People's Liberation Army for the 2017 Equifax data breach, which involved hacking into Equifax and plundering sensitive data as part of a massive heist that also included stealing trade secrets, though the Chinese Communist Party denied these claims.
===
Nuclear capabilities ===
In 1955, China decided to proceed with a nuclear weapons program.
The decision was made after the United States threatened the use of nuclear weapons against China
should it take action against Quemoy and Matsu, coupled with the lack of interest of the Soviet Union for using its nuclear weapons in defence of China.

After their first nuclear test (China claims minimal Soviet assistance before 1960) on 16 October 1964, China was the first state to pledge no-first-use of nuclear weapons.
On 1 July 1966, the Second Artillery Corps, as named by Premier Zhou Enlai, was formed.
In 1967, China tested a fully functional hydrogen bomb, only 32 months after China had made its first fission device.
China thus produced the shortest fission-to-fusion development known in history.

China became a major international arms exporter during the 1980s.
Beijing joined the Middle East arms control talks, which began in July 1991 to establish global guidelines for conventional arms transfers, and later announced that it would no longer participate because of the US decision to sell 150 F-16A/B aircraft to Taiwan on 2 September 1992.

It joined the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in 1984 and pledged to abstain from further atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons in 1986.
China acceded to the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1992 and supported its indefinite and unconditional extension in 1995.
Nuclear weapons tests by China ceased in 1996, when it signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and agreed to seek an international ban on the production of fissile nuclear weapons material.

In 1996, China committed to provide assistance to unsafeguarded nuclear facilities.
China attended the May 1997 meeting of the NPT Exporters (Zangger) Committee as an observer and became a full member in October 1997.
The Zangger Committee is a group which meets to list items that should be subject to IAEA inspections if exported by countries, which have, as China has, signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
In September 1997, China issued detailed nuclear export control regulations.
China began implementing regulations establishing controls over nuclear-related dual-use items in 1998.
China also has decided not to engage in new nuclear co-operation with Iran (even under safeguards), and will complete existing co-operation, which is not of proliferation concern, within a relatively short period.
Based on significant, tangible progress with China on nuclear nonproliferation, President Clinton in 1998 took steps to bring into force the 1985 US–China Agreement on Peaceful Nuclear Cooperation.

Beijing has deployed a modest ballistic missile force, including land and sea-based intermediate-range and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
It was estimated in 2007 that China has about 100–160 liquid fuelled ICBMs capable of striking the United States with approximately 100–150 IRBMs able to strike Russia or Eastern Europe, as well as several hundred tactical SRBMs with ranges between 300 and 600 km.

Currently, the Chinese nuclear stockpile is estimated to be between 50 and 75 land and sea based ICBMs.
China's nuclear program follows a doctrine of minimal deterrence, which involves having the minimum force needed to deter an aggressor from launching a first strike.
The current efforts of China appear to be aimed at maintaining a survivable nuclear force by, for example, using solid-fuelled ICBMs in silos rather than liquid-fuelled missiles.
China's 2006 published deterrence policy states that they will "uphold the principles of counterattack in self-defense and limited development of nuclear weapons", but "has never entered, and will never enter into a nuclear arms race with any country".
It goes on to describe that China will never undertake a first strike, or use nuclear weapons against a non-nuclear state or zone.
US strategists, however, suggest that the Chinese position may be ambiguous, and nuclear weapons may be used both to deter conventional strikes/invasions on the Chinese mainland, or as an international political tool – limiting the extent to which other nations can coerce China politically, an inherent, often inadvertent phenomenon in international relations as regards any state with nuclear capabilities.

===
Space ===
The PLA has deployed a number of space-based systems for military purposes, including the imagery intelligence satellite systems like the ZiYan series, and the militarily designated JianBing series, synthetic aperture satellites (SAR) such as JianBing-5, BeiDou satellite navigation network, and secured communication satellites with FENGHUO-1.The PLA is responsible for the Chinese space program.
To date, all the participants have been selected from members of the PLA Air Force.
China became the third country in the world to have sent a man into space by its own means with the flight of Yang Liwei aboard the Shenzhou 5 spacecraft on 15 October 2003 and the flight of Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng aboard Shenzhou 6 on 12 October 2005 and Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming, and Jing Haipeng aboard Shenzhou 7 on 25 September 2008.

The PLA started the development of an anti-ballistic and anti-satellite system in the 1960s, code named Project 640, including ground-based lasers and anti-satellite missiles.
On 11 January 2007, China conducted a successful test of an anti-satellite missile, with an SC-19 class KKV.
Its anti ballistic missile test was also successful.

The PLA has tested two types of hypersonic space vehicles, the Shenglong Spaceplane and a new one built by Chengdu Aircraft Corporation.
Only a few pictures have appeared since it was revealed in late 2007.
Earlier, images of the High-enthalpy Shock Waves Laboratory wind tunnel of the CAS Key Laboratory of high-temperature gas dynamics (LHD) were published in the Chinese media.
Tests with speeds up to Mach 20 were reached around 2001.

==
Budget and Expenditure ==
Military spending for the People's Liberation Army has grown about 10 percent annually over the last 15 years.
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, SIPRI, estimated China's military expenditure for 2013 to US$188.5bn.
China's military budget for 2014 according to IHS Jane's, a defence industry consulting and analysis company, will be US$148bn, which is the second largest in the world.
The United States military budget for 2014 in comparison, is US$574.9bn, which is down from a high of US$664.3bn in 2012.
According to SIPRI, China became the world's third largest exporter of major arms in 2010–2014, an increase of 143 per cent from the period 2005–2009.
China supplied major arms to 35 states in 2010–2014.
A significant percentage (just over 68 per cent) of Chinese exports went to three countries: Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Myanmar.
China also exported major arms to 18 African states.
Examples of China's increasing global presence as an arms supplier in 2010–2014 included deals with Venezuela for armoured vehicles and transport and trainer aircraft, with Algeria for three frigates, with Indonesia for the supply of hundreds of anti-ship missiles and with Nigeria for the supply of a number of unmanned combat aerial vehicles.
Following rapid advances in its domestic arms industry, China has become less dependent on arms imports, which decreased by 42 per cent between 2005–2009 and 2010–2014.
China's rise in military spending come at a time when there are tensions along the South China Sea with territorial disputes involving the Philippines, Vietnam, and Taiwan, as well as escalating tensions between China and Japan involving the disputed Diaoyu (Chinese spelling) and Senkaku (Japanese spelling) islands.
Former-United States Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has urged China to be more transparent about its military capabilities and intentions.
The years 2018 and 2019 both saw significant budget increases as well.
China announced 2018's budget as 1.11 trillion yuan (US$165.5bn), an 8.1% increase on 2017, and 2019's budget as 1.19 trillion yuan (US$177.61bn), an increase of 7.5 per cent on 2018.

===
Military spending ===
March 2000
: The budget was announced to be $14.6 billion
March 2001: The budget was announced to be $17.0 billion
March 2002: The budget was announced to be $20.0 billion
March 2003: The budget was announced to be $22.0 billion
March 2004: The budget was announced to be $24.6 billion
March 2005: The budget was announced to be $29.9 billion
March 2006: The budget was announced to be $35.0 billion
March 2007:
The budget was announced to be $44.9 billion
March 2008: The budget was announced to be $58.8 billion
March 2009: The budget was announced to be $70.0 billion
March 2010: The budget was announced to be $76.5 billion
March 2011: The budget was announced to be $90.2 billion
March 2012: The budget was announced to be $103.1 billion
March 2013: The budget was announced to be $116.2 billion
March 2014: The budget was announced to be $131.2 billion
March 2015: The budget was announced to be $142.4 billion
March 2016: The budget was announced to be $143.7 billion
March 2017: The budget was announced to be $151.4 billion
March 2018: The budget was announced to be $165.5 billion
March 2019: The budget was announced to be  $177.6 billion
May 2020:
The budget was annouced to be $183.5 billion
March 2021: The budget was annouced to be $209.4
billionBudget
figures are published on the website of the State Council via a document named 'Central and Local Budgets' followed by the preceding year of the publication.

==
Commercial Activities ==


===
Historical ===
Until the mid-1990s the PLA had extensive commercial enterprise holdings in non-military areas, particularly real estate.
Almost all of these holdings were supposedly spun off in the mid-1990s.
In most cases, the management of the companies remained unchanged, with the PLA officers running the companies simply retiring from the PLA to run the newly formed private holding companies.
The history of PLA involvement in commercial enterprises began in the 1950s and 1960s.
Because of the socialist state-owned system and from a desire for military self-sufficiency, the PLA created a network of enterprises such as farms, guest houses, and factories intended to financially support its own needs.
One unintended side effect of the Deng-era economic reforms was that many of these enterprises became very profitable.
For example, a military guest house intended for soldier recreation could be easily converted into a profitable hotel for civilian use.
There were two main factors which increased PLA commercial involvement in the 1990s.
One was that running profitable companies decreased the need for the state to fund the military from the government budget.
The second was that in an environment where legal rules were unclear and political connections were important, PLA influence was very useful.
By the early 1990s party officials and high military officials were becoming increasingly alarmed at the military's commercial involvement for a number of reasons.
The military's involvement in commerce was seen to adversely affect military readiness and spread corruption.
Further, there was great concern that having an independent source of funding would lead to decreased loyalty to the party.
The result of this was an effort to spin off the PLA's commercial enterprises into private companies managed by former PLA officers, and to reform military procurement from a system in which the PLA directly controls its sources of supply to a contracting system more akin to those of Western countries.
The separation of the PLA from its commercial interests was largely complete by the year 2000.
It was met with very little resistance, as the spinoff was arranged in such a way that few lost out.

==
Anthem and Insignia ==
The military anthem of the PLA is the Military Anthem of the People's Liberation Army (simplified Chinese: 中国人民解放军军歌;
traditional Chinese: 中國人民解放軍軍歌
; pinyin:
Zhōngguó Rénmín Jiěfàngjūn Jūngē)
(Chinese People's Liberation Army Song).
The Central Military Commission (CMC) adopted the song as the official anthem on 25 July 1988.
The lyrics of the anthem were written by composer Gong Mu
(real name: Zhang Yongnian; Chinese: 张永年) and
the music was composed by Korea born Chinese composer Zheng Lücheng.

The PLA's insignia consists of a roundel with a red star bearing the two Chinese characters "八一"(literally "eight-one"), referring to the Nanchang uprising (A pivotal moment in Chinese history in which the Chinese Communist Party decided to take up armed struggle against the Nationalist Kuomintang party in response to the Shanghai massacre ordered by nationalist generalissimo and KMT party leader and founding father of Taiwan Chiang Kai Shek) which began on 1 August 1927
(The first day of the eighth month).
The inclusion of the two characters "八一" (Eight-One) being symbolic of the party's revolutionary history carrying strong emotional connotations of the political power which it shed blood to obtain.

==
Flags ==
The flag of the Chinese People's Liberation Army is the war flag of the People's Liberation Army; the layout of the flag has a golden star at the top left corner and "八一" to the right of the star,
placed on a red field.
Each service branch also have their own individual flags: The top ​5⁄8 of the flags is the same as the PLA flag; the bottom ​3⁄8 are occupied by the colors of the branches.
The flag of the Ground Forces has a forest green bar at the bottom, the naval ensign has stripes of blue and white at the bottom, the Air Force uses a sky blue bar and the Rocket Force uses a yellow bar at the bottom.
The forest green represents the earth, the blue and white stripes represent the seas, the sky blue represents the air and
the yellow represents the flare of missile launching.

==
See also ==
2015 People's Republic of China military reform
Chinese espionage in the United States
Chinese information operations and information warfare
Military Power of the People's Republic of China
Republic of China Armed Forces
Timeline of the Cox Report controversy
Titan Rain
Type 07


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Ministry of National Defense
The People's Republic of China
PLA Daily News sponsored by the PLA.
(
in Chinese)
This is a list of Infantry weapons used by the Canadian Military throughout its history and military arms used by militaries in pre-Confederation conflicts in Canada.

==
Colonial Era to Confederation (1604 - 1867) ==


===
Black powder rifles, carbines and pistols ===


===
Service rifles and carbines ===
==
Confederation to First World War (1867 - 1914) ==


===
Service Pistols ===


===
Service Rifles ===


==
First World War to Second World War (1914 - 1939) ==


===
Service pistols ===


===
Rifles ===


===
Machine Guns ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Second World War to Cold War (1939 - 1946) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Scout Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Carriers and Armoured Tractors ===


===
Tanks ===


====
Combat Tanks ====


====
Training Tanks ====


===
Self-Propelled Artillery and Anti-Aircraft ===


===
Engineering Vehicles ===


===
Artillery ===


====
Field artillery ====


====
Anti-tank guns ====


====
Anti-aircraft guns ====


==
Cold War to Modern (Cold War and peace keeping weapons until 2003) ==


===
Infantry Weapons ===


===
Utility Vehicles ===


===
Armoured Fighting Vehicles ===


==
Unsorted ==


===
Approved private purchase and secondary side-arms ===


===
Grenades, mines and other explosives ===


===
Infantry mortars ===


===
Bayonets and Knives ===


===
Ammunition ===


===
Swords ===
1897 Pattern British Infantry Officer's Sword
1908 and 1912 Pattern British Army Cavalry Swords
1857 Artillery Officer Sword
1827
Navy Officer Sword
1926
Air Force Officer Sword


===
Uniforms, Load Bearing and Protective Equipment ===
Uniforms
See also:
Battledress, Uniforms of the Canadian Forces

Foreign Service Dress 1900-1903
Service Dress 1903-1939
Canadian Pattern and British Pattern
Khaki Drill
Battle Dress 1939-1967
Denison smock Used by the Airborne
Canadian Para Smock
Bush Dress
Combat Dress -1968-2002
CADPAT camouflage Combat Dress 2002–presentLoad bearing equipment
Oliver Pattern Equipment 1898-19??

1903
Pattern Bandolier Equipment
1937
Pattern Web Equipment
1942 Battle Jerkin
1951 Pattern Web Equipment
1964 Pattern Web Equipment
1982 Pattern Web Equipment
Tactical Vest (or just known as Tac Vest).
2003–PresentHead dress
Canadian military fur wedge cap
Glengarry
Tam o'shanter
Field Service Cap
Beret
Balmoral bonnet
Brodie helmet
Mk II
helmet
Mk III helmet
M1 Helmet
CG634Protective equipment
Fragmentation Protection Vest


==
Present day ==
List of equipment of the Canadian Army


==
References ==


==
External links ==
canadiansoldier.com
The Nigerian military juntas of 1966–79 and 1983–99 were a pair of military dictatorships in Nigeria that were led by the Nigerian Armed Forces, having a chairman or president in charge.

== 1966 Nigerian coup d'état ==
Nigeria's first military junta began following the 1966 Nigerian coup d'état which overthrew the First Nigerian Republic.
Major General Johnson Aguiyi-Ironsi was made the Head of the Federal Military Government of Nigeria, serving for six months before being overthrown and assassinated in the 1966 Nigerian counter-coup.

==
First Junta (1966–1979) ==
Aguiyi-Ironsi was succeeded by General Yakubu Gowon, who established a Supreme Military Council.
Gowon held power until July 1975, when he was overthrown in a bloodless coup.

Brigadier (later General)
Murtala Mohammed succeeded Gowon.
Months later, in February 1976, Mohammed was assassinated by Buka Suka Dimka and others in a violent coup attempt, but the plotters failed to kill Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ, who then succeeded Mohammed as head of state.

The Supreme Military Council was formally dissolved when Ọbasanjọ handed power to the elected Shehu Shagari, ending the military regime and establishing a Nigerian Second Republic.

==
Second Junta (1983–1985) ==
Shagari was overthrown in the 1983 Nigerian coup d'état and succeeded by Muhammadu Buhari, who was appointed Chairman of a new Supreme Military Council of Nigeria and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces by the junta.
Buhari ruled for two years, until the 1985 Nigerian coup d'état, when he was overthrown by General Ibrahim Babangida.

==
Third Junta (1985–1993) ==
General Ibrahim Babangida promulgated himself as the President of the Armed Forces Ruling Council and the first military President of Nigeria.
His rule was the longest serving in peacetime and his administration typified the military dictatorships of the 20th century.

Babangida promised a return of democracy when he seized power, but he ruled Nigeria for eight years, when he temporarily handed power to the interim head of state Ernest Shonekan in 1993 in a move towards democratization.
Two months later, however, Shonekan was overthrown by General Sani Abacha while Babangida was visiting Egypt.

==
Fourth Junta (1993–1999) ==
In 1993, General Sani Abacha overthrew Interim National Government and appointed himself Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council of Nigeria.
After Abacha's death in 1998, General Abdulsalami Abubakar took over and ruled until Olusẹgun Ọbasanjọ again became head of state (via the 1999 presidential election), ending the junta and establishing the Fourth Nigerian Republic.

== See also ==
Nigerian First Republic
Nigerian Second Republic
Nigerian Third Republic
Nigerian Fourth Republic
Politics of Nigeria


==
References ==
A nuclear weapon (also called an atom bomb, nuke, atomic bomb, nuclear warhead, A-bomb, or nuclear bomb) is an explosive device that derives its destructive force from nuclear reactions, either fission (fission bomb) or from a combination of fission and fusion reactions (thermonuclear bomb).
Both bomb types release large quantities of energy from relatively small amounts of matter.
The first test of a fission ("atomic") bomb released an amount of energy approximately equal to 20,000 tons of TNT (84 TJ).
The first thermonuclear ("hydrogen") bomb test released energy approximately equal to 10 million tons of TNT (42 PJ).
Nuclear bombs have had yields between 10 tons TNT (the W54) and 50 megatons for the Tsar Bomba (see TNT equivalent).
A thermonuclear weapon weighing little more than 2,400 pounds (1,100 kg) can release energy equal to more than 1.2 million tons of TNT (5.0 PJ).
A nuclear device no larger than traditional bombs can devastate an entire city by blast, fire, and radiation.
Since they are weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation of nuclear weapons is a focus of international relations policy.

==
Testing and deployment of nuclear weapons ==
Nuclear weapons have been used twice in war, both times by the United States against Japan near the end of World War II.
On August 6, 1945, the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a uranium gun-type fission bomb nicknamed "Little Boy" over the Japanese city of Hiroshima; three days later, on August 9, the U.S. Army Air Forces detonated a plutonium implosion-type fission bomb nicknamed "Fat Man" over the Japanese city of Nagasaki.
These bombings caused injuries that resulted in the deaths of approximately 200,000 civilians and military personnel.
The ethics of these bombings and their role in Japan's surrender are subjects of debate.

Since the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, nuclear weapons have been detonated over 2,000 times for testing and demonstration.
Only a few nations possess such weapons or are suspected of seeking them.
The only countries known to have detonated nuclear weapons—and acknowledge possessing them—are (chronologically by date of first test)
the United States, the Soviet Union (succeeded as a nuclear power by Russia), the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea.
Israel is believed to possess nuclear weapons, though, in a policy of deliberate ambiguity, it does not acknowledge having them.
Germany, Italy, Turkey, Belgium and the Netherlands are nuclear weapons sharing states.
South Africa is the only country to have independently developed and then renounced and dismantled its nuclear weapons.
The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons aims to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons, but its effectiveness has been questioned.
Modernisation of weapons continues to this day.

== Types ==
There are two basic types of nuclear weapons: those that derive the majority of their energy from nuclear fission reactions alone, and those that use fission reactions to begin nuclear fusion reactions that produce a large amount of the total energy output.

===
Fission weapons ===
All existing nuclear weapons derive some of their explosive energy from nuclear fission reactions.
Weapons whose explosive output is exclusively from fission reactions are commonly referred to as atomic bombs or atom bombs (abbreviated as A-bombs).
This has long been noted as something of a misnomer, as their energy comes from the nucleus of the atom, just as it does with fusion weapons.

In fission weapons, a mass of fissile material (enriched uranium or plutonium) is forced into supercriticality—allowing an exponential growth of nuclear chain reactions—either by shooting one piece of sub-critical material into another (the "gun" method) or by compression of a sub-critical sphere or cylinder of fissile material using chemically-fueled explosive lenses.
The latter approach, the "implosion" method, is more sophisticated than the former.

A major challenge in all nuclear weapon designs is to ensure that a significant fraction of the fuel is consumed before the weapon destroys itself.
The amount of energy released by fission bombs can range from the equivalent of just under a ton to upwards of 500,000 tons (500 kilotons) of TNT (4.2 to 2.1×106
GJ).All fission reactions generate fission products, the remains of the split atomic nuclei.
Many fission products are either highly radioactive (but short-lived) or moderately radioactive (but long-lived), and as such, they are a serious form of radioactive contamination.
Fission products are the principal radioactive component of nuclear fallout.
Another source of radioactivity is the burst of free neutrons produced by the weapon.
When they collide with other nuclei in the surrounding material, the neutrons transmute those nuclei into other isotopes, altering their stability and making them radioactive.

The most commonly used fissile materials for nuclear weapons applications have been uranium-235 and plutonium-239.
Less commonly used has been uranium-233.
Neptunium-237 and some isotopes of americium may be usable for nuclear explosives as well, but it is not clear that this has ever been implemented, and their plausible use in nuclear weapons is a matter of dispute.

===
Fusion weapons ===
The other basic type of nuclear weapon produces a large proportion of its energy in nuclear fusion reactions.
Such fusion weapons are generally referred to as thermonuclear weapons or more colloquially as hydrogen bombs (abbreviated as H-bombs), as they rely on fusion reactions between isotopes of hydrogen (deuterium and tritium).
All such weapons derive a significant portion of their energy from fission reactions used to "trigger" fusion reactions, and fusion reactions can themselves trigger additional fission reactions.
Only six countries—United States, Russia, United Kingdom, China, France, and India—have conducted thermonuclear weapon tests.
Whether India has detonated a "true" multi-staged thermonuclear weapon is controversial.
North Korea claims to have tested a fusion weapon as of January 2016, though this claim is disputed.
Thermonuclear weapons are considered much more difficult to successfully design and execute than primitive fission weapons.
Almost all of the nuclear weapons deployed today use the thermonuclear design because it is more efficient.
Thermonuclear bombs work by using the energy of a fission bomb to compress and heat fusion fuel.
In the Teller-Ulam design, which accounts for all multi-megaton yield hydrogen bombs, this is accomplished by placing a fission bomb and fusion fuel (tritium, deuterium, or lithium deuteride) in proximity within a special, radiation-reflecting container.
When the fission bomb is detonated, gamma rays and X-rays emitted first compress the fusion fuel, then heat it to thermonuclear temperatures.
The ensuing fusion reaction creates enormous numbers of high-speed neutrons, which can then induce fission in materials not normally prone to it, such as depleted uranium.
Each of these components is known as a "stage", with the fission bomb as the "primary" and the fusion capsule as the "secondary".
In large, megaton-range hydrogen bombs, about half of the yield comes from the final fissioning of depleted uranium.
Virtually all thermonuclear weapons deployed today use the "two-stage" design described above, but it is possible to add additional fusion stages—each stage igniting a larger amount of fusion fuel in the next stage.
This technique can be used to construct thermonuclear weapons of arbitrarily large yield, in contrast to fission bombs, which are limited in their explosive force.
The largest nuclear weapon ever detonated, the Tsar Bomba of the USSR, which released an energy equivalent of over 50 megatons of TNT (210 PJ), was a three-stage weapon.
Most thermonuclear weapons are considerably smaller than this, due to practical constraints from missile warhead space and weight requirements.

Fusion reactions do not create fission products, and thus contribute far less to the creation of nuclear fallout than fission reactions, but because all thermonuclear weapons contain at least one fission stage, and many high-yield thermonuclear devices have a final fission stage, thermonuclear weapons can generate at least as much nuclear fallout as fission-only weapons.

===
Other types ===
There are other types of nuclear weapons as well.
For example, a boosted fission weapon is a fission bomb that increases its explosive yield through a small number of fusion reactions, but it is not a fusion bomb.
In the boosted bomb, the neutrons produced by the fusion reactions serve primarily to increase the efficiency of the fission bomb.
There are two types of boosted fission bomb: internally boosted, in which a deuterium-tritium mixture is injected into the bomb core, and externally boosted, in which concentric shells of lithium-deuteride and depleted uranium are layered on the outside of the fission bomb core.

Some nuclear weapons are designed for special purposes; a neutron bomb is a thermonuclear weapon that yields a relatively small explosion but a relatively large amount of neutron radiation; such a device could theoretically be used to cause massive casualties while leaving infrastructure mostly intact and creating a minimal amount of fallout.
The detonation of any nuclear weapon is accompanied by a blast of neutron radiation.
Surrounding a nuclear weapon with suitable materials (such as cobalt or gold) creates a weapon known as a salted bomb.
This device can produce exceptionally large quantities of long-lived radioactive contamination.
It has been conjectured that such a device could serve as a "doomsday weapon" because such a large quantity of radioactivities with half-lives of decades, lifted into the stratosphere where winds would distribute it around the globe, would make all life on the planet extinct.

In connection with the Strategic Defense Initiative, research into the nuclear pumped laser was conducted under the DOD program Project Excalibur but this did not result in a working weapon.
The concept involves the tapping of the energy of an exploding nuclear bomb to power a single-shot laser that is directed at a distant target.

During the Starfish Prime high-altitude nuclear test in 1962, an unexpected effect was produced which is called a nuclear electromagnetic pulse.
This is an intense flash of electromagnetic energy produced by a rain of high-energy electrons which in turn are produced by a nuclear bomb's gamma rays.
This flash of energy can permanently destroy or disrupt electronic equipment if insufficiently shielded.
It has been proposed to use this effect to disable an enemy's military and civilian infrastructure as an adjunct to other nuclear or conventional military operations against that enemy.
Because the effect is produced by high altitude nuclear detonations, it can produce damage to electronics over a wide, even continental, geographical area.

Research has been done into the possibility of pure fusion bombs: nuclear weapons that consist of fusion reactions without requiring a fission bomb to initiate them.
Such a device might provide a simpler path to thermonuclear weapons than one that required the development of fission weapons first, and pure fusion weapons would create significantly less nuclear fallout than other thermonuclear weapons because they would not disperse fission products.
In 1998, the United States Department of Energy divulged that the United States had, "...made a substantial investment" in the past to develop pure fusion weapons, but that, "The U.S. does not have and is not developing a pure fusion weapon", and that, "No credible design for a pure fusion weapon resulted from the DOE investment".
Antimatter, which consists of particles resembling ordinary matter particles in most of their properties but having opposite electric charge, has been considered as a trigger mechanism for nuclear weapons.
A major obstacle is the difficulty of producing antimatter in large enough quantities, and there is no evidence that it is feasible beyond the military domain.
However, the U.S. Air Force funded studies of the physics of antimatter in the Cold War, and began considering its possible use in weapons, not just as a trigger, but as the explosive itself.
A fourth generation nuclear weapon design is related to, and relies upon, the same principle as antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion.
Most variation in nuclear weapon design is for the purpose of achieving different yields for different situations, and in manipulating design elements to attempt to minimize weapon size.

==
Weapons delivery ==
The system used to deliver a nuclear weapon to its target is an important factor affecting both nuclear weapon design and nuclear strategy.
The design, development, and maintenance of delivery systems are among the most expensive parts of a nuclear weapons program; they account, for example, for 57% of the financial resources spent by the United States on nuclear weapons projects since 1940.The simplest method for delivering a nuclear weapon is a gravity bomb dropped from aircraft; this was the method used by the United States against Japan.
This method places few restrictions on the size of the weapon.
It does, however, limit attack range, response time to an impending attack, and the number of weapons that a country can field at the same time.
With miniaturization, nuclear bombs can be delivered by both strategic bombers and tactical fighter-bombers.
This method is the primary means of nuclear weapons delivery; the majority of U.S. nuclear warheads, for example, are free-fall gravity bombs, namely the B61.

Preferable from a strategic point of view is a nuclear weapon mounted on a missile, which can use a ballistic trajectory to deliver the warhead over the horizon.
Although even short-range missiles allow for a faster and less vulnerable attack, the development of long-range intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) has given some nations the ability to plausibly deliver missiles anywhere on the globe with a high likelihood of success.

More advanced systems, such as multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs), can launch multiple warheads at different targets from one missile, reducing the chance of a successful missile defense.
Today, missiles are most common among systems designed for delivery of nuclear weapons.
Making a warhead small enough to fit onto a missile, though, can be difficult.
Tactical weapons have involved the most variety of delivery types, including not only gravity bombs and missiles but also artillery shells, land mines, and nuclear depth charges and torpedoes for anti-submarine warfare.
An atomic mortar has been tested by the United States.
Small, two-man portable tactical weapons (somewhat misleadingly referred to as suitcase bombs), such as the Special Atomic Demolition Munition, have been developed, although the difficulty of combining sufficient yield with portability limits their military utility.

==
Nuclear strategy ==
Nuclear warfare strategy is a set of policies that deal with preventing or fighting a nuclear war.
The policy of trying to prevent an attack by a nuclear weapon from another country by threatening nuclear retaliation is known as the strategy of nuclear deterrence.
The goal in deterrence is to always maintain a second strike capability (the ability of a country to respond to a nuclear attack with one of its own) and potentially to strive for first strike status (the ability to destroy an enemy's nuclear forces before they could retaliate).
During the Cold War, policy and military theorists considered the sorts of policies that might prevent a nuclear attack, and they developed game theory models that could lead to stable deterrence conditions.

Different forms of nuclear weapons delivery (see above) allow for different types of nuclear strategies.
The goals of any strategy are generally to make it difficult for an enemy to launch a pre-emptive strike against the weapon system and difficult to defend against the delivery of the weapon during a potential conflict.
This can mean keeping weapon locations hidden, such as deploying them on submarines or land mobile transporter erector launchers whose locations are difficult to track, or it can mean protecting weapons by burying them in hardened missile silo bunkers.
Other components of nuclear strategies included using missile defenses to destroy the missiles before they land, or implementing civil defense measures using early-warning systems to evacuate citizens to safe areas before an attack.

Weapons designed to threaten large populations or to deter attacks are known as strategic weapons.
Nuclear weapons for use on a battlefield in military situations are called tactical weapons.

Critics of nuclear war strategy often suggest that a nuclear war between two nations would result in mutual annihilation.
From this point of view, the significance of nuclear weapons is to deter war because any nuclear war would escalate out of mutual distrust and fear, resulting in mutually assured destruction.
This threat of national, if not global, destruction has been a strong motivation for anti-nuclear weapons activism.

Critics from the peace movement and within the military establishment have questioned the usefulness of such weapons in the current military climate.
According to an advisory opinion issued by the International Court of Justice in 1996, the use of (or threat of use of) such weapons would generally be contrary to the rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, but the court did not reach an opinion as to whether or not the threat or use would be lawful in specific extreme circumstances such as if the survival of the state were at stake.

Another deterrence position is that nuclear proliferation can be desirable.
In this case, it is argued that, unlike conventional weapons, nuclear weapons deter all-out war between states, and they succeeded in doing this during the Cold War between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.
In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Gen. Pierre Marie Gallois of France, an adviser to Charles de Gaulle, argued in books like The Balance of Terror: Strategy for the Nuclear Age (1961) that mere possession of a nuclear arsenal was enough to ensure deterrence, and thus concluded that the spread of nuclear weapons could increase international stability.
Some prominent neo-realist scholars, such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, have argued, along the lines of Gallois, that some forms of nuclear proliferation would decrease the likelihood of total war, especially in troubled regions of the world where there exists a single nuclear-weapon state.
Aside from the public opinion that opposes proliferation in any form, there are two schools of thought on the matter: those, like Mearsheimer, who favored selective proliferation, and Waltz, who was somewhat more non-interventionist.
Interest in proliferation and the stability-instability paradox that it generates continues to this day, with ongoing debate about indigenous Japanese and South Korean nuclear deterrent against North Korea.
The threat of potentially suicidal terrorists possessing nuclear weapons (a form of nuclear terrorism) complicates the decision process.
The prospect of mutually assured destruction might not deter an enemy who expects to die in the confrontation.
Further, if the initial act is from a stateless terrorist instead of a sovereign nation, there might not be a nation or specific target to retaliate against.
It has been argued, especially after the September 11, 2001, attacks, that this complication calls for a new nuclear strategy, one that is distinct from that which gave relative stability during the Cold War.
Since 1996, the United States has had a policy of allowing the targeting of its nuclear weapons at terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction.
Robert Gallucci argues that although traditional deterrence is not an effective approach toward terrorist groups bent on causing a nuclear catastrophe, Gallucci believes that "the United States should instead consider a policy of expanded deterrence, which focuses not solely on the would-be nuclear terrorists but on those states that may deliberately transfer or inadvertently leak nuclear weapons and materials to them.
By threatening retaliation against those states, the United States may be able to deter that which it cannot physically prevent.".
Graham Allison makes a similar case, arguing that the key to expanded deterrence is coming up with ways of tracing nuclear material to the country that forged the fissile material.
"
After a nuclear bomb detonates, nuclear forensics cops would collect debris samples and send them to a laboratory for radiological analysis.
By identifying unique attributes of the fissile material, including its impurities and contaminants, one could trace the path back to its origin.
"
The process is analogous to identifying a criminal by fingerprints.
"
The goal would be twofold: first, to deter leaders of nuclear states from selling weapons to terrorists by holding them accountable for any use of their weapons; second, to give leaders every incentive to tightly secure their nuclear weapons and materials.
"According to the Pentagon's June 2019 "Doctrine for Joint Nuclear Operations" of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs website Publication
, "Integration of nuclear weapons employment with conventional and special operations forces is essential to the success of any mission or operation."
==
Governance, control, and law ==
Because they are weapons of mass destruction, the proliferation and possible use of nuclear weapons are important issues in international relations and diplomacy.
In most countries, the use of nuclear force can only be authorized by the head of government or head of state.
Despite controls and regulations governing nuclear weapons, there is an inherent danger of "accidents, mistakes, false alarms, blackmail, theft, and sabotage".
In the late 1940s, lack of mutual trust prevented the United States and the Soviet Union from making progress on arms control agreements.
The Russell–Einstein Manifesto was issued in London on July 9, 1955, by Bertrand Russell in the midst of the Cold War.
It highlighted the dangers posed by nuclear weapons and called for world leaders to seek peaceful resolutions to international conflict.
The signatories included eleven pre-eminent intellectuals and scientists, including Albert Einstein, who signed it just days before his death on April 18, 1955.
A few days after the release, philanthropist Cyrus S. Eaton offered to sponsor a conference—called for in the manifesto—in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, Eaton's birthplace.
This conference was to be the first of the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, held in July 1957.

By the 1960s, steps were taken to limit both the proliferation of nuclear weapons to other countries and the environmental effects of nuclear testing.
The Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (1963) restricted all nuclear testing to underground nuclear testing, to prevent contamination from nuclear fallout, whereas the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (1968) attempted to place restrictions on the types of activities signatories could participate in, with the goal of allowing the transference of non-military nuclear technology to member countries without fear of proliferation.

In 1957, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established under the mandate of the United Nations to encourage development of peaceful applications of nuclear technology, provide international safeguards against its misuse, and facilitate the application of safety measures in its use.
In 1996, many nations signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, which prohibits all testing of nuclear weapons.
A testing ban imposes a significant hindrance to nuclear arms development by any complying country.
The Treaty requires the ratification by 44 specific states before it can go into force; as of 2012, the ratification of eight of these states is still required.
Additional treaties and agreements have governed nuclear weapons stockpiles between the countries with the two largest stockpiles, the United States and the Soviet Union, and later between the United States and Russia.
These include treaties such as SALT II (never ratified), START I (expired), INF, START II (never ratified), SORT, and New START, as well as non-binding agreements such as SALT I and the Presidential Nuclear Initiatives of 1991.
Even when they did not enter into force, these agreements helped limit and later reduce the numbers and types of nuclear weapons between the United States and the Soviet Union/Russia.

Nuclear weapons have also been opposed by agreements between countries.
Many nations have been declared Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones, areas where nuclear weapons production and deployment are prohibited, through the use of treaties.
The Treaty of Tlatelolco (1967) prohibited any production or deployment of nuclear weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Treaty of Pelindaba (1964) prohibits nuclear weapons in many African countries.
As recently as 2006 a Central Asian Nuclear Weapon Free Zone was established among the former Soviet republics of Central Asia prohibiting nuclear weapons.

In 1996, the International Court of Justice, the highest court of the United Nations, issued an Advisory Opinion concerned with the "Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons".
The court ruled that the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons would violate various articles of international law, including the Geneva Conventions, the Hague Conventions, the UN Charter, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Given the unique, destructive characteristics of nuclear weapons, the International Committee of the Red Cross calls on States to ensure that these weapons are never used, irrespective of whether they consider them lawful or not.
Additionally, there have been other, specific actions meant to discourage countries from developing nuclear arms.
In the wake of the tests by India and Pakistan in 1998, economic sanctions were (temporarily) levied against both countries, though neither were signatories with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
One of the stated casus belli for the initiation of the 2003 Iraq War was an accusation by the United States that Iraq was actively pursuing nuclear arms (though this was soon discovered not to be the case as the program had been discontinued).
In 1981, Israel had bombed a nuclear reactor being constructed in Osirak, Iraq, in what it called an attempt to halt Iraq's previous nuclear arms ambitions; in 2007, Israel bombed another reactor being constructed in Syria.

In 2013, Mark Diesendorf said that governments of France, India, North Korea, Pakistan, UK, and South Africa have used nuclear power and/or research reactors to assist nuclear weapons development or to contribute to their supplies of nuclear explosives from military reactors.
The two tied-for-lowest points for the Doomsday Clock have been in 1953, when the Clock was set to two minutes until midnight after the U.S. and the Soviet Union began testing hydrogen bombs, and in 2018, following the failure of world leaders to address tensions relating to nuclear weapons and climate change issues.

===
Disarmament ===
Nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world, in which nuclear weapons are eliminated.

Beginning with the 1963 Partial Test Ban Treaty and continuing through the 1996 Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, there have been many treaties to limit or reduce nuclear weapons testing and stockpiles.
The 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has as one of its explicit conditions that all signatories must "pursue negotiations in good faith" towards the long-term goal of "complete disarmament".
The nuclear-weapon states have largely treated that aspect of the agreement as "decorative" and without force.
Only one country—South Africa—has ever fully renounced nuclear weapons they had independently developed.
The former Soviet republics of Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine returned Soviet nuclear arms stationed in their countries to Russia after the collapse of the USSR.

Proponents of nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war, especially accidentally.
Critics of nuclear disarmament say that it would undermine the present nuclear peace and deterrence and would lead to increased global instability.
Various American elder statesmen, who were in office during the Cold War period, have been advocating the elimination of nuclear weapons.
These officials include Henry Kissinger, George Shultz, Sam Nunn, and William Perry.
In January 2010, Lawrence M. Krauss stated that "no issue carries more importance to the long-term health and security of humanity than the effort to reduce, and perhaps one day, rid the world of nuclear weapons".

In January 1986, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev publicly proposed a three-stage program for abolishing the world's nuclear weapons by the end of the 20th century.
In the years after the end of the Cold War, there have been numerous campaigns to urge the abolition of nuclear weapons, such as that organized by the Global Zero movement, and the goal of a "world without nuclear weapons" was advocated by United States President Barack Obama in an April 2009 speech in Prague.
A CNN poll from April 2010 indicated that the American public was nearly evenly split on the issue.
Some analysts have argued that nuclear weapons have made the world relatively safer, with peace through deterrence and through the stability–instability paradox, including in south Asia.
Kenneth Waltz has argued that nuclear weapons have helped keep an uneasy peace, and further nuclear weapon proliferation might even help avoid the large scale conventional wars that were so common before their invention at the end of World War II.
But former Secretary Henry Kissinger says there is a new danger, which cannot be addressed by deterrence: "The classical notion of deterrence was that there was some consequences before which aggressors and evildoers would recoil.
In a world of suicide bombers, that calculation doesn’t operate in any comparable way".
George Shultz has said, "If you think of the people who are doing suicide attacks, and people like that get a nuclear weapon, they are almost by definition not deterrable".
As of early 2019, more than 90% of world's 13,865 nuclear weapons were owned by Russia and the United States.
===
United Nations ===
The UN Office for Disarmament Affairs (UNODA) is a department of the United Nations Secretariat established in January 1998 as part of the United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan's plan to reform the UN as presented in his report to the General Assembly in July 1997.Its goal is to promote nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and the strengthening of the disarmament regimes in respect to other weapons of mass destruction, chemical and biological weapons.
It also promotes disarmament efforts in the area of conventional weapons, especially land mines and small arms, which are often the weapons of choice in contemporary conflicts.

==
Controversy ==


===
Ethics ===
Even before the first nuclear weapons had been developed, scientists involved with the Manhattan Project were divided over the use of the weapon.
The role of the two atomic bombings of the country in Japan's surrender and the U.S.'s ethical justification for them has been the subject of scholarly and popular debate for decades.
The question of whether nations should have nuclear weapons, or test them, has been continually and nearly universally controversial.
===
Notable nuclear weapons accidents ===
August 21, 1945:
While conducting impromptu experiments on a third core (an alloy of plutonium and gallium) which had been prepared for atomic warfare at Los Alamos National Laboratory, physicist Harry Daghlian received a lethal dose of radiation.
He died on September 15, 1945.

May 21, 1946
: While conducting further impromptu experiments on the third plutonium core at Los Alamos National Laboratory, physicist Louis Slotin received a lethal dose of radiation.
He died on May 30, 1946.
After these 2 incidents, the core was used to construct a bomb for use on the Nevada Test Range.

February 13, 1950:
a Convair B-36B crashed in northern British Columbia after jettisoning a Mark IV atomic bomb.
This was the first such nuclear weapon loss in history.
The accident was designated a "Broken Arrow"—an accident involving a nuclear weapon but which does not present a risk of war.
Experts believe that up to 50 nuclear weapons were lost during the Cold War.

May 22, 1957: a 42,000-pound (19,000 kg)
Mark-17 hydrogen bomb accidentally fell from a bomber near Albuquerque, New Mexico.
The detonation of the device's conventional explosives destroyed it on impact and formed a crater 25 feet (7.6 m) in diameter on land owned by the University of New Mexico.
According to a researcher at the Natural Resources Defense Council, it was one of the most powerful bombs made to date.

June 7, 1960:
the 1960 Fort Dix IM-99 accident destroyed a Boeing CIM-10 Bomarc nuclear missile and shelter and contaminated the BOMARC Missile Accident Site in New Jersey.

January 24, 1961:
the 1961 Goldsboro B-52 crash occurred near Goldsboro, North Carolina.
A Boeing B-52 Stratofortress carrying two Mark 39 nuclear bombs broke up in mid-air, dropping its nuclear payload in the process.

1965
Philippine Sea A-4 crash, where a Skyhawk attack aircraft with a nuclear weapon fell into the sea.
The pilot, the aircraft, and the B43 nuclear bomb were never recovered.
It was not until 1989 that the Pentagon revealed the loss of the one-megaton bomb.

January 17, 1966:
the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash occurred when a B-52G bomber of the USAF collided with a KC-135 tanker during mid-air refuelling off the coast of Spain.
The KC-135 was completely destroyed when its fuel load ignited, killing all four crew members.
The B-52G broke apart, killing three of the seven crew members aboard.
Of the four Mk28 type hydrogen bombs the B-52G carried, three were found on land near Almería, Spain.
The non-nuclear explosives in two of the weapons detonated upon impact with the ground, resulting in the contamination of a 2-square-kilometer (490-acre) (0.78 square mile) area by radioactive plutonium.
The fourth, which fell into the Mediterranean Sea, was recovered intact after a 2½-month-long search.

January 21, 1968:
the 1968 Thule Air Base B-52 crash involved a United States Air Force (USAF) B-52 bomber.
The aircraft was carrying four hydrogen bombs when a cabin fire forced the crew to abandon the aircraft.
Six crew members ejected safely, but one who did not have an ejection seat was killed while trying to bail out.
The bomber crashed onto sea ice in Greenland, causing the nuclear payload to rupture and disperse, which resulted in widespread radioactive contamination.
One of the bombs remains lost.

September 18–19, 1980: the Damascus Accident, occurred in Damascus, Arkansas, where a Titan missile equipped with a nuclear warhead exploded.
The accident was caused by a maintenance man who dropped a socket from a socket wrench down an 80-foot (24 m) shaft, puncturing a fuel tank on the rocket.
Leaking fuel resulted in a hypergolic fuel explosion, jettisoning the W-53 warhead beyond the launch site.

===
Nuclear testing and fallout ===
Over 500 atmospheric nuclear weapons tests were conducted at various sites around the world from 1945 to 1980.
Radioactive fallout from nuclear weapons testing was first drawn to public attention in 1954 when the Castle Bravo hydrogen bomb test at the Pacific Proving Grounds contaminated the crew and catch of the Japanese fishing boat Lucky Dragon.
One of the fishermen died in Japan seven months later, and the fear of contaminated tuna led to a temporary boycotting of the popular staple in Japan.
The incident caused widespread concern around the world, especially regarding the effects of nuclear fallout and atmospheric nuclear testing, and "provided a decisive impetus for the emergence of the anti-nuclear weapons movement in many countries".
As public awareness and concern mounted over the possible health hazards associated with exposure to the nuclear fallout, various studies were done to assess the extent of the hazard.
A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/ National Cancer Institute study claims that fallout from atmospheric nuclear tests would lead to perhaps 11,000 excess deaths among people alive during atmospheric testing in the United States from all forms of cancer, including leukemia, from 1951 to well into the 21st century.

As of March 2009, the U.S. is the only nation that compensates nuclear test victims.
Since the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act of 1990, more than $1.38 billion in compensation has been approved.
The money is going to people who took part in the tests, notably at the Nevada Test Site, and to others exposed to the radiation.
In addition, leakage of byproducts of nuclear weapon production into groundwater has been an ongoing issue, particularly at the Hanford site.

== Effects of nuclear explosions ==


===
Effects of nuclear explosions on human health ===
Some scientists estimate that a nuclear war with 100 Hiroshima-size nuclear explosions on cities could cost the lives of tens of millions of people from long-term climatic effects alone.
The climatology hypothesis is that if each city firestorms, a great deal of soot could be thrown up into the atmosphere which could blanket the earth, cutting out sunlight for years on end, causing the disruption of food chains, in what is termed a nuclear winter.
People near the Hiroshima explosion and who managed to survive the explosion subsequently suffered a variety of medical effects:
Initial stage—the first 1–9 weeks, in which are the greatest number of deaths, with 90% due to thermal injury and/or blast effects and 10% due to super-lethal radiation exposure.

Intermediate stage—from 10 to 12 weeks.
The deaths in this period are from ionizing radiation in the median lethal range – LD50
Late period—lasting from 13 to 20 weeks.
This period has some improvement in survivors' condition.

Delayed period—from 20+ weeks.
Characterized by numerous complications, mostly related to healing of thermal and mechanical injuries, and if the individual was exposed to a few hundred to a thousand millisieverts of radiation, it is coupled with infertility, sub-fertility and blood disorders.
Furthermore, ionizing radiation above a dose of around 50–100 millisievert exposure has been shown to statistically begin increasing one's chance of dying of cancer sometime in their lifetime over the normal unexposed rate of ~25%, in the long term, a heightened rate of cancer, proportional to the dose received, would begin to be observed after
~5
+ years, with lesser problems such as eye cataracts and other more minor effects in other organs and tissue also being observed over the long term.
Fallout exposure—depending on if further afield individuals shelter in place or evacuate perpendicular to the direction of the wind, and therefore avoid contact with the fallout plume, and stay there for the days and weeks after the nuclear explosion, their exposure to fallout, and therefore their total dose, will vary.
With those who do shelter in place, and or evacuate, experiencing a total dose that would be negligible in comparison to someone who just went about their life as normal.
Staying indoors until after the most hazardous fallout isotope, I-131 decays away to 0.1% of its initial quantity after ten half lifes—which is represented by 80 days in I-131s case, would make the difference between likely contracting Thyroid cancer or escaping completely from this substance depending on the actions of the individual.

===
Public opposition ===
Peace movements emerged in Japan and in 1954 they converged to form a unified "Japanese Council Against Atomic and Hydrogen Bombs".
Japanese opposition to nuclear weapons tests in the Pacific Ocean was widespread, and "an estimated 35 million signatures were collected on petitions calling for bans on nuclear weapons".
In the United Kingdom, the first Aldermaston March organised by the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament(CND) took place at Easter 1958, when, according to the CND, several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square, London, to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment close to Aldermaston in Berkshire, England, to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons.
The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the four-day marches.
In 1959, a letter in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists was the start of a successful campaign to stop the Atomic Energy Commission dumping radioactive waste in the sea 19 kilometres from Boston.
In 1962, Linus Pauling won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work to stop the atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons, and the "Ban the Bomb" movement spread.
In 1963, many countries ratified the Partial Test Ban Treaty prohibiting atmospheric nuclear testing.
Radioactive fallout became less of an issue and the anti-nuclear weapons movement went into decline for some years.
A resurgence of interest occurred amid European and American fears of nuclear war in the 1980s.

== Costs and technology spin-offs ==
According to an audit by the Brookings Institution, between 1940 and 1996, the U.S. spent $9.49 trillion in present-day terms on nuclear weapons programs.
57 percent of which was spent on building nuclear weapons delivery systems.
6.3 percent of the total, $595 billion in present-day terms, was spent on environmental remediation and nuclear waste management, for example cleaning up the Hanford site, and 7 percent of the total, $667 billion was spent on making nuclear weapons themselves.

== Non-weapons uses ==
Peaceful nuclear explosions are nuclear explosions conducted for non-military purposes, such as activities related to economic development including the creation of canals.
During the 1960s and 1970s, both the United States and the Soviet Union conducted a number of PNEs.
Six of the explosions by the Soviet Union are considered to have been of an applied nature, not just tests.

The United States and the Soviet Union later halted their programs.
Definitions and limits are covered in the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty of 1976.
The stalled Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty of 1996 would prohibit all nuclear explosions, regardless of whether they are for peaceful purposes or not.

==
History of development ==


==
See also ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
Further reading ==
Laura Grego and David Wright, "Broken Shield: Missiles designed to destroy incoming nuclear warheads fail frequently in tests and could increase global risk of mass destruction", Scientific American, vol.
320,
no.
no.
6 (June 2019), pp.
62–67.
"
Current U.S. missile defense plans are being driven largely by technology, politics and fear.
Missile defenses will not allow us to escape our vulnerability to nuclear weapons.
Instead large-scale developments will create barriers to taking real steps toward reducing nuclear risks—by blocking further cuts in nuclear arsenals and potentially spurring new deployments."
(
p. 67.)

Michael T. Klare, "Missile Mania:
The death of the INF [Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces] Treaty [of 1987] has escalated the arms race", The Nation, vol.
309, no.
6 (September 23, 2019), p. 4.

Moniz, Ernest J., and Sam Nunn, "The Return of Doomsday: The New Nuclear Arms Race – and
How Washington and Moscow Can Stop It", Foreign Affairs, vol.
98
, no.
5 (September / October 2019), pp.
150–161.
Former U.S. Secretary of Energy Ernest Moniz and former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn write that "the old [strategic] equilibrium" between the United States and Russia has been "destabilized" by "clashing national interests, insufficient dialogue, eroding arms control structures, advanced missile systems, and new cyberweapons...
Unless Washington and Moscow confront these problems now, a major international conflict or nuclear escalation is disturbingly plausible—perhaps even likely."
(
p. 161.)

Thomas Powers, "The Nuclear Worrier" (review of Daniel Ellsberg, The Doomsday Machine: Confessions of a Nuclear War Planner, New York, Bloomsbury, 2017, ISBN 9781608196708, 420 pp.),
The New York Review of Books, vol.
LXV, no.
1
(January 18, 2018), pp.
13–15.

Eric Schlosser, Command and Control: Nuclear Weapons, the Damascus Accident, and the Illusion of Safety, Penguin Press, 2013, ISBN 1594202273.
The book became the basis for a 2-hour 2017 PBS American Experience episode, likewise titled "Command and Control".
Nuclear weapons continue to be equally hazardous to their owners as to their potential targets.
Under the 1970 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, nuclear-weapon states are obliged to work toward the elimination of nuclear weapons.

==
External links ==
Nuclear Weapon Archive from Carey Sublette is a reliable source of information and has links to other sources and an informative FAQ.

The Federation of American Scientists provide solid information on weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons and their effects
Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues – contains many resources related to nuclear weapons, including a historical and technical overview and searchable bibliography of web and print resources.

Video archive of US, Soviet, UK, Chinese and French Nuclear Weapon Testing at sonicbomb.com
The National Museum of Nuclear Science & History (United States) – located in Albuquerque, New Mexico; a Smithsonian Affiliate Museum
Nuclear Emergency and Radiation Resources
The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb at AtomicArchive.com
Los Alamos National Laboratory:
History (U.S. nuclear history)
Race for the Superbomb, PBS website on the history of the H-bomb
Recordings of recollections of the victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
The Woodrow Wilson Center's Nuclear Proliferation International History Project or NPIHP is a global network of individuals and institutions engaged in the study of international nuclear history through archival documents, oral history interviews and other empirical sources.

NUKEMAP3D – a 3D nuclear weapons effects simulator powered by Google Maps.
This is a list of lists of lists, a list of list articles that contain other list articles on the English Wikipedia.

In other words, each of the articles linked here is an index to multiple lists on a topic.
Some of the linked articles may contain lists of lists as well.

==
General reference ==
List of lists of lists:
This article itself is a list of lists, so it contains itself.

Lists of academic journals
Lists of important publications in science
Lists of problems
Lists of unsolved problems


==
Culture and the arts ==


===
Literature ===
Lists of books
Lists of 100 best books
Lists of banned books
Lists of The New York Times Fiction Best Sellers
Lists of The New York Times Non-Fiction Best Sellers
Publishers Weekly lists of bestselling novels in the United States
Lists of dystopian works
Lists of LGBT figures in fiction and myth
Lists of writers
List of African writers by country
Lists of American writers
Lists of Slovak authors


===
Mythology ===
Lists of demons
Lists of deities
Lists of deities by cultural sphere
Lists of legendary creatures


===
Philosophy ===
Lists of philosophers
Lists about skepticism


===
Art and the arts ===
====
Characters ====
Lists of advertising characters
Lists of characters in a fictional work
Lists of Coronation Street characters
Lists of CSI characters
Lists of DC Comics characters
Lists of Emmerdale characters
Lists of General Hospital
characters
Lists of Hollyoaks characters
Lists of horror film characters
Lists of Marvel Comics characters
Lists of Marvel Cinematic Universe cast members
Lists of Stargate characters
Lists of The Office characters
Lists of The Walking Dead characters
Lists of Transformers characters
Lists of fictional hybrids
Lists of fictional Presidents of the United States
Lists of superheroes
Lists of villains


====
Fictional elements ====
Lists of fictional locations
Lists of fictional future timelines


====
Performing arts ====
Lists of a cappella groups
Lists of accolades by film
Lists of actors
Lists of actors by television series
Lists of albums
Lists of UK Compilation Chart
number-one albums
Lists of anime
Lists of Canadian game shows
Lists of comedians
Lists of composers
Chronological lists of classical composers
Chronological lists of classical composers by nationality
Lists of concert tours
Lists of Desert Island Discs episodes
Lists of films
Lists of animated films
Lists of book-based war films
Lists of box office
number-one films
Lists of feature film series
Lists of film remakes
Lists of film spin-offs
Lists of films based on location
Lists of films based on mythology
Lists of films by country
Lists of American films
Lists of Argentine films
Lists of Australian films
Lists of Austrian films
Lists of Azerbaijani films
Lists of Belgian films
Lists of Brazilian films
Lists of British films
Lists of Bulgarian films
Lists of Cambodian films of the 2000s
Lists of Chinese films
Lists of Czech films
Lists of Czechoslovakian films
Lists of Danish films
Lists of Dutch films
Lists of Egyptian films
Lists of Finnish films
Lists of French films
Lists of Georgian films
Lists of German films
Lists of Hong Kong films
Lists of Hungarian films
Lists of Indian films
Lists of Assamese films
Lists of Assamese-language films
Lists of Bengali films
Lists of Bollywood films
Lists of Indian Punjabi films
Lists of Malayalam films
Lists of Tamil-language films
Lists of Telugu-language films
Lists of Iranian films
Lists of Israeli films
Lists of Italian films
Lists of Japanese films
Lists of Korean films
Lists of South Korean films
Lists of Malaysian films
Lists of Mexican films
Lists of Norwegian films
Lists of Pakistani films
Lists of Philippine films
Lists of Polish films
Lists of Portuguese films
Lists of Soviet films
Lists of Spanish films
Lists of Sri Lankan films
Lists of Swedish films
Lists of Turkish films
Lists of films by genre
Lists of action films
Lists of adventure films
Lists of animated feature films
Lists of avant-garde films
Lists of comedy films
Lists of crime films
Lists of erotic films
Lists of fantasy films
Lists of horror films
Lists of LGBT-related films
Lists of science fiction films
Lists of thriller films
Lists of Western films
Lists of films by studio
Lists of films released by Disney
Lists of highest-grossing films
Lists of works of fiction made into feature films
Lists of Gladiators events
Lists of Hispanic Academy Award winners and nominees by country
Lists of music by theme
Lists of music inspired by literature
Lists of musicals
Lists of musicians
Lists of A&M Records artists
Lists of blues musicians by genre
Lists of pianists
Lists of violinists
Lists of operas
Lists of singers
Lists of songs
Lists of Geordie song-related topics
Lists of UK number one singles
Lists of Stargate topics
Lists of television episodes
Lists of American television episodes with LGBT themes
Lists of Arrowverse episodes
Lists of Big Brother episodes
Lists of Blue's Clues episodes
Lists of Cosmos episodes
Lists of Dallas episodes
Lists of Doctor Doctor episodes
Lists of Doctor
Who episodes
Lists of CSI episodes
Lists of Doraemon episodes
Lists of Knight Rider episodes
Lists of Mickey Mouse episodes
Lists of One Piece episodes
Lists of Pokémon episodes
Lists of Powerpuff Girls episodes
Lists of Scooby-Doo episodes
Lists of Star Trek episodes
Lists of Stargate episodes
Lists of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles episodes
Lists of The Berenstain Bears episodes
Lists of The Twilight Zone episodes
Lists of This American Life episodes
Lists of Winnie the Pooh episodes
Lists of television programs
Lists of animated television series
Lists of Canadian television series
Lists of Canadian network television schedules
Lists of C-SPAN Q&A interviews
Lists of television programs with LGBT characters
Lists of television specials
Lists of Christmas television episodes
Lists of The Simpsons publications
Lists of theatres


====
Visual arts ====
Lists of artists
Lists of painters
Lists of painters by nationality
Lists of women artists
Lists of colors
Lists of comics
Lists of DC Comics publications
Lists of manga
Lists of Marvel Comics publications
Lists of webcomics
Lists of public art
Lists of monuments and memorials


===
Entertainment and recreation ===


====
Festivals ====
Lists of festivals


====
Games ====
Lists of games
Lists of video games
Lists of best-selling video games by platform
Lists of free games
Lists of games considered the best
Lists of Nintendo games
Lists of Game Boy
games
Lists of Virtual Console games
Lists of PlayStation games
Lists of PlayStation Store games
Lists of PlayStation Vita games
Lists of PS one Classics
Lists of Sega games
Lists of Square Enix franchises
Lists of video game
characters
Lists of Grand Theft Auto characters
Lists of Nintendo characters
Lists of video game companies
Lists of video game consoles


====
Sports ====
Lists of association football clubs
Lists of Australian rules football leagues
Lists of curling clubs
Lists of international rugby football teams
Lists of National Football League team seasons
Lists of player transfers
Lists of Danish football transfers
2008–09
Lists of Danish football transfers
2009–10
Lists of Italian football transfers
2007–08
Lists of sports venues
Lists of baseball parks
Lists of stadiums
Sri Lanka cricket lists
Lists of Swedish Swimming Championships
champions
Lists of sportspeople
Lists of American football players
Lists of College Football Hall of Fame inductees
Lists of Albanian athletes
Lists of association football players
Lists of England international footballers
Lists of foreign footballers in Japan
Lists of golfers
Lists of
Maccabiah Games medalists
Lists of Olympic medalists
Lists of Paralympic medalists
Lists of rodeo performers
Lists of sportspeople who died during their careers
Lists of tennis players
Lists of wrestlers
Status lists of players in professional sports
Lists of tennis records and
statistics


===
Food and drink ===
Lists of food and beverage topics
Lists of beverages
Lists of breweries
Lists of foods
Lists of prepared foods
Lists of restaurants


===
Mass media ===
Lists of magazines
Lists of newspapers
Lists of encyclopedias
Lists of radio stations
Lists of record labels
Lists of television channels
Lists of television channels in
India
Lists of television stations in North America
Lists of television stations in the United States
Lists of highest-grossing films
Lists of television programs by episode count


==
Geography and places ==


===
Natural geographical features ===


====
Landforms ====
Lists of extreme points
Lists of highest points
Lists of hills
Lists of islands
Lists of islands by name
Lists of islands of the Americas
Lists of islands of the European Union
Lists of mountains
Lists of mountains by region
Lists of mountains and hills in the British Isles
Lists of volcanoes


====
Bodies of water ====
Lists of lakes
Lists of rivers
Lists of waterways


===
Manmade geographical features ===


====
Countries and regions ====
Lists of borders
Lists of countries and territories
Lists of counties
Lists of counties in the United States
Lists of Scottish counties by population
Lists of countries and territories
Lists of African Union members
Lists of countries by mineral production
Lists of former Soviet Republics
Lists by country
Lists of country-related topics
Lists of Zambia-related topics
Lists of non-sovereign nations
Lists of sovereign states and dependent territories
Lists of sovereign states by year
Lists of Spanish provinces
Lists of Taiwanese counties and cities
Lists of the Arab League
Lists of time zones
Lists of townlands of County Cork
Lists of U.S. state topics
Lists of Oregon-related topics
Ranked lists of Chilean regions
Lists of divisions in Dorset
Lists of Quebec-related topics


====
Places ====
Lists of heritage sites
Lists of Bienes de Interés Cultural
Lists of Indian Monuments of National Importance
Lists of protected heritage sites in Hainaut (province)
Lists of protected heritage sites in Liège (province)
Lists of immovable heritage sites in
Limburg (Belgium)
Lists of protected heritage sites in Luxembourg (Belgium)
Lists of protected heritage sites in Namur (province)
Lists of protected heritage sites in Walloon-Brabant
Lists of World Heritage Sites
Lists of World Heritage Sites in Europe
Lists of landmarks
Lists of National Treasures of Japan
Lists of parks in Canada
Lists of ports
Lists of renamed places
Lists of state parks by U.S. state
Lists of tourist attractions
Lists of tourist attractions in England
Wonders of the World


====
Settlements ====
Lists of capitals
Lists of cities
Lists of cities by country
Lists of communes of France
Lists of ghost towns in Canada
Lists of places in Wales
Lists of populated places in the United States
Lists of places in Kansas
Lists of Los Angeles topics
Lists of New York City Landmarks
Lists of New York City topics
Lists of Omaha topics
Lists of San Francisco topics
Lists of U.S. cities with large ethnic identity populations
Lists of U.S. cities with non-white majority populations
Lists of municipalities
Lists of neighborhoods by city
Lists of places
Lists of places by eponym
Lists of rural localities in Russia
Lists of towns
Lists of towns and cities in England by population
Lists of towns in Ireland
Lists of twin towns and sister cities
Lists of villages in Nigeria
Lists of villages in Norway


==
History and events ==
Lists of disasters
Lists of incidents of unrest and violence in the United States by city
Lists of occupations
Phone hacking scandal reference lists
Lists of resignations
Lists of tenants in the World Trade Center (1973–2001)
List of timelines
Lists of years by topic


== Mathematics and logic ==
Lists of mathematics topics
Lists of integrals
Lists of unsolved problems in mathematics
Lists of vector identities
Lists of shapes
Lists of statistics topics


==
Natural and physical sciences ==


===
Biology ===
Lists of animals
Fauna of Denmark
Lists of amphibians by region
Lists of organisms by population
Lists of birds by region
Lists of breeds
Lists of cats
Lists of dogs
Lists of elephants
Lists of extinct animals
Lists of extinct animals of the British Isles
Lists of horses
Lists of insects of Great Britain
Lists of Lepidoptera by region
Lists of mammals by population
Lists of mammals by region
Lists of pigs
Lists of reptiles by region
Lists of reptiles of the United States
Lists of sponges
Lists of aquarium life
Lists of biologists by author abbreviation
Lists of diseases
Lists of animal diseases
Lists of plant diseases
Lists of dinosaur-bearing stratigraphic units
Lists of dinosaur specimens
Lists of dinosaur type specimens
Lists of ecoregions
Lists of ecoregions by country
Lists of ecoregions in the United States
Lists of environmental publications
Lists of environmental topics
Lists of fictional lifeforms
Lists of fictional animals
Lists of legendary creatures
Lists of dragons
Lists of vampires
Lists of fictional hybrids
Lists of fictional species
Lists of fictional humanoid species
Lists of Star Wars species
Lists of giants
Lists of IUCN Red List species
Lists of extinct animals
Lists of IUCN Red List
Critically Endangered species
Lists of IUCN Red List
data deficient species
Lists of IUCN Red List endangered species
Lists of IUCN Red List near threatened species
Lists of IUCN Red List vulnerable species
Lists of plants
Lists of cultivars
Lists of trees
Lists of species
List of Araneidae species
List of Asilidae species
List of Euphorbia species
Lists of invasive species
Lists of Linyphiidae species


===
Physical sciences ===
Lists of astronomical objects
Lists of comets
Lists of exoplanets
Lists of galaxies
Lists of geological features of the Solar System
Lists of nebulae
Lists of planets
Lists of small Solar System bodies
Lists of stars
Lists of stars by constellation
Lists of constellations
Lists of earthquakes
Lists of solar eclipses


====
Chemistry ====
Carbon number
Lists of metalloids


====
Meteorology ====
Lists of Category 5 hurricanes
Lists of Atlantic hurricanes
Lists of tornadoes and tornado outbreaks
Lists of United States tornadoes in 2009


====
Physics ====
Lists of physics equations


==
People ==
Lists of people by belief
Lists of atheists
Lists of Christians
Lists of former Christians
Lists of Hindus
Lists of Jews
Lists of Muslims
Lists of black people
Lists of celebrities
Lists of centenarians
Lists of deaths by year
Lists of ethnic groups
Lists of heroes
Lists of people by honor
Lists of covers of Time magazine
Lists of Nobel Prizes
Special Honours Lists (Australia)
Lists of LGBT people
Lists of gay, lesbian, and bisexual people
Lists of bisexual people
Lists of libertarians
Lists of people by cause of death
Lists of martyrs
Lists of people executed in the United States
Lists of people executed in Texas
Lists of people by nationality
Lists of people from African Union states
Lists of Americans
Lists of African Americans
Lists of American Jews
Lists of people from Kansas
Lists of Armenians
Lists of Australians
Lists of Indigenous Australians
Lists of British people by ethnic or national origin
Lists of Britons
Lists of Celts
Lists of people from Camden
Lists of people from London
Lists of Dominicans
Lists of Israeli artists
Lists of people from India by state
Lists of people from Quebec by region
Lists of Jews by country
Lists of Indian people
Lists of people by occupation
Lists of engineers
Lists of mathematicians
Lists of Muslim scientists and scholars
Lists of painters
Lists of philosophers
Lists of professional bodybuilders
Lists of scientists
Lists of sportspeople
Lists of Jews associated with the visual arts
Lists of Jews in politics
Lists of Jews associated with literature and journalism
Lists of women
Lists of men
Lists of activists


==
Religion and belief systems ==
Lists of Armenian churches
Lists of Bible stories
Lists of Buddhist sites and traditions in Kerala
Lists of cathedrals
Lists of cathedrals in the United Kingdom
Lists of Catholic church buildings
List of churches in England
Lists of Commissioners' churches
Lists of places of worship in Chichester District
Lists of places of worship in Wealden
Lists of Coptic church buildings
Lists of deities
Lists of deities by cultural sphere
Lists of holidays
Lists of monasteries
Lists of mosques
Lists of New Testament minuscules
Lists of patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops
Lists of patriarchs
Lists of lists of people by belief
Lists of atheists
Lists of Christians
Lists of Christian Scientists
Lists of Roman Catholics
Lists of venerable people
Lists of Hindus
Lists of Jews
Lists of American Jews
Lists of Muslims


==
Society and social sciences ==


===
Archaeology ===
Lists of hoards


===
Linguistics ===
Lists of abbreviations
Lists of dictionaries
Lists of English words
Lists of collective nouns
Lists of English loanwords by country or language of origin
Lists of English words of Celtic origin
Lists of English words of Scottish origin
Lists of Merriam-Webster's Words of the Year
Lists of pejorative terms for people
Word lists by frequency
Lists of words having different meanings in American and British English
Lists of etymologies
Lists of North American place name etymologies
Lists of U.S. county name etymologies
Lists of things named after places
Lists of ISO 639 codes
Lists of languages
Lists of endangered languages
Lists of extinct languages
List of Latin phrases
Lists of medical eponyms
Lists of Unicode blocks
Lists of names
Lists of East Asian surnames
Lists of Korean names
Lists of most common surnames
Lists of nicknames


===
Social institutions ===


====
Infrastructure ====
List of bridges
Lists of bus routes in New York City
Lists of canals
Lists of cemeteries
Lists of crossings
Lists of crossings of the East River
Lists of crossings of the Hudson River
Lists of crossings of the Mississippi River
Lists of mines
Lists of mines in Canada
Lists of mines in Asia
Lists of named passenger trains
Lists of New Jersey Transit bus routes
Lists of pipelines
Lists of rail accidents
List of railway stations
Lists of rapid transit systems
List of roads and highways
Lists of motorways and highways of Pakistan
Lists of numbered highways in Washington
Lists of roads in Toronto
Lists of roads in the United Kingdom
Lists of road junctions in the United Kingdom
Lists of tunnels


====
Economy and business ====
Lists of banks
Lists of brands
Lists of companies
Lists of breweries
Lists of video game companies
Lists of distribution companies
Lists of companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange
Lists of publishing companies
Lists of companies by stock exchange listing
Lists of companies listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange
List of companies of the United States by state
Lists of corporate acquisitions and mergers
Lists of corporate assets
Lists of corporate headquarters by city
Lists of countries by GDP
Lists of countries by GDP per capita
Lists of countries by GNI per capita
Lists of countries by debt
Lists of most expensive items
Lists of recessions
Lists of law firms


====
Education ====
Lists of academic chancellors and vice chancellors
Lists of Massachusetts Institute of Technology people
Lists of schools
Lists of boys' schools
Lists of law schools
Lists of girls' schools
Lists of universities and colleges
Lists of universities and colleges by country
Lists of American universities and colleges
List of institutions of higher education in India
Lists of institutions of higher education by endowment size
Lists of schools by country
Lists of educational institutions in Pakistan
Lists of schools in Australia
Lists of schools in New South Wales
Lists of schools in Queensland
Lists of schools in Belgium
Lists of schools in Canada
Lists of schools in the Toronto District School Board
Lists of schools in Hong Kong
Lists of Chinese national-type primary schools in Malaysia
Lists of Tamil national-type primary schools in Malaysia
Lists of schools in New Zealand
Lists of high schools in Paraguay
Lists of schools in South Africa
Lists of schools in Sri Lanka
Lists of government schools in Sri Lanka
Lists of schools in the United Kingdom
Lists of schools in England
Lists of schools in Northern Ireland
Lists of schools in Scotland
Lists of schools in Wales
Lists of schools in the United States
Lists of school districts in the United States
List of school-related attacks
Lists of university leaders


====
Government and politics ====
Political lists
Lists of active separatist movements
Lists of diplomatic missions
Lists of First Nations
Lists of governments of Lithuania
Historical lists of Privy Counsellors
Lists of holidays
Lists of legislation
Lists of statutes of New Zealand
Lists of lord lieutenancies
Lists of national institutions and symbols
Lists of national symbols
Lists of newspaper endorsements in United States presidential elections
Lists of office-holders
Lists of ambassadors
Lists of Canadian senators
Lists of county governors of Norway
Lists of current members of the Privy Council
Lists of custodes rotulorum
Lists of Danzig officials
Lists of emperors
Lists of female state governors
Lists of Georgian monarchs
Lists of Governors of Punjab
Lists of Japanese Governors-General
Lists of mayors by country
Lists of monarchs
Lists of ancient kings
Lists of monarchs in the British Isles
Lists of Irish kings
Lists of Polish politicians
Lists of presidents
Lists of rulers of Djibouti
Lists of rulers of Ethiopia
Lists of rulers of Germany
Lists of rulers of Ghana
Lists of rulers of Greece
Lists of rulers of India
Lists of rulers of Ireland
Lists of rulers of Italy
Lists of rulers of Kenya
Lists of rulers of Madagascar
Lists of rulers of Spain
Lists of state leaders
Lists of state leaders by age
Lists of state leaders by year
Lists of United States congress
Lists of Washington initiatives
====
Law ====
Lists of case law
Former FBI
Ten
Most Wanted Fugitives
Lists of habeas petitions filed on behalf of War on Terror detainees
Lists of landmark court decisions
Lists of Pakistan Supreme Court cases
Lists of Supreme Court Justices
List of United States crime-related lists
Lists of United States Supreme Court cases
Lists of United States Supreme Court cases by volume
Lists of killings by law enforcement officers in the United States
Lists of unsolved murders


===
War ===
Lists of abbreviations used on Commonwealth World War
I medals
Lists of allied military operations of the Vietnam War
List of American Civil War units by state
Lists of battles
Lists of Commandants of Cadets of the United States
Lists of flying aces in Arab–Israeli wars
Lists of former Guantanamo Bay detainees alleged to have returned to terrorism
Lists of military commanders
List of military decorations
Lists of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel
List of timelines of wars
Lists of Victoria Cross recipients
Lists of wars
Lists of wars in the 20th century
Lists of World War
I topics
Lists of World War
I flying aces
Lists of World War II topics
Lists of World War II prisoner-of-war camps
Index of World War II articles


==
Technology and applied science ==


===
Aerospace ===
Aviation lists
Lists of aircraft
Lists of airlines
Lists of rockets
Lists of rocket launches


===
Buildings ===
Lists of airports
Lists of buildings and structures
List of castles
List of castles by country
Lists of castles in North America
List of museums
List of museums by country
List of real estate in Dubai
Listed buildings in England
Grade II
* listed buildings in Devon
Lists of cathedrals
Lists of cathedrals in the United Kingdom
Lists of hotels
Lists of hillforts
Lists of lighthouses
List of lighthouses in the United Kingdom
Lists of listed buildings in Scotland
Lists of listed buildings in Shetland
Lists of royal residences
Lists of shopping malls
Lists of tallest buildings in New York
Lists of works by Sharpe, Paley and Austin


===
Energy ===
Lists of renewable energy topics
Lists of hydroelectric power stations
List of windmills in the United Kingdom
Lists of windmills in Sussex
Lists of windmills in Yorkshire
Lists about renewable energy
Lists of offshore wind farms by country
Lists of offshore wind farms by water area
Lists of reservoirs and dams
Lists of solar power stations
Lists of wind farms
Lists of wind farms by country
List of generating stations in Canada


===
Medicine ===
List of cannabis-related lists
List of drugs
Lists of hospitals
Lists of hospitals in Africa
Lists of hospitals in Asia
Lists of hospitals in Europe
Lists of hospitals in North America
Lists of hospitals in the United States
Lists of hospitals in Oceania
Lists of hospitals in South America
Lists of medical eponyms


===
Maritime ===
Lists of sail frigates
Lists of ships
Lists of Empire ships
List of Liberty ships
Lists of ships of the Turkish Navy
Lists of shipwrecks
Lists of U-boats
Lists of watercraft types


===
Military ===
Lists of accidents and incidents involving military aircraft
Lists of armoured fighting vehicles
List of artillery
Lists of gun cartridges
Lists of military aircraft by nation
Lists of Bulgarian military aircraft
Lists of military equipment
Lists of currently active military equipment by country
Lists of military installations
Lists of naval flags
Lists of swords
Lists of weapons
Lists of World War II military equipment


===
Technology ===
Lists of automobile-related articles
Lists of automobiles by performance
Lists of astronauts
Lists of artificial objects sent into space
Lists of computers
Lists of mobile computers
Lists of microcomputers
Lists of country codes
Lists of North American area codes
Lists of nuclear disasters and radioactive incidents
Lists of programming languages
Lists of software
Lists of websites
Lists of Internet Archive's collections


==
Miscellaneous ==
Lists of awards
Lists of civil awards and decorations of the United States
Lists of Dutch inventions and discoveries
Lists of flags
List of Japanese municipal flags
Lists of pairs
Lists of replicas
Lists of deaths by year


==
Notes ==
The term assault weapon is used in the United States to define some types of firearms.
The definition varies among regulating jurisdictions but usually includes semi-automatic firearms with a detachable magazine, a pistol grip and sometimes other features such as a vertical forward grip, flash suppressor or barrel shroud.
Some firearms are specified by name.
At the time that the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban passed in 1994, the U.S. Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use."
The origin of the term has been attributed to legislators, gun control groups, firearm manufacturers, and the media.
It is often used interchangeably (but incorrectly) with the term "assault rifle", which may more specifically refer to selective-fire military rifles that can fire in automatic or burst mode.
After the December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, many news organizations ran stories about assault weapons, explaining their varying definitions and presenting varying opinions about whether they should be banned again at the federal level.

== Definitions and usage ==
Drawing from federal and state law definitions, the term assault weapon refers primarily to semi-automatic rifles, pistols, and shotguns that are able to accept detachable magazines and possess one or more other features.
Some jurisdictions define revolving cylinder shotguns as assault weapons.
Legislative definitions do not include fully automatic weapons, which are regulated separately as Title II weapons under federal law.
A key defining law was the now-defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994.

At that time, the United States Department of Justice said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use.
"Common attributes used in legislative definitions of assault weapons include:

Semi-automatic firearm capable of accepting a detachable magazine;
Folding or telescoping (collapsible) stock, which reduces the overall length of the firearm;
A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the weapon;
Bayonet lug, which allows the mounting of a bayonet;
Threaded barrel, which can accept muzzle devices such as a flash hider, suppressor, compensator or muzzle brake;
Grenade launcher;
Barrel shroud.
Dictionary definitions vary from legal definitions.

Dictionary.com defines "assault weapon" as "any of various automatic and semiautomatic military firearms utilizing an intermediate-power cartridge, designed for individual use".
Merriam-Webster's online definition is "any of various automatic or semiautomatic firearms; especially: assault rifle".
===
History of terminology ===
The origin of the term is not clearly known and is the subject of much debate.
In the past, the names of certain military weapons used the phrase, such as the Rifleman's Assault Weapon, a grenade launcher developed in 1977 for use with the M16 assault rifle, or the Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon, a rocket launcher introduced in 1984.One of the earliest uses of the term, or a similar term, in its current meaning was in a bill introduced by Art Agnos in the California State Assembly in April 1985 to ban semi-automatic "assault firearms" capable of using detachable magazines of 20 rounds or more.
Speaking to the Assembly Public Safety Committee, Agnos said, "The only use for assault weapons is to shoot people."
The measure did not pass when it came up for a vote.
In 2013, The Washington Post, looking into the history of the term, wrote of the term: "
Many attribute its popularization to a 1988 paper written by gun-control activist and Violence Policy Center founder Josh Sugarmann and the later reaction to the Cleveland School massacre in Stockton, California, in January 1989.
"
Sugarmann had written:

Assault weapons—just like armor-piercing bullets, machine guns, and plastic firearms—are a new topic.
The weapons' menacing looks, coupled with the public's confusion over fully automatic machine guns versus semi-automatic assault weapons—anything that looks like a machine gun is assumed to be a machine gun—can only increase the chance of public support for restrictions on these weapons.
In addition, few people can envision a practical use for these weapons.

Other researchers have found evidence to suggest that the firearms industry itself may have introduced the term "assault weapon" to build interest in new product lines.
Phillip Peterson, the author of Gun Digest Buyer’s Guide to Assault Weapons
(2008) wrote:
The popularly held idea that the term 'assault weapon' originated with anti-gun activists is wrong.
The term was first adopted by manufacturers, wholesalers, importers and dealers in the American firearms industry to stimulate sales of certain firearms that did not have an appearance that was familiar to many firearms owners.
The manufacturers and gun writers of the day needed a catchy name to identify this new type of gun.

Meanwhile many gun rights activists have put forward that the term originated from the media or gun control activists.
Conservative writer Rich Lowry said that assault weapon is a "manufactured term".
Joseph P. Tartaro of the Second Amendment Foundation (SAF) wrote in 1994: "
One of the key elements of the anti-gun strategy to gull the public into supporting bans on the so-called 'assault weapons' is to foster confusion.
As stated previously, the public does not know the difference between a full automatic and a semi-automatic firearm."

Robert Crook, executive director of the Coalition of Connecticut Sportsmen, said "the term 'assault weapon,' as used by the media, is a media invention."
===
Differing state law definitions ===
Seven states have assault weapon bans with different definitions and characteristics.

California defines assault weapons by name, by "series" (AK or AR-15), and by characteristic.

A shotgun with a revolving cylinder is also defined as an assault weapon.

Connecticut defines assault weapons as selective-fire firearms (including assault rifles capable of fully automatic or burst fire); semi-automatic firearms specified by name; and semi-automatic firearms with specific characteristics.

Hawaii defines and bans assault pistols.

Maryland defines and bans assault pistols.
It regulates 45 other assault weapons listed by make or model including copies, regardless of manufacturer.

Massachusetts defines assault weapons as semi-automatic firearms with the same definition provisions from the expired federal ban of 1994.

New York had an assault weapons ban prior to 2013, but on January 16 of that year it passed the SAFE Act, which created a stricter definition of assault weapons and banned them immediately.
The NY SAFE Act defines assault weapons as semi-automatic pistols and rifles with detachable magazines and one military-style feature, and semi-automatic shotguns with one military-style feature.
In Illinois, proposed legislation in 2013 would have defined the term "semi-automatic assault weapon" as any semi-automatic firearm able to accept a detachable magazine, but it was never brought to a vote.
The Illinois State Rifle Association said most of the state's firearms owners owned one or more guns that would have been banned under the proposal.
The NRA said the proposal would have restricted about 75 percent of handguns and 50 percent of long guns in circulation.
As municipalities, Chicago and Cook County bans certain firearms defined as assault weapons and have no provision for legal possession of firearms owned before their laws were passed.

Minnesota also defines certain firearms as assault weapons and regulates their sales.

===
Distinction from assault rifles ===
The term "assault rifle" is sometimes used interchangeably with the term "assault weapon".
According to the Associated Press Stylebook, "although the terms are often used interchangeably, some make the distinction that assault rifle is a military weapon with a selector switch for firing in either fully automatic or semi-automatic mode from
a detachable, 10- to 30-round magazine.
"
Civilian ownership of machine guns, including selective-fire rifles, has been tightly regulated since 1934 under the National Firearms Act and since 1986 under the Firearm Owners Protection Act.

===
Cosmetic features ===
Gun control advocates and gun rights advocates have referred to at least some of the features outlined in assault weapons bans as "cosmetic".
The NRA Institute for Legislative Action and the Violence Policy Center both used the term in 2004 when the federal ban expired.
In May 2012, the Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence said, "the inclusion in the list of features that were purely cosmetic in nature created a loophole that allowed manufacturers to successfully circumvent the law by making minor modifications to the weapons they already produced."
Some reporters used the term in stories after the 2012 shootings in Aurora, Colorado and at Sandy Hook Elementary School.
Assault weapons, also sometimes called "black guns" or "black rifles", are no more powerful than many other semi-automatic rifles legally used for hunting throughout the United States; they do not shoot faster or have greater range.
Two scholars have written: "
One problem inherent in the study of [assault weapons (AW)] is that the classifications of AW are based on cosmetic features of firearms...
For instance, the Colt AR-15 series of semi-automatic rifles—the civilian version of the fully automatic M-16 rifle issued to U.S. soldiers—was subject to the 1994 AW restrictions, but the Ruger Mini-14 rifle was not banned.
Yet, the Mini-14 is the same caliber, has a similar barrel length, the same semi-automatic action, and can use magazines that hold 30 rounds of ammunition.
The only real meaningful difference between the two firearms is cosmetic:
The AR-15 rifle looks more dangerous.
"The
National Shooting Sports Foundation, a firearms industry trade group, states that the term assault weapon has been misapplied to many semi-automatic firearms because of their appearance and not their use in crime.

== Political and legislative issues ==
Prominent gun-control groups that support restrictions on ownership of firearms include the Brady Campaign and the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence.
Prominent opponents of assault-weapons bans include the National Rifle Association and Gun Owners of America.
In 2002, the NRA's Wayne LaPierre and Jim Baker said "assault weapons" is a pejorative term.
The National Shooting Sports Foundation considers it a politically driven catchphrase aimed to conflate non-automatic weapons with full-automatic assault rifles.
As of 2012, there are an estimated 2.5–3.7 million rifles from just the AR-15 family of rifles in civilian use in the United States; the total number of assault weapons in the United States among all types is not known, and can not be known because of the different definitions in different jurisdictions.

===
Defunct U.S. Federal Assault Weapons Ban ===
The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994, more commonly known as the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, expired in 2004.

It banned the manufacture or importation of certain semi-automatic firearms that it defined as "semiautomatic assault weapons", commonly known as assault weapons.

Any firearms so defined that were already possessed at the time the law took effect were grandfathered in, and could be legally owned or transferred.

Another aspect of the law banned the manufacture or importation of magazines that could hold more than ten rounds of ammunition, with existing magazines grandfathered in as legal.
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 defined certain firearms as assault weapons based on the features they possessed.

This included semi-automatic rifles with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a flash suppressor or threaded barrel, a bayonet mount, or a muzzle-mounted grenade launcher.

It included semi-automatic pistols with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip, a threaded barrel, a barrel shroud, or an unloaded weight of 50 ounces or more.
Additionally defined as assault weapons were semi-automatic shotguns with a rotating cylinder, or with at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a detachable magazine, or a fixed magazine that can hold more than five rounds.
The ban also prohibited 19 specifically named models of firearms, as well as copies of those guns.

These included the AK-47, Uzi, Galil, AR-15, FN FAL, MAC-10, Steyr AUG, TEC-9, and Armsel Striker.

===
Failed Assault Weapons Ban of 2013
bill ===
On December 16, 2012, two days after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Senator Dianne Feinstein said she would introduce a new assault weapons ban on the first day of Congress.
Five days later, on December 21, Wayne LaPierre, chief executive of the National Rifle Association, held a news conference repeating the NRA's opposition to additional gun laws.
Feinstein and Senator Richard Blumenthal held a separate news conference in response.
There, Feinstein said that it seemed to her "prudent" to register grandfathered assault weapons under the National Firearms Act (NFA).
A two-page bill summary on the senator's web site also mentioned registering grandfathered assault weapons under the NFA, but the text of the bill introduced to the Senate did not include that provision.

On January 24, 2013, Feinstein introduced S. 150, the "Assault Weapons Ban of 2013".
The bill was similar to the 1994 ban, but differed in that it used a one-feature test for a firearm to qualify as an assault weapon rather than the two-feature test of the 1994 ban.
On April 17, 2013, it failed on a Senate vote of 60 to 40.

== See also ==
Military-style semi-automatic, New Zealand legal classification
Semi-automatic firearm


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Quotations related to Assault weapon at Wikiquote
The United States Army Military Government in Korea (USAMGIK) was the official ruling body of the southern half of the Korean Peninsula from September 8, 1945 to August 15, 1948.

The country during this period was plagued with political and economic chaos, which arose from a variety of causes.
The after-effects of the Japanese occupation were still being felt in the occupation zone, as well as in the Soviet zone in the North.[1]
Popular discontent stemmed from the U.S. Military Government's support of the Japanese colonial government; then once removed, keeping the former Japanese governors on as advisors; by ignoring, censoring and forcibly disbanding the functional and popular People's Republic of Korea (PRK); and finally by supporting United Nations elections that divided the country.
In addition, the U.S. military was largely unprepared for the challenge of administering the country, arriving with no knowledge of the language or political situation.[2]
Thus, many of their policies had unintended destabilizing effects.
Waves of refugees from North Korea (estimated at 400,000)[3] and returnees from abroad caused further turmoil.[4]


== Background ==
The short-lived People's Republic of Korea had been established in August, in consultation with Japanese authorities, and rapidly exerted control throughout the country.[5]
The U.S. Military Government outlawed it in the South shortly after their arrival.[6]
The leader of the People's Republic, Yeo Un-hyeong, stepped down and formed the People's Party of Korea.[7]
The U.S. administration also refused to recognize the members of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea, led by Kim Ku, who were obliged to enter the country as private citizens.[8]


==
Key events ==
After the surrender of the Empire of Japan to the Allies, the division at the 38th parallel marked the beginning of Soviet and American command over North Korea and South Korea, respectively.
From 1945-48 the overall responsibility of southern Korea was given to General Douglas MacArthur as Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers due to the vague orders and lack of guidance from both the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Department of State regarding Korea.
Washington, D.C. decided to give MacArthur a free hand to deal with Korea however he wished.
He ordered the XXIV Corps under Lt.
General John R. Hodge to not only accept the surrender of Japanese forces but also to set up a military occupation of Korea.
U.S. forces landed at Incheon on September 8, 1945, and established a military government shortly thereafter.[9]
The forces landing at Incheon were of the XXIV Corps of the U.S. Tenth Army.[10]
Four days before he arrived in Korea, Hodge told his officers that Korea "was an enemy of the United States".
On September 9, at a surrender ceremony, Hodge announced that the Japanese colonial government would remain intact, including its personnel and its governor-general.
After a major outcry, Hodge replaced the governor-general with an American and removed all the Japanese bureau chiefs, though he, in turn, enlisted the former Japanese bureaucrats as advisors.
Faced with mounting popular discontent, in October 1945 Hodge established the Korean Advisory Council.
The majority of the Council seats were given to members of the Korean Democratic Party which had been formed at the encouragement of the U.S. and was primarily made up of large landowners, wealthy businesspeople, and former officials in the colonial government.
A few members of the PRK were offered to join, but they refused and instead criticized the Council appointees for their collaboration with the Japanese.
A proposal was made in 1945 for a long-term trusteeship arrangement.
In December 1945, the United States and the Soviet Union agreed to administer the country under the U.S.–Soviet Joint Commission, as termed by the Moscow Conference of Foreign Ministers.
It was agreed that Korea would govern independently after four years of international oversight.
However, both the United States and the USSR approved Korean-led governments in their respective halves, each of which was favorable to the occupying power's political ideology.
From a number of perspectives, it may be argued that not all Koreans necessarily favoured these arrangements.
In the south the interim legislature and the interim government were headed by Kim Kyu-shik and Syngman Rhee, respectively, and the elections for which were met with a large uprising.
The USAMGIK banned strikes on December 8 and outlawed the people's committees on December 12 1945.
However, in September 1946 the Communist Party of Korea initiated a General Strike.
This started among railway workers in Busan
but  it spread to other industries by September 24 and more than a quarter of a million workers joined in the strike.
The USAMG organised military operations to oppose the strikers and also encouraged right-wing anti-communist groups.

On October 1 a strike protest in Daegu was fired on by police and a worker was killed.

Demonstrations in the following days developed into the  'Autumn Uprising'.
The U.S. administration responded by declaring martial law, firing into crowds of demonstrators and killing a publicly unknown number of people.
The Jeju Uprising started during the U.S. occupation period in April 1948 when left wing radicals killed 30 South Korean police officers.
This uprising happened after a South Korean communist named Pak Hon-yong (who collaborated with Kim Il-sung in Pyongyang) called on left wing and communist groups south of the 38th parallel to oppose the 1948 Korean elections by whatever means necessary, and called for a general strike to begin on 7 February.
At this point, there were at least 60,000 members of the communist Workers' Party of South Korea on Jeju, and at least 80,000 active supporters.
These members and supporters not only went on strike but in some cases attacked government installations and engaged with police forces in open conflict.
These engagements between SKLP guerrillas against rightist groups and police continued through March 1948.
It was a brutal war for the next 13 months that resulted in atrocities by both sides that led to the deaths of 60,000-100,000 people.

==
Education ==
Among the earliest edicts promulgated by USAMGIK was one reopening all schools, issued in November 1945.
No immediate changes were made in the educational system, which was simply carried over from the Japanese colonial period.
In this area, as in others, the military government sought to maintain the forms of the Japanese occupation system.

Although it did not implement sweeping educational reforms, the military government did lay the foundations for reforms which were implemented early in the First Republic.
In 1946, a council of about 100 Korean educators was convened to map out the future path of Korean education.

==
Politics ==
Although the military government was hostile to leftism from the beginning, it did initially tolerate the activities of left-wing political groups, including the Korean Communist Party.
They had attempted to strike a balance between hard-left and hard-right groups, encouraging moderation.
However, these overtures frequently had the adverse effect of angering powerful leaders such as Syngman Rhee.

This period of reconciliation did not last long.
Within a short time, the military government actively disempowered and eventually banned popular organizations that were gaining support within the general public, including the People's Republic of Korea.
The justification given by the USAMGIK was its suspicion that they were aligned with the communist bloc, despite professing a relatively moderate stance compared to the actual Korean Communist Party, which had also been banned at this time.

A good symbol of how the U.S. military occupation of southern Korea went overall was when Hodge and the USAMGIK created the South Korean Interim Legislative Assembly in December 1946.
This assembly was supposed to formulate draft laws to be used as "the basis for political, economic, and social reforms."
However, the left-wing political faction, consolidated under the South Korean Workers Party, ignored the assembly and refused to participate.
The conservative faction's Korea Democratic Party, supported by landlords and small-business owners, also opposed the assembly because their main leaders were excluded from it by the USAMGIK.
The problem was that even though many of the 45-member assembly were conservatives most of the members were nominated by the moderate Kim Kyu-sik, who was the Vice President of the Provisional Government of the Republic of Korea (this was the mostly moderate institution created in 1919 during the Japanese-occupied Korea era with the ultimate goal of delivering independence to Korea in the form of a republic) and was Hodge's choice to lead a future independent South Korea.
Unfortunately, Kim was not charismatic and could not inspire either the left wing or the right wing to support him.

==
Inter-Korean relations ==
At the time of division, the overwhelming majority of Korean industry was concentrated in the North, while most of the agricultural land was in the South.
Power lines and shipping connections were maintained during this period, but were frequently and unpredictably cut off.
The North, controlled during this period by the Soviet Union, had the ability to wreak havoc in the South by cutting off the supply of electricity or fertilizer, and frequently did so.

==
Economy ==
The economy of South Korea did not fare well during this period, although the foundations of recovery were laid.
Counterfeiting was reportedly a serious problem during this period.

== Dissolution ==
Following the constitutional assembly and presidential elections held in May and July 1948 respectively, the Republic of Korea was officially proclaimed on August 15, 1948.
American troops finally withdrew in 1949.

== See also ==
Operation Blacklist
Forty
Korean general strike of September 1946
List of Korea-related topics
History of South Korea
Provisional People's Committee for North Korea
Soviet Civil Administration – Soviet counterpart in North Korea
Autumn Uprising of 1946


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Unofficial list of US National Archives documents concerning USAMGIK
Paramilitary politics under the USAMGIK and the establishment of the ROK, Kim Bong-jin, Korea Journal 43 (2), pp.
289–322 (2003).
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to military science:
Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.
It strives to be a scientific system that if properly employed, will greatly enhance the practitioner's ability to prevail in an armed conflict with any adversary.
To this end, it is unconcerned whether that adversary is an opposing military force, guerrillas or other irregulars, or any adversary who knows of or utilizes military science in response.

==
Topics within military science ==
Military organization
Military education and training
Military history
Military geography
Military technology and equipment
Military strategy and doctrine
Intelligence cycle management
Foreign policy analysis
Diplomacy
== Types of military technology ==
Weapon
Armour – protective clothing intended to defend its wearer from intentional harm in combat and military engagements, typically associated with soldiers
Artillery – large caliber weapons firing projectiles one at a time.

Artillery pieces are crew serviced weapons that provide direct or indirect trajectories for the shell
Medieval siege weaponry
Fortifications – military constructions and buildings designed for defense in warfare–
Martial arts – also known as fighting systems, martial arts are bodies of codified practices or traditions of training for unarmed and armed combat, usually without the use of guns and other modern weapons–
Mêlée – hand-to-hand combat or mano-a-mano; weapons commonly used in mêlée include swords, clubs, spears, axes, or fists: almost any tool with which one can hit someone else
Military vehicles – are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces
Armoured fighting vehicle
Armoured personnel carrier
Tank
Military aviation and military aircraft – Military aviation include such areas as transport, bombing, surveillance, and aerial warfare
Military communications – the transmission medium that links military components on the battlefield
Communications
Military engineer
Military robots – autonomous or remote-controlled devices designed for military applications
Unmanned Ground Vehicles
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicles
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles
Military thought and planning –
military tactics, strategy, and doctrine
Military doctrine – level of military planning between national strategy and unit-level
Military strategy – collective name for planning the conduct of warfare
Military tactics – collective name for methods of engaging and defeating an enemy in battle
Military unit – an organization within an armed force.
It may consist of any number of soldiers, ships, vehicles, or aircraft.
Armies, navies, and air forces, are organised hierarchically into groups of various sizes for functional, tactical and administrative purposes
Military rank
Comparative military ranks
Munitions – often defined as a synonym for ammunition.
A slightly broader definition would include bombs, missiles, warheads, and mines
Bullet
Missile
Bomb
Mine
Landmine
Naval mine
Naval warfare – combat in and on seas and oceans
Navy
Naval ship
Submarine
Small arms and firearms
– a firearm is a kinetic energy weapon that fires either a single or multiple projectiles propelled at high velocity by the gases produced by action of the rapid confined burning of a propellant


==
Military by region ==
List of militaries by country
List of air forces
List of armies by country
List of navies
List of military special forces units
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army


==
History of military science and technology ==
Military history
===
By historical period ===
Prehistoric warfare
Ancient warfare
Medieval warfare
Gunpowder warfare
Industrial warfare
Total war
Irregular warfare
Modern warfare
===
By battlespace ===
Air power history
History of aerial warfare
Army history
History of land warfare
History of information warfare
History of espionage
Nuclear espionage
Atomic spies
History of surveillance
Naval history
History of naval warfare
History of space warfare
===
By terrain ===
History of arctic warfare
History of cyber-warfare
History of desert warfare
History of jungle warfare
History of mountain warfare
History of urban warfare


===
By weapon technology ===
History of armoured warfare
History of artillery
History of biological warfare
History of cavalry
History of chemical warfare
History of electronic warfare
History of infantry
History of mechanized warfare
History of sea-based and land-based mine warfare
History of nuclear warfare
History of nuclear weapons
History of psychological warfare
History of radiological warfare
History of ski warfare
History of submarine warfare


===
History of military tactics ===
History of amphibious warfare
History of asymmetric warfare
History of attrition warfare
History of cavalry tactics
History of conventional warfare
History of fortification
History of guerrilla warfare
History of hand to hand combat
History of invasion
History of joint warfare
History of maneuver warfare
Siege warfare
Total warfare
Trench warfare
History of unconventional warfare


===
History of military strategy ===
History of economic warfare
History of grand strategy
History of operational warfare


==
General military science and technology concepts ==
Aircraft
Bomber
Fighter aircraft
Aircraft carrier
Air superiority
Basic training
Battlespace
Defense
Draft
Exchange officer
Maginot line
Militaria
Military Aid to the Civil Power
Military Aid to the Civil Community
Military academy
Military courtesy
Military fiat
Military history
Military incompetence
Military logistics
Junta
Military organization
Military rule (disambiguation)
Military science
Military tactics
Military technology and equipment
Mutually assured destruction (MAD)
Napalm
Nuclear missile
SLBM
ICBM
MIRV
Tactical nuclear weapon
Radar
Recruiting
Sonar
Strategic Bombing
Troop density
War crime (list)
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
Mass murder
War rape


==
Influential military strategists ==
Following are examples from throughout history of prominently influential military strategists:

Cyrus the Great
Sun Tzu – Chinese military general, strategist, and philosopher during the Zhou dynasty's Spring and Autumn Period.
He is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War, an extremely influential ancient Chinese book on military strategy.

Sun Bin
Chanakya
Alexander the Great
Chandragupta Maurya
Hannibal
Qin Shi Huang
Julius Caesar
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa
Zhuge Liang
Khalid ibn al-Walid
Genghis Khan
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
Frederick the Great
Napoleon Bonaparte
Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington
Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher
Antoine-Henri Jomini
Nathan Bedford Forrest
Carl von Clausewitz – German-Prussian soldier and military theorist who stressed the psychological and political aspects of war.
His ideas have been widely influential in military theory and have had a strong influence on German military thought specifically.

Robert E. Lee
Ulysses S. Grant
William Tecumseh Sherman
Helmuth von Moltke
the Elder
Alfred von Schlieffen
Hans Delbrück
Alfred Thayer Mahan
Ferdinand Foch
Giulio Douhet
Billy Mitchell
J. F. C. Fuller
B. H. Liddell Hart
Hans von Seeckt
Heinz Guderian
Erwin Rommel
Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke
Bernard Montgomery,
1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein
George Marshall
Dean Acheson


==
Military science and technology lists ==
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army
List of air forces
List of navies
List of armies
List of battles


==
See also ==
Outline of war
Military science fiction


==
External links ==
Collection of military handbooks etc.
Special Forces of the Main Directorate of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces (Russian:
Части и подразделения специального назначения (спецназ)
Главного управления
Генерального штаба
Вооружённых сил
Российской Федерации (СпН ГУ ГШ ВС РФ)), commonly known as the Spetsnaz G.U. or Spetsnaz GRU is the special forces (spetsnaz) of the G.U., the foreign military intelligence agency of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.

The Spetsnaz GRU was formed in 1949, the first spetsnaz force in the Soviet Union, as the military force of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU), the foreign military intelligence agency of the Soviet Armed Forces.
The force was designed in the context of the Cold War to carry out reconnaissance and sabotage against enemy targets in the form of special reconnaissance and direct action attacks.
The Spetsnaz GRU inspired additional spetsnaz forces attached to other Soviet intelligence agencies, such as the Vympel and Alpha Group of the KGB.

==
Modus operandi ==
The concept of using special forces tactics and strategies in the Soviet Union was originally proposed by the military theorist Mikhail Svechnykov, who envisaged the development of unconventional warfare capabilities in order to overcome disadvantages that conventional forces faced in the field.
Svechnykov was executed during the Great Purge in 1938, but practical implementation of his ideas was begun by Ilya Starinov, dubbed the "grandfather of the spetsnaz".
Following the entrance of the Soviet Union into World War II, basic forces dedicated to acts of reconnaissance and sabotage were formed under the supervision of the Second Department of the General Staff of the Soviet Armed Forces, and were subordinate to the commanders of Fronts.
The primary function of Spetsnaz troops in wartime was infiltration/insertion behind enemy lines (either in uniform or civilian clothing), usually well before hostilities are scheduled to begin and, once in place, to commit acts of sabotage such as the destruction of vital communications logistics centers, as well as the assassination of key government leaders and military officers.
Spetsnaz GRU training included: weapons handling, fast rappelling, explosives training, marksmanship, counter-terrorism, airborne training, hand-to-hand combat, climbing (alpine rope techniques), diving, underwater combat, emergency medical training, and demolition.

==
History ==


===
Soviet era ===
The situation was reviewed after the war ended, and between 1947 and 1950 the whole of the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) was reorganized.

The first "independent reconnaissance companies of special purpose" were formed in 1949, to work for tank and combined-arms armies, which were tasked to eliminate amongst others enemy nuclear weapons systems such as the MGR-3 Little John and MGM-1 Matador.
In 1957, the first Spetsnaz battalions were formed under the GRU, five to operate beyond the 150–200 km range of the reconnaissance companies.
The first brigades were formed in 1962, reportedly to reach up to 750 kilometres in the rear to destroy U.S. weapons systems such as the MGM-52 Lance, MGM-29 Sergeant, and MGM-31 Pershing.

Two 'study regiments' were established in the 1960s to train specialists and NCOs, the first in 1968 at Pechora near Pskov, and the second in 1970 at Chirchik near Tashkent.
According to Vladimir Rezun, a GRU defector who used the pseudonym "Viktor Suvorov", there were 20 GRU Spetsnaz brigades plus 41 separate companies at the time of his defection in 1978.

====
Known missions ====
In May 1968, at the peak of the Vietnam War, nine GRU special forces operatives raided a secret US airbase in Cambodia in a bid to capture a brand new Super Cobra attack helicopter, equipped with the latest guidance systems and guided missiles at the time.
As a result of the operation, one helicopter was stolen and taken to Vietnam which was eventually brought back to the Soviet Union.
The rest were destroyed and 15 Americans soldiers were killed in the operation.
According to the Soviets, the U.S. learnt about the attack on the base by Soviet special forces years later thanks to a KGB leak.
The first major foreign operation of the unit came in August 1968, when Moscow decided to crack down on the Prague Spring and move the troops of Warsaw Pact countries into Czechoslovakia.
The Spetsnaz GRU was tasked with capturing the Prague Airport.
On the night of 21 August, a Soviet passenger plane requested an emergency landing at the Prague Airport, allegedly due to engine failure.
After landing, the commandos, without firing a shot, seized the airport and took over air traffic control.
At the same time, other Spetsnaz GRU units that had infiltrated into Prague a few days before the operation seized control of other key city points.
In December 1979, the undercover Spetsnaz GRU unit codenamed "Muslim Battalion" participated in Operation Storm-333, the successful mission to assassinate Hafizullah Amin, the President of Afghanistan, and to capture Amin's residential palace which triggered the Soviet–Afghan War.
Most of Spetsnaz GRU's operations remain classified even after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
It is believed the special forces had participated in operations in more than nineteen countries around the world in Africa, Asia and South America.
From time to time, the men also served as military instructors and set up training camps for Soviet-backed fighters in Vietnam and Angola.
===
Russian Federation era ===
Following the deactivation of the Soviet GRU in 1992, control of the special forces was transferred to the newly formed G.U. of Russia and were maintained to their respective assigned units as before.
According to Stanislav Lunev, who defected to the U.S. in 1992, the GRU also commanded some 25,000 Spetsnaz troops as of 1997.Following the 2008 Russian military reform, a brand new Directorate of Special Operations was established in 2009 following studies of American and various Western special operations forces units and commands.
The newly formed Special Operations Forces which is directly subordinated to the General Staff, bypassing the GRU.
In 2013, the Directorate became the Special Operations Forces Command with a GRU unit transferring to the command.
In 2010, Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to the military districts of the Ground Forces and was subordinate to the operational-strategic commands until 2012, due to then Defence Minister Anatoliy Serdyukov's military reforms.
This decision was reversed in 2013 and Spetsnaz GRU units were reassigned to their original GRU divisions.

====
Known operations ====
Throughout the mid-1990s to the 2000s, Spetsnaz GRU were involved in both the First Chechen War and more prominently in the Second Chechen War and also the Invasion of Dagestan in August 1999.
The special forces learned invaluable lessons from the first war and transformed into a better and more effective fighting force and were instrumental in Russia's and the Russian backed government's success in the second war.

In 2003, during the Second Chechen War, the GRU formed the Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad, two ethnic Chechen units that belonged to the Spetsnaz GRU which fought primarily in Chechnya, and also in the 2008 Russo-Georgian War as well as peacekeeping operations after the 2006 Lebanon War.

Spetsnaz GRU maintains an airborne unit, the Separate Spetsnaz Airborne Reconnaissance Unit (codenamed No.
48427), which participated in the 2008 Georgian War.
The unit is housed at Matrosskaya Tishina 10 in Moscow.
During the period of insurgency in the North Caucasus region, Spetsnaz GRU along with special forces from the FSB and MVD conducted numerous special operations and counter-terrorism operations against mainly the Caucasus Emirate, Wilayat al-Qawqaz and other smaller terrorist groups.

After the Crimean crisis, during which some units of Spetsnaz GRU were a part of the "Little green men", and the start of the rebel insurgency by pro-Russian rebels, Ukraine has on numerous occasions accused various Spetsnaz forces of aiding the rebels and even fighting on the ground in Eastern Ukraine.
In December 2014, the Ukrainian military claimed that the Spetsnaz GRU was involved in attacks on an airport in Donetsk which was later captured by DPR in the battle.

In late 2015, GRU special forces operators were reportedly involved in the Syrian Civil War, appearing in the government offensives of Aleppo and Homs.
GRU officials have also visited Qamishli, near the border with Turkey.

==
List of GRU special units ==
Below is a list of current "Spetsnaz" units in the Russian Armed Forces that fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations:
Russian Ground Forces - fields
7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

2nd Spetsnaz Brigade – based in Promezhitsa, Pskov Oblast
Brigade
HQ
Signals Battalion (2× Company)
Support Company
70th
Special Purpose Detachment
329th Special Purpose Detachment
700th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
3rd Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tolyatti 
Brigade HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
1st Special Purpose Detachment (1st Battalion)
790th
Special Purpose Detachment (2nd Battalion)
791st Special Purpose Detachment (3rd Battalion)
Training Battalion (2× Company)
10th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Mol'kino, Krasnoyarsk Territory
Brigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Support Company
Logistics Company
K-9 Unit
325th
Special Purpose Detachment
328th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
14th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Ussuriysk
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
282nd Special Purpose Detachment
294th Special Purpose Detachment
308th Special Purpose Detachment
Training Battalion (2× Company)
16th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Tambov, with all units deployed in Tambov except for the 664th SPD.

Brigade HQ
EOD company
Signals
Company
Logistics Company
370th Special Purpose Detachment
379th Special Purpose Detachment
585th Special Purpose Detachment
664th Special Purpose Detachment
669th
Special Purpose Detachment
22nd Special Purpose Brigade – entire unit is based in Stepnoi, Rostov Oblast 
Brigade
HQ
Signals
Company
Support Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
Engineer Unit
108th Special Purpose Detachment
173rd Special Purpose Detachment
305th Special Purpose Detachment
411th Special Purpose Detachment
24th Special Purpose Brigade – based in Irkutsk, with all units and units deployed in IrkutskBrigade
HQ
Signals Company
Special Weapons Company
Logistics Unit
281st Special Purpose Detachment
297th Special Purpose Detachment
641th Special Purpose Detachment
25th Special Purpose Regiment
Russian Airborne
Troops45th Guards Special Purpose Brigade – based in Kubinka 
Russian Navy
The navy also fields dedicated maritime sabotage and counter-sabotage diver units which are attached to the naval infantry.
These units also include combat swimmers, trained to conduct underwater combat, mining and clearance diving.
The task is to protect ships and other fleet assets from enemy frogmen and special forces.
The term "combat swimmers" is correct term in relation to the staff of the OSNB PDSS.
Every PDSS unit has approximately 50–60 combat swimmers.
There are PDSS units in all major naval bases across Russia.
The OMRP is composed of reconnaissance divers that fall under operational subordination to the Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU).
There are four OMRPs in Russia serving each fleet: Northern Fleet, Baltic Fleet, Black Sea Fleet and Pacific Fleet, with each consisting of 120–200 personnel.

Naval Special Reconnaissance (OMRP)42nd Marine Reconnaissance point (Pacific Fleet)
388th Marine Reconnaissance point (Black Sea Fleet) – reorganized from the former 431st MRP
420th Marine Reconnaissance point (Northern Fleet)
561st
Marine Reconnaissance point (Baltic Fleet)
Counteraction Underwater Diversionary Forces and Facilities
(PDSS)
101st PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
102nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Sevastopol
136th PDSS Detachment - based in Novorossiysk
137th PDSS Detachment - based in Makhachkala
140th PDSS Detachment - based in Vidyayevo
152nd
PDSS Detachment - based in Polyarny, Murmansk Oblast
153rd PDSS Detachment - based in Ostrovnoy, Murmansk Oblast
159th PDSS Detachment - based in Razboynik
160th
PDSS Detachment - based in Murmansk
269th
PDSS Detachment - based in Gadzhiyevo
311th PDSS Detachment - based in Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky
313rd PDSS Detachment - based in Baltiysk
473rd PDSS Detachment - based in Kronstadt


===
Dissolved units ===
The Special Battalions Vostok and Zapad were two Spetsnaz units; Vostok headquartered at Eastern Chechnya and Zapad headquartered at Western Chechnya.

It was subordinate to the GRU and responsible for carrying out mountain warfare and special operations in Chechnya.
A power struggle then broke out between rival pro-Russian Chechen warlords then Head of the Chechen Republic Kadyrov and Sulim Yamadaev which led to a series of assassinations and shootouts in the ensuing years forcing the GRU to disband the controversial battalions in November 2008.

== See also ==
Similar foreign special forces units:
List of special forces units


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Carey Schofield, The Russian Elite:
Inside Spetsnaz and the Airborne Forces, Greenhill, London, 1993
Scott and Scott, The Armed Forces of the Soviet Union
Viktor Suvorov, Spetsnaz:
The Story Behind the Soviet SAS, 1987, Hamish Hamilton Ltd, ISBN 0-241-11961-8
Steve Zaloga, James W. Loop, Soviet Bloc Elite Forces, Volume 5 of Elite Series, Osprey Publishing, 1985, ISBN 0850456312, 9780850456318
Lethal Weapon is a 1987 American buddy cop action film directed by Richard Donner, produced by Joel Silver, and written by Shane Black.
It stars Mel Gibson and Danny Glover alongside Gary Busey, Tom Atkins, Darlene Love, and Mitchell Ryan.
In Lethal Weapon, a pair of mismatched LAPD detectives – Martin Riggs (Gibson), a former Green Beret who has become suicidal following the death of his wife, and Roger Murtaugh (Glover), a 50-year-old veteran of the force – work together as partners.

The film was released on March 6, 1987.
Upon its release, Lethal Weapon grossed over $120 million (against a production budget of $15 million) and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound.
It spawned a franchise that includes three sequels and a television series.

==
Plot ==
Shortly after his 50th birthday, LAPD Homicide Sergeant Roger Murtaugh is unhappily partnered with Sergeant Martin Riggs, a transfer from narcotics.
Riggs, a former Special Forces soldier whose wife was killed in a car accident three years prior, has turned suicidal and his superiors transfer him to Homicide after he nearly kills a drug dealer.
Murtaugh and Riggs quickly find themselves at odds as Murtaugh doesn't want to partner with someone who is crazy and Riggs is irritated by Murtaugh's dismissive attitude towards him.

Murtaugh is contacted by Michael Hunsaker, a Vietnam War buddy and banker, but before they can meet, Murtaugh learns that Hunsaker's daughter, Amanda, apparently committed suicide by jumping from her apartment balcony.
Autopsy reports show Amanda to have been poisoned with drain cleaner, making the case a possible homicide.
Hunsaker tells Murtaugh that he was concerned about his daughter's involvement in drugs, prostitution, and pornography, and was trying to get Murtaugh to help her escape that life.

Murtaugh and Riggs attempt to question Amanda's pimp, but find a drug lab on the premises, leading to a shootout.
Riggs kills the pimp and saves the life of Murtaugh, who starts to tolerate his new partner.
Even though the case seems closed, Riggs is aware that the only witness to Amanda's apparent suicide was Dixie, another prostitute who was working away from her normal streets.
They attempt to question Dixie at her home, but the residence explodes as they approach it.
Riggs finds parts of a mercury switch from bomb debris, indicating a professional had set the bomb; a little kid who had been nearby witnessed a man approach the house with a military tattoo similar to the one Riggs has, and Murtaugh suspects Hunsaker is withholding information from him.

The pair visit Hunsaker before Amanda's funeral, where he reveals of having previously been an operative of "Shadow Company," which ran the Vietnam War out of Laos and took over the huge heroin trade in the area after murdering all of its Viet Cong leaders.
Long after the war, Shadow Company got back together and resumed bringing in huge bi-annual heroin shipments from their sources in Southeast Asia, a scheme masterminded by retired General Peter McAllister and his right-hand chief enforcer, Mr. Joshua.
Hunsaker had been laundering the money but wanted to get out, and when McAllister found out he had contacted Murtaugh, the general had Amanda killed in retaliation.
As Murtaugh tries to get Hunsaker to reveal everything he knows about Shadow Company, Joshua arrives in a helicopter and kills Hunsaker.
Then Shadow Company attempts to kill Riggs in a drive-by shooting, but he is saved by a bulletproof vest.
Murtaugh and Riggs fake his murder in order to gain the upper hand.

Shadow Company later kidnaps Murtaugh's daughter Rianne and demands that Murtaugh turn himself over to them for her return.
Murtaugh and Riggs plan an ambush for the exchange at El Mirage Lake with Riggs providing sniper support, but Riggs is caught by McAllister and the trio is taken to an unknown location.
Murtaugh and Riggs are tortured for information, but Riggs manages to overpower the captors before freeing Murtaugh and Rianne, and they escape to find themselves in a busy nightclub used as a front for Shadow Company.
With their cover blown, McAllister and Joshua attempt to escape separately.
Joshua manages to get away, but McAllister's driver is shot by Murtaugh, causing the general's car to veer out of control and get struck by a bus on Hollywood Boulevard, and McAllister is killed when a fire causes hand grenades in the car to detonate.
Murtaugh and Riggs race to Murtaugh's home, knowing that Joshua will come after his family for revenge.
They arrive in time to prevent him, and Riggs beats Joshua in a violent brawl on the front lawn.
As backup officers arrive to take Joshua into custody, he breaks free and steals a gun from one of the patrolmen, but Murtaugh and Riggs pull their guns and shoot Joshua dead.

After visiting his wife's grave, Riggs spends Christmas with the Murtaughs, having become close friends with Murtaugh and bonding with the rest of the family.
Riggs also gives Murtaugh a symbolic gift: a Hollow-point bullet which he had been saving to commit suicide, as he does not need it anymore.

== Cast ==


==
Production ==


===
Development ===
Recent UCLA graduate Shane Black wrote the screenplay in mid-1985.
Black stated that his intention was to do an "urban western" inspired by Dirty Harry where a violent character "reviled for what he did, what he is capable of, the things he believed in" is eventually recruited for being the one that could solve the problem.
The protagonists would be everymen policemen, "guys shuffling in a town like Los Angeles searching for something noble as justice when they're just guys in washed and worn suits seeking a paycheck".

According to Black, his original first draft of the script was very different and much darker than the final film.
It was 140 pages long and both the plot and characters were different, and action scenes were also much bigger.
The ending of the script contained a chase scene with helicopters and a trailer truck full of cocaine exploding over Hollywood Hills with cocaine snowing over the Hollywood sign.
Black hated this first draft and initially discarded it but later picked it up again and re-wrote it into the new drafts that were eventually used for filming.
His agent sent the Lethal Weapon script to various studios, being rejected before Warner Bros. executive Mark Canton took a liking to it.
Canton brought along producer Joel Silver, who loved the story and worked with Black to further develop the script.
Director Richard Donner also brought in writer Jeffrey Boam to do some uncredited re-writes on Black's script after he found parts of it to be too dark.
Boam mostly added some more humor into the script, and later did a complete re-write of Shane Black and Warren Murphy's rejected script for the second film.
He also wrote the script for the third film and an unused draft for the fourth film.
After the script was purchased for $250,000, studio production executives offered it to director Richard Donner, who also loved it.
Leonard Nimoy was one of the choices considered for directing, but he did not feel comfortable doing action films, and he was working on Three Men and a Baby at the time.
With those key elements in place, the search began for the right combination of actors to play Riggs and Murtaugh.

Mel Gibson was invited by Richard Donner as he was interested in working with the actor after Ladyhawke.
Casting director Marion Dougherty first suggested teaming Gibson with Danny Glover, given Murtaugh had no set ethnicity in the script.
She arranged for Gibson to fly in from his home in Sydney while Glover was flown in from Chicago, where he was appearing in a play, to read through the script.
According to a June 2007 Vanity Fair magazine article, Bruce Willis was considered for the Riggs role.
This is referenced in the spoof of the Lethal Weapon films, Loaded Weapon 1.
Bruce (as John McClane) appears after the villains attack the wrong beach residence, looking for the protagonist.

According to Donner, "It took about two hours and by the time we were done, I was in seventh heaven.
They found innuendoes; they found laughter where I never saw it; they found tears where they didn't exist before; and, most importantly, they found a relationship — all in just one reading.
So if you ask about casting...
it was magical, just total dynamite.
"

Explains Gibson, "This particular story was a cut above others I had passed on, because the action is really a sideline which heightens the story of these two great characters.
I picture Riggs as an almost Chaplinesque figure, a guy who doesn't expect anything from life and even toys with the idea of taking his own.
He's not like these stalwarts who come down from Mt. Olympus and wreak havoc and go away.
He's somebody who doesn't look like he's set to go off until he actually does."

The draw for Glover was equally strong.
Fresh from his success as Mister in The Color Purple, he felt the role of Roger Murtaugh offered a whole new range of character expression and experience.
"
Aside from the chance to work with Mel, which turned out to be pure pleasure, one of the reasons I jumped at this project was the family aspect.
The chance to play intricate relationships and subtle humor that exist in every close family group was an intriguing challenge, as was playing a guy turning 50.
Murtaugh's a little cranky about his age until everything he loves is threatened.
His reawakening parallels Riggs'."

Both actors were signed by early spring 1986.
Gibson and Glover then flew home to pack, and, returning to Los Angeles, began an intensive two months of physical training and preparation.
Meanwhile, the crucial role of Joshua was settled when Gary Busey asked for a chance to read for the part.
An established star since his Academy Award-nominated performance in The Buddy Holly Story
, Busey had not auditioned for a film in years.
"
I had butterflies," he said.
"
I'd never played a bad guy.
And no one had seen me since I'd lost 60 pounds and got back into shape.
But I decided to take the initiative in order to have the opportunity to work with Dick, Joel, Mel and Danny.
I'm constantly looking for someone to pull the best performance out of me and any of those guys could.
They even talked me into dyeing my hair!"
In his E!
True Hollywood Story biography
, Busey says he was hired to play Joshua because they were looking for someone big and menacing enough to be a believable foe for Mel Gibson.
Busey also credits the film for reviving his failing film career.

Stunt coordinator Bobby Bass planned and supervised all phases of Gibson's and Glover's intense pre-production training; physical conditioning, weight workouts, and weapons handling and safety.
Bass also used his own military experiences to bring a greater depth of understanding to the Riggs character.
To familiarize the actors with the specialized skills and sensibilities acquired by undercover cops, arrangements were made for Gibson and Glover to spend time in the field accompanying working L.A.P.D. officers.
Throughout filming, technical advisers from the L.A.P.D. as well as the L.A. County Sheriff's Department worked closely with Donner and the actors to ensure authenticity.

===
Martial arts ===
Cedric Adams was the first technical adviser brought in. "
Adams thought the best possible way to show just how lethal Riggs really is — is to show his mastery of a form of martial arts never before seen onscreen," said Donner.
Donner wanted Riggs's style of fighting to be unique with the second assistant director Willie Simmons, who was interested in unusual forms of martial arts, choosing three martial arts styles.
Gibson and Busey were instructed in Capoeira by Adams, Jailhouse rock by Dennis Newsome and Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu by Rorion Gracie.
Bobby Bass, the stunt coordinator, a former US Army Special Forces instructor and judo champion, also provided training in various techniques.
At one point, the actors trained in between filming, for four hours a day for six weeks and did months of choreography.

==
Music ==
Michael Kamen, who just completed work on Highlander, composed the score for Lethal Weapon.
The guitar part of Riggs's theme was performed by Eric Clapton.
Kamen and Clapton had worked together on the music for the 1985 BBC TV series Edge of Darkness (the feature adaptation of which would later, by coincidence, star Mel Gibson).
The saxophone part of Murtaugh's theme was performed by David Sanborn.
The Christmas song "Jingle Bell Rock", performed by Bobby Helms, is played during the film's opening credits.
Honeymoon Suite's song, "Lethal Weapon," is played during the film's end credits without being credited.

==
Release ==


===
Awards ===
Released on March 6, 1987, Lethal Weapon was No.
1 at the box office for three weeks before Blind Date supplanted it.
It grossed $120.2 million worldwide and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Sound Mixing (Les Fresholtz, Dick Alexander, Vern Poore and Bill Nelson) (losing to The Last Emperor).
It is widely considered to be one of the best buddy cop films of all time, influencing numerous "buddy cop" films such as Hot Fuzz, Tango & Cash, Bad Boys and the Rush Hour series.

===
Critical reception ===
On Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 80% based on 56 reviews, with an average rating of 6.90/10.
The website's critical consensus reads, "The most successful installment in a phenomenally successful franchise, Lethal Weapon helped redefine action movies for the 1980s and 1990s.
"
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 68 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.
Variety wrote, "Lethal Weapon is a film teetering on the brink of absurdity when it gets serious, but thanks to its unrelenting energy and insistent drive, it never quite falls."

Richard Schickel of Time called it "Mad Max meets The Cosby Show", saying that it works better than expected.

Richard Harrington of The Washington Post described it as "a vivid, visceral reminder of just how exciting an action film can be".

At The New York Times, Janet Maslin wrote, "The film is all fast action, noisy stunts and huge, often unflattering close-ups, but it packs an undeniable wallop."
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four out of four stars, saying Donner "tops himself".
===
Home media ===
Lethal Weapon has been released on Betamax, VHS and DVD numerous times, along with a single Blu-ray Disc release.
The first DVD was released in 1997 and featured the film's theatrical version.
The Director's Cut was released in 2000.
Since then, numerous sets have been released that contain all four films in the series (featuring the same DVDs).
The theatrical version was also released on Blu-ray in 2006.

===
Alternate versions ===
An alternate opening and ending were both filmed and can be seen on the Lethal Weapon 4 DVD.
The alternate opening featured Martin Riggs drinking alone in a bar where he is accosted by a couple of thugs who attack him for his money, but are easily subdued by Riggs.
Director Richard Donner felt the film should open with a brighter look at Riggs, and replaced the bar scene with the scene in which Riggs awakens in his trailer.
The alternate ending featured Riggs telling Murtaugh not to retire.
Without even thinking about the possibility of sequels, Donner decided that Riggs and Murtaugh's relationship is one of friendship, and filmed the ending that appears in the completed film.

In addition to the film's theatrical release, an extended Director's Cut version was released later on DVD.
The Director's Cut version is longer (117 minutes) than the original theatrical release version (110 minutes), and features additional scenes.
One extended scene depicts Riggs dispatching a sniper who had been firing at children in a playground.
In another scene, Riggs picks up a street-walking prostitute, but instead of having sex with her, he takes her home to watch The Three Stooges on TV, thus illustrating his loneliness following the death of his wife.

==
Reboot ==
On January 19, 2011, Warner Bros. announced plans to reboot the Lethal Weapon franchise without Gibson and Glover.
The new franchise was set to feature the same characters but a brand new cast.
Will Beall was hired to write the script.
A television version premiered in September 2016 on Fox starring Clayne Crawford as Martin Riggs, Damon Wayans as Roger Murtaugh, and Thomas Lennon as Leo Getz.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Lethal Weapon at IMDb
Lethal Weapon at AllMovie
Lethal Weapon at Box Office Mojo
The following outline is provided as an overview of, and topical guide to, applied physics:
Applied physics – physics intended for a particular technological or practical use.

It is usually considered as a bridge or a connection between "pure" physics and engineering.
Applied Physics – is the proper name of a journal founded and edited by Helmut K.V. Lotsch in 1972 and published by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York from 1973 onTopics in Applied Physics – is the proper name of a series of quasi-monographs founded by Helmut K.V. Lotsch and published by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York


==
What type of thing is applied physics?
==
Applied physics can be described as all of the following:

Branch of science –
Branch of physics –
Branch of applied science –
Branch of engineering –


==
Branches of applied physics ==
Fields and areas of research include:

Accelerator physics –
Acoustics –
Agrophysics –
Analog electronics –
Astrodynamics –
Astrophysics –
Ballistics –
Biophysics –
Communication physics –
Computational physics –
Condensed matter physics –
Control theory –
Digital electronics –
Econophysics –
Experimental physics –
Engineering physics –
Fiber optics –
Fluid dynamics –
Force microscopy and imaging –
Geophysics –
Laser physics –
Medical physics –
Metrological physics –
Microfluidics –
Nanotechnology –
Nondestructive testing –
Nuclear engineering –
Nuclear technology –
Optics –
Optoelectronics –
Petrophysics –
Photonics –
Photovoltaics –
Plasma physics –
Quantum electronics –
Semiconductor physics and devices –
Soil physics –
Solid state physics –
Space physics –
Spintronics –
Superconductors –
Vehicle dynamics –


== Applied physics institutions and organizations ==
International Union of Pure and Applied Physics
Harvard School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
National Institute of Physics, University of the Philippines Diliman
Institute of Mathematical Science and Physics, University of the Philippines Los Baños
School of Pure and Applied Physics, Mahatma Gandhi University
Institute of Applied Physics and Computational Mathematics, Beijing,
China
Institute of Applied Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine
School of Pure and Applied Physics, University of KwaZulu-Natal
Department of Applied Physics, University of Karachi
Department of Applied Physics and Materials Science,
Northern Arizona University


==
Applied physics publications ==


===
Applied physics journals ===
American Institute of Physics
Journal of Applied Physics
Applied Physics Letters
Japan Society of Applied Physics
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics
Applied Physics Express
IOP Publishing
Journal of Physics D:
Applied Physics
Springer Berlin Heidelberg New York
Applied Physics
Applied Physics
A
Applied Physics B
Topics in Applied Physics


==
Persons influential in applied physics ==
Nikola Tesla
Michael Faraday


==
See also ==
Engineering physics/Engineering science
Outline of applied science
Outline of engineering
Outline of physics


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Applied physics at Harvard
Applied physics at Stanford University
Applied physics at Caltech
Applied physics at Columbia University
Sample Plans of Study for the Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Physics
, Applied Option - Oklahoma State University
The arms industry, also known as the arms trade, is a global industry which manufactures and sells weapons and military technology, and is a major component of the military–industrial complex.
It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities.
Arms-producing companies, also referred to as arms dealers, or as the military industry, produce arms for the armed forces of states and for civilians.
Departments of government also operate in the arms industry, buying and selling weapons, munitions and other military items.
An arsenal is a place where arms and ammunition - whether privately or publicly owned - are made, maintained and repaired, stored, or issued, in any combination.
Products of the arms industry include guns, artillery, ammunition, missiles, military aircraft, military vehicles, ships, electronic systems, night-vision devices, holographic weapon sights, laser rangefinders, laser sights, hand grenades, landmines and more.
The arms industry also provides other logistical and operational support.

The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) estimated military expenditures as of 2018 at $1822 billion.
This represented a relative decline from 1990, when military expenditures made up 4% of world GDP.
Part of the money goes to the procurement of military hardware and services from the military industry.
The combined arms-sales of the top 100 largest arms-producing companies and military services companies (excluding China) totaled $420 billion in 2018, according to SIPRI.
This was
4.6 percent higher than sales in 2017 and marks the fourth consecutive year of growth in Top 100 arms sales.
In 2004 over $30 billion were spent in the international arms-trade (a figure that excludes domestic sales of arms).
According to the institute, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2014–18 was 7.8 percent higher than in 2009–13 and 23 percent higher than in 2004–2008.
The five largest exporters in 2014–18 were the United States, Russia, France, Germany and China whilst the five biggest importers were Saudi Arabia, India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria.
Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms-industry to supply their own military forces.
Some countries also have a substantial legal or illegal domestic trade in weapons for use by their own citizens, primarily for self-defense, hunting or sporting purposes.
Illegal trade in small arms occurs in many countries and regions affected by political instability.
The Small Arms Survey estimates that 875 million small arms circulate worldwide, produced by more than 1,000 companies from nearly 100 countries.
Governments award contracts to supply their country's military; such arms contracts can become of substantial political importance.
The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development of what U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower described in 1961 as a military-industrial complex, where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked, similarly to the European multilateral defense procurement.
Various corporations, some publicly held, others private, bid for these contracts, which are often worth many billions of dollars.
Sometimes, as with the contract for the international Joint Strike Fighter, a competitive tendering process takes place, with the decision made on the merits of the designs submitted by the companies involved.
Other times, no bidding or competition takes place.

==
History ==
During the early modern period, England, France, the Netherlands and some states in Germany became self-sufficient in arms production, with diffusion and migration of skilled workers to more peripheral countries such as Portugal and Russia.

The modern arms industry emerged in the second half of the nineteenth century as a product of the creation and expansion of the first large military-industrial companies.
As smaller countries (and even newly industrializing countries like Russia and Japan) could no longer produce cutting-edge military equipment with their indigenous resources and capacity, they increasingly began to contract the manufacture of military equipment, such as battleships, artillery pieces and rifles to foreign firms.

In 1854, the British government awarded a contract to the Elswick Ordnance Company for the supply of his latest breech loading rifled artillery pieces.
This galvanized the private sector into weapons production, with the surplus being increasingly exported to foreign countries.
Armstrong became one of the first international arms dealers, selling his weapon systems to governments across the world from Brazil to Japan.
In 1884, he opened a shipyard at Elswick to specialize in warship production—at the time, it was the only factory in the world that could build a battleship and arm it completely.
The factory produced warships for many navies, including the Imperial Japanese Navy.
Several Armstrong cruisers played an important role in defeating the Russian fleet at the Battle of Tsushima in 1905.

In the American Civil War in 1861 the North had a small but cognizable advantage over the south due to its ability to produce (in relatively small numbers) breech-loading rifles for use against the muzzle-loading rifled muskets
the were largely the sole variety of shoulder arm utilized by the south.
This began the transition to industrially produced mechanized weapons such as the Gatling gun.
This industrial innovation in the defense industry was adopted by Prussia in 1866 & 1870–71 in its defeat of Austria and France respectively.
By this time the machine gun had begun entering into the militaries.
The first example of its effectiveness was in 1899 during the Boer War and in 1905 during the Russo-Japanese War.
However, Germany were leaders in innovation of weapons and used this innovation nearly defeating the allies in World War I.
In 1885, France decided to capitalize on this increasingly lucrative form of trade and repealed its ban on weapon exports.
The regulatory framework for the period up to the First World War was characterized by a laissez-faire policy that placed little obstruction in the way of weapons exports.
Due to the carnage of World War I, arms traders began to be regarded with odium as "merchants of death" and were accused of having instigated and perpetuated the war in order to maximize their profits from arms sales.
An inquiry into these allegations in Britain failed to find evidence to support them.
However, the sea change in attitude about war more generally meant that governments began to control and regulate the trade themselves.

The volume of the arms trade greatly increased during the 20th century, and it began to be used as a political tool, especially during the Cold War where the United States and the USSR supplied weapons to their proxies across the world, particularly third world countries (see Nixon Doctrine).

==
Sectors ==
===
Land-based weapon ===
This category includes everything from light arms to heavy artillery, and the majority of producers are small.
Many are located in third world countries.
International trade in handguns, machine guns, tanks, armored personnel carriers, and other relatively inexpensive weapons is substantial.
There is relatively little regulation at the international level, and as a result, many weapons fall into the hands of organized crime, rebel forces, terrorists, or regimes under sanctions.

====
Small arms ====
The Control Arms Campaign, founded by Amnesty International, Oxfam, and the International Action Network on Small Arms, estimated in 2003 that there are over 639 million small arms in circulation, and that over 1,135 companies based in more than 98 different countries manufacture small arms as well as their various components and ammunition.

===
Aerospace systems ===
Encompassing military aircraft (both land-based and naval aviation), conventional missiles, and military satellites, this is the most technologically advanced sector of the market.
It is also the least competitive from an economic standpoint, with a handful of companies dominating the entire market.
The top clients and major producers are virtually all located in the western world and Russia, with the United States easily in the first place.
Prominent aerospace firms include Rolls Royce, HAL(Hindustan aeronautics limited) BAE Systems, Dassault Aviation, Sukhoi, Mikoyan, EADS, Leonardo, Thales Group, Lockheed Martin,  Northrop Grumman and Boeing.
There are also several multinational consortia mostly involved in the manufacturing of fighter jets, such as the Eurofighter.
The largest military contract in history, signed in October 2001, involved the development of the Joint Strike Fighter.

===
Naval systems ===
Some of the world's great powers maintain substantial naval forces to provide a global presence, with the largest nations possessing aircraft carriers, nuclear submarines and advanced anti-air defense systems.
The vast majority of military ships are conventionally powered, but some are nuclear-powered.
There is also a large global market in second-hand naval vessels, generally purchased by developing countries from Western governments.

==
Cybersecurity industry ==
The cybersecurity industry is becoming the most important defense industry as cyber attacks are being deemed as one of the greatest risks to defense in the next ten years as cited by the NATO review in 2013.
Therefore, high levels of investment has been placed in the cybersecurity industry to produce new software to protect the ever-growing transition to digitally run hardware.
For the military industry it is vital that protections are used for systems used for reconnaissance, surveillance and intelligence gathering.

Nevertheless, cyber attacks and cyber attackers have become more advanced in their field using techniques such as Dynamic Trojan Horse Network (DTHN) Internet Worm, Zero-Day Attack, and Stealth Bot.
As a result, the cybersecurity industry has had to improve the defense technologies to remove any vulnerability to cyber attacks using systems such as the Security of Information (SIM), Next-Generation Firewalls (NGFWs) and DDoS techniques.

As the threat to computers grows, the demand for cyber protection will rise, resulting in the growth of the cybersecurity industry.
It is expected that the industry will be dominated by the defense and homeland security agencies that will make up 40% of the industry.

==
International arms transfers ==
According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–14 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009.
The five biggest exporters in 2010–2014 were the United States, Russia, China, Germany and France, and the five biggest importers were India, Saudi Arabia, China, the United Arab Emirates and Pakistan.
The flow of arms to the Middle East increased by 87 percent between 2009–13 and 2014–18, while there was a decrease in flows to all other regions: Africa, the Americas, Asia and Oceania, and Europe.
SIPRI has identified 67 countries as exporters of major weapons in 2014–18.
The top 5 exporters during the period were responsible for 75 percent of all arms exports.
The composition of the five largest exporters of arms changed between 2014–18 remained unchanged compared to 2009–13, although their combined total exports of major arms were 10 percent higher.
In 2014–18 there can be seen significant increases in arms exports from the US, France and Germany, while Chinese exports rose marginally and Russian exports decreased.
In 2014–18, 155 countries (about three-quarters of all countries) imported major weapons.
The top 5 recipients accounted for 33 percent of the total arms imports during the period.
The top five arms importers - Saudi Arabia, India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria - accounted for 35 percent of total arms imports in 2014–18.
Of these, Saudi Arabia and India were among the top five importers in both 2009–13 and 2014–18.

In 2014–18, the volume of major arms international transfers was 7.8 percent higher than in 2009-13 and 23 percent than that in 2004–08.
The largest arms importer was Saudi Arabia, importing arms majorly from the United States, United Kingdom and France.
Between 2009–13 and 2014–18, the flow of arms to the Middle East increased by 87 percent.
Also including India, Egypt, Australia and Algeria, the top five importers received 35 percent of the total arms imports, during 2014–18.
Besides, the largest exporters were the United States, Russia, France, Germany and China.

==
World's largest arms exporters ==
Figures are SIPRI Trend Indicator Values (TIVs) expressed in millions.
These numbers may not represent real financial flows as prices for the underlying arms can be as low as zero in the case of military aid.
The following are estimates from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.

Overall global arms exports rose of about 6 per-cent in the last 5 years compared to the period 2010-2014 and increased by 20 per-cent since 2005–2009.Note that rankings for exporters below a billion dollars are less meaningful, as they can be swayed by single contracts.
A much more accurate picture of export volume, free from yearly fluctuations, is presented by 5-year moving averages.

Next to SIPRI there are several other sources that provide data on international transfers of arms.
These include national reports by national governments about arms exports, the UN register on conventional arms and an annual publication by the U.S. Congressional Research Service that includes data on arms exports to developing countries as compiled by U.S. intelligence agencies.
Due to the different methodologies and definitions used different sources often provide significantly different data.

===
World’s largest postwar arms exporter ===
SIPRI uses the "trend-indicator values" (TIV).
These are based on the known unit production costs of weapons and represent the transfer of military resources rather than the financial value of the transfer.

==
World's largest arms importers ==
Units are in Trend Indicator Values expressed as millions of U.S. dollars at 1990s prices.
These numbers may not represent real financial flows as prices for the underlying arms can be as low as zero in the case of military aid.

Please note that arms import rankings fluctuate heavily as countries enter and exit wars.
Export data tend to be less volatile as exporters tend to be more technologically advanced and have stable production flows.
5-year moving averages present a much more accurate picture of import volume, free from yearly fluctuations.

==
List of major weapon manufacturers ==
This is a list of the world's largest arms manufacturers and other military service companies who profit the most from the War economy, their origin is shown as well.
The information is based on a list published by the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute for 2020.
The list provided by the SIPRI
The numbers are in billions of US dollars.

==
Arms control ==
Arms control refers to international restrictions upon the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation and usage of small arms, conventional weapons, and weapons of mass destruction.
It is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy, which seeks to persuade governments to accept such limitations through agreements and treaties, although it may also be forced upon non-consenting governments.

===
Notable international arms control treaties ===
Geneva Protocol on chemical and biological weapons, 1925
Outer Space Treaty, signed and entered into force 1967
Biological Weapons Convention, signed 1972, entered into force 1975
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), 1987
Chemical Weapons Convention, signed 1993, entered into force 1997
Ottawa Treaty on anti-personnel land mines, signed 1997, entered into force 1999
New START Treaty, signed by Russia and the United States in April 2010, entered into force in February 2011
Arms Trade Treaty, concluded in 2013, entered into force on 24 December 2014.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Amnesty International:
Arms Trade
The British Library – Defence Industry Guide (sources of information)
FAS's Arms Sales Monitoring Project
The Guardian's arms trade report
List of participators of the Defense System and Equipment international conference in London, 2003
SIPRI arms industry reports and database
SIPRI list of Top 100 arms-producing companies
SPADE Defense Index (NYSE:
DXS) Defense sector market index
The True Cost of Global Arms Trade [infographic included]
UN Office for Disarmament Affairs
U.S. Arms Sales to the Third World from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives
World Map and Chart of Arms exports per country by Lebanese-economy-forum, World Bank data
World Security Institute's Center for Defense Information
Z. Yihdego, Arms Trade and International Law, Hart:
OXford, 2007
Music as a Weapon is a series of concert tours created by the American metal band Disturbed.
There have been seven editions of the tour, five in North America and two in Australasia.
The name of the tour is from the lyrics of "Droppin' Plates" on Disturbed's first album, The Sickness.

==
Line-ups
==
===
Music as a Weapon (2001) ===
Disturbed
Drowning Pool
Adema
Stereomud
Systematic


=== Music as a Weapon II (2003) ==
=
Disturbed
Chevelle
Taproot
Ünloco


===
Music as a Weapon III (2006) ===
Disturbed
Stone Sour
Flyleaf
Nonpoint


===
Music as a Weapon:
Australia and New Zealand (2008) ===
For a list of tour dates, see Indestructible Tour.

Disturbed
P.O.D.
Alter Bridge
Redline
Behind Crimson Eyes


=== Music as a Weapon IV (2009) ==
=
For a list of tour dates, see Indestructible Tour.

Disturbed
Killswitch Engage
Lacuna Coil
Chimaira
Suicide Silence
Spineshank
Crooked X
Bury Your Dead
Born of Osiris
After the Burial


=== Music as a Weapon V (2011) ===
For a list of tour dates, see Asylum Tour.

Disturbed
Korn
Sevendust
In This Moment
StillWell (second leg
only)This was the first time Music as a Weapon had co-headliners, Disturbed and Korn.

=== Music as a Weapon:
Australia and New Zealand (2011) ===
For a list of tour dates, see Asylum Tour.

Disturbed
Trivium
As I Lay
Dying
Forgiven Rival
These Four Walls


== Live albums ==


=== Music as a Weapon II ===
Music as a Weapon II was recorded as a live album and DVD, created by Disturbed.
It was recorded at The Aragon in Chicago in 2003, and released in 2004.
It contains Disturbed's cover of Metallica's "Fade to Black" and the previously unreleased song "Dehumanized".
The DVD also contains Disturbed's video for their single "Liberate".
This was Disturbed's last release with bass guitarist Steve Kmak.
It was also Ünloco's final release before splitting up.

====
Track listing ====


====
Chart positions ====


==
References ==
This is a list of active Russian military aircraft currently in service with three branches of the Russian Armed Forces.
It also includes lists of Russia's experimental aircraft and aircraft currently under development.

==
Russian Air Force ==


==
Russian Naval Aviation ==


==
Russian Ground Forces ==


==
Developmental aircraft ==


==
Experimental aircraft ==


==
See also ==
List of active Russian Air Force aircraft
List of military aircraft of the Soviet Union and the CIS
Lists of currently active military equipment by country


==
References ==
The Ground Forces of the Russian Federation (Russian:
Сухопутные войска Российской Федерации, tr.
Sukhoputnye Voyska Rossiyskoy
Federatsii, SVR) are the land forces of the Russian Armed Forces.
It is also simply referred to as the Russian Army (Russian:
Русская армия, tr.
Russkaya armiya).

==
Mission ==
The primary responsibilities of the Russian Ground Forces are the protection of the state borders, combat on land, the security of occupied territories, and the defeat of enemy troops.
The Ground Forces must be able to achieve these goals both in nuclear war and non-nuclear war, especially without the use of weapons of mass destruction.
Furthermore, they must be capable of protecting the national interests of Russia within the framework of its international obligations.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces is officially tasked with the following objectives:
the training of troops for combat, on the basis of tasks determined by the Armed Forces' General Staff
the improvement of troops' structure and composition, and the optimization of their numbers, including for special troops
the development of military theory and practice
the development and introduction of training field manuals, tactics, and methodology
the improvement of operational and combat training of the Ground Forces


==
History ==
As the Soviet Union dissolved, efforts were made to keep the Soviet Armed Forces as a single military structure for the new Commonwealth of Independent States.
The last Minister of Defence of the Soviet Union, Marshal Yevgeny Shaposhnikov, was appointed supreme commander of the CIS Armed Forces in December 1991.
Among the numerous treaties signed by the former republics, in order to direct the transition period, was a temporary agreement on general purpose forces, signed in Minsk on 14 February 1992.
However, once it became clear that Ukraine (and potentially the other republics) was determined to undermine the concept of joint general purpose forces and form their own armed forces, the new Russian government moved to form its own armed forces.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin signed a decree forming the Russian Ministry of Defence on 7 May 1992, establishing the Russian Ground Forces along with the other branches of the military.
At the same time, the General Staff was in the process of withdrawing tens of thousands of personnel from the Group of Soviet Forces in Germany, the Northern Group of Forces in Poland, the Central Group of Forces in Czechoslovakia, the Southern Group of Forces in Hungary, and from Mongolia.

Thirty-seven divisions had to be withdrawn from the four groups of forces and the Baltic States, and four military districts—totalling 57 divisions—were handed over to Belarus and Ukraine.
Some idea of the scale of the withdrawal can be gained from the division list.
For the dissolving Soviet Ground Forces, the withdrawal from the former Warsaw Pact states and the Baltic states was an extremely demanding, expensive, and debilitating process.
As the military districts that remained in Russia after the collapse of the Union consisted mostly of the mobile cadre formations, the Ground Forces were, to a large extent, created by relocating the formerly full-strength formations from Eastern Europe to under-resourced districts.
However, the facilities in those districts were inadequate to house the flood of personnel and equipment returning from abroad, and many units "were unloaded from the rail wagons into empty fields.
"

The need for destruction and transfer of large amounts of weaponry under the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe also necessitated great adjustments.

=== Post-Soviet reform plans ===
The Ministry of Defence newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda published a reform plan on 21 July 1992.
Later one commentator said it was "hastily" put together by the General Staff "to satisfy the public demand for radical changes.
"
The General Staff, from that point, became a bastion of conservatism, causing a build-up of troubles that later became critical.
The reform plan advocated a change from an Army-Division-Regiment structure to a Corps-Brigade arrangement.
The new structures were to be more capable in a situation with no front line, and more capable of independent action at all levels.
Cutting out a level of command, omitting two out of three higher echelons between the theatre headquarters and the fighting battalions, would produce economies, increase flexibility, and simplify command-and-control arrangements.
The expected changeover to the new structure proved to be rare, irregular, and sometimes reversed.
The new brigades that appeared were mostly divisions that had broken down until they happened to be at the proposed brigade strengths.
New divisions—such as the new 3rd Motor Rifle Division in the Moscow Military District, formed on the basis of disbanding tank formations—were formed, rather than new brigades.

Few of the reforms planned in the early 1990s eventuated, for three reasons: Firstly, there was an absence of firm civilian political guidance, with President Yeltsin primarily interested in ensuring that the Armed Forces were controllable and loyal, rather than reformed.
Secondly, declining funding worsened the progress.
Finally, there was no firm consensus within the military about what reforms should be implemented.
General Pavel Grachev, the first Russian Minister of Defence (1992–96), broadly advertised reforms, yet wished to preserve the old Soviet-style Army, with large numbers of low-strength formations and continued mass conscription.
The General Staff and the armed services tried to preserve Soviet era doctrines, deployments, weapons, and missions in the absence of solid new guidance.
British military expert, Michael Orr, claims that the hierarchy had great difficulty in fully understanding the changed situation, due to their education.
As graduates of Soviet military academies, they received great operational and staff training, but in political terms they had learned an ideology, rather than a wide understanding of international affairs.
Thus, the generals—focused on NATO expansion in Eastern Europe—could not adapt themselves and the Armed Forces to the new opportunities and challenges they faced.

===
Internal crisis of 1993 ===
The Russian Ground Forces reluctantly became involved in the Russian constitutional crisis of 1993 after President Yeltsin issued an unconstitutional decree dissolving the Russian Parliament, following its resistance to Yeltsin's consolidation of power and his neo-liberal reforms.
A group of deputies, including Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, barricaded themselves inside the parliament building.
While giving public support to the President, the Armed Forces, led by General Grachev, tried to remain neutral, following the wishes of the officer corps.
The military leadership were unsure of both the rightness of Yeltsin's cause and the reliability of their forces, and had to be convinced at length by Yeltsin to attack the parliament.

When the attack was finally mounted, forces from five different divisions around Moscow were used, and the personnel involved were mostly officers and senior non-commissioned officers.
There were also indications that some formations deployed into Moscow only under protest.
However, once the parliament building had been stormed, the parliamentary leaders arrested, and temporary censorship imposed, Yeltsin succeeded in retaining power.

===
Chechen Wars ===


====
First Chechen War ====
The Chechen people had never willingly accepted Russian rule.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the Chechens declared independence in November 1991, under the leadership of a former Air Forces officer, General Dzhokar Dudayev.
The continuation of Chechen independence was seen as reducing Moscow's authority; Chechnya became perceived as a haven for criminals, and a hard-line group within the Kremlin began advocating war.
A Security Council meeting was held 29 November 1994, where Yeltsin ordered the Chechens to disarm, or else Moscow would restore order.
Defense Minister Pavel Grachev assured Yeltsin that he would "take Grozny with one airborne assault regiment in two hours.
"The
operation began on 11 December 1994 and, by 31 December, Russian forces were entering Grozny, the Chechen capital.
The 131st Motor Rifle Brigade was ordered to make a swift push for the centre of the city, but was then virtually destroyed in Chechen ambushes.
After finally seizing Grozny amid fierce resistance, Russian troops moved on to other Chechen strongholds.
When Chechen militants took hostages in the Budyonnovsk hospital hostage crisis in Stavropol Kray in June 1995, peace looked possible for a time, but the fighting continued.
Following this incident, the separatists were referred to as insurgents or terrorists within Russia.

Dzhokar Dudayev was assassinated in a Russian airstrike on 21 April 1996, and that summer, a Chechen attack retook Grozny.
Alexander Lebed, then Secretary of the Security Council, began talks with the Chechen rebel leader Aslan Maskhadov in August 1996 and signed an agreement on 22/23 August; by the end of that month, the fighting ended.

The formal ceasefire was signed in the Dagestani town of Khasavyurt on 31 August 1996, stipulating that a formal agreement on relations between the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria and the Russian federal government need not be signed until late 2001.

Writing some years later, Dmitri Trenin and Aleksei Malashenko described the Russian military's performance in Chechniya as "grossly deficient at all levels, from commander-in-chief to the drafted private."
The Ground Forces' performance in the First Chechen War has been assessed by a British academic as "appallingly bad".

Writing six years later, Michael Orr said "one of the root causes of the Russian failure in 1994–96 was their inability to raise and deploy a properly trained military force."
====
Second Chechen War ====
The Second Chechen War began in August 1999 after Chechen militias invaded neighboring Dagestan, followed quickly in early September by a series of four terrorist bombings across Russia.
This prompted Russian military action against the alleged Chechen culprits.

In the first Chechen war, the Russians primarily laid waste to an area with artillery and airstrikes before advancing the land forces.
Improvements were made in the Ground Forces between 1996 and 1999; when the Second Chechen War started, instead of hastily assembled "composite regiments" dispatched with little or no training, whose members had never seen service together, formations were brought up to strength with replacements, put through preparatory training, and then dispatched.
Combat performance improved accordingly, and large-scale opposition was crippled.

Most of the prominent past Chechen separatist leaders had died or been killed, including former President Aslan Maskhadov and leading warlord and terrorist attack mastermind Shamil Basayev.
However, small-scale conflict continued to drag on; as of November 2007, it had spread across other parts of the Russian Caucasus.
It was a divisive struggle, with at least one senior military officer dismissed for being unresponsive to government commands:
General Colonel Gennady Troshev was dismissed in 2002 for refusing to move from command of the North Caucasus Military District to command of the less important Siberian Military District.
The Second Chechen War was officially declared ended on 16 April 2009.

===
Reforms under Sergeyev ===
When Igor Sergeyev arrived as Minister of Defence in 1997, he initiated what were seen as real reforms under very difficult conditions.

The number of military educational establishments, virtually unchanged since 1991, was reduced, and the amalgamation of the Siberian and Trans-Baikal Military Districts was ordered.
A larger number of army divisions were given "constant readiness" status, which was supposed to bring them up to 80 percent manning and 100 percent equipment holdings.
Sergeyev announced in August 1998 that there would be six divisions and four brigades on 24-hour alert by the end of that year.
Three levels of forces were announced; constant readiness, low-level, and strategic reserves.
However, personnel quality—even in these favored units—continued to be a problem.
Lack of fuel for training and a shortage of well-trained junior officers hampered combat effectiveness.
However, concentrating on the interests of his old service, the Strategic Rocket Forces, Sergeyev directed the disbanding of the Ground Forces headquarters itself in December 1997.
The disbandment was a "military nonsense", in Orr's words, "justifiable only in terms of internal politics within the Ministry of Defence".
The Ground Forces' prestige declined as a result, as the headquarters disbandment implied—at least in theory—that the Ground Forces no longer ranked equally with the Air Force and Navy.

===
Reforms under Putin ===
Under President Vladimir Putin, more funds were committed, the Ground Forces Headquarters was reestablished, and some progress on professionalisation occurred.
Plans called for reducing mandatory service to 18 months in 2007, and to one year by 2008, but a mixed Ground Force, of both contract soldiers and conscripts, would remain.
(
As of 2009, the length of conscript service was 12 months.)Funding increases began in 1999; after some recovery in the Russian economy and the associated rise in income, especially from oil, "Russia's officially reported defence spending [rose] in nominal terms at least, for the first time since the formation of the Russian Federation".
The budget rose from 141 billion rubles in 2000 to 219 billion rubles in 2001.
Much of this funding has been spent on personnel—there have been several pay rises, starting with a 20-percent rise authorised in 2001; the current professionalisation programme, including 26,000 extra sergeants, was expected to cost at least 31 billion roubles ($1.1 billion USD).
Increased funding has been spread across the whole budget, with personnel spending being matched by greater procurement and research and development funding.

However, in 2004, Alexander Goltz said that, given the insistence of the hierarchy on trying to force contract soldiers into the old conscript pattern, there is little hope of a fundamental strengthening of the Ground Forces.
He further elaborated that they are expected to remain, to some extent, a military liability and "Russia's most urgent social problem" for some time to come.
Goltz summed up by saying: "All of this means that the Russian armed forces are not ready to defend the country and that, at the same time, they are also dangerous for Russia.
Top military personnel demonstrate neither the will nor the ability to effect fundamental changes.
"More money is arriving both for personnel and equipment; Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin stated in June 2008 that monetary allowances for servicemen in permanent-readiness units will be raised significantly.
In May 2007, it was announced that enlisted pay would rise to 65,000 roubles (US$2,750) per month, and the pay of officers on combat duty in rapid response units would rise to 100,000–150,000 roubles (US$4,230–$6,355) per month.
However, while the move to one year conscript service would disrupt dedovshchina, it is unlikely that bullying will disappear altogether without significant societal change.
Other assessments from the same source point out that the Russian Armed Forces faced major disruption in 2008, as demographic change hindered plans to reduce the term of conscription from two years to one.
===
Serdyukov reforms ===
A major reorganisation of the force began in 2007 by the Minister for Defence Anatoliy Serdyukov, with the aim of converting all divisions into brigades, and cutting surplus officers and establishments.
However, this affected units of continuous readiness (Russian: ЧПГ – части постоянной готовности) only.
It is intended to create 39 to 40 such brigades by 1 January 2016, including 39 all-arms brigades, 21 artillery and MRL brigades, seven brigades of army air defence forces, 12 communication brigades, and two electronic warfare brigades.
In addition, the 18th Machine Gun Artillery Division stationed in the Far East remained, and there will be an additional 17 separate regiments.
The reform has been called "unprecedented".

In the course of the reorganization, the 4-chain command structure (military district – field army – division – regiment) that was used until then was replaced with a 3-chain structure: strategic command – operational command – brigade.
Brigades are supposed to be used as mobile permanent-readiness units capable of fighting independently with the support of highly mobile task forces or together with other brigades under joint command.
In a statement on 4 September 2009, RGF Commander-in-Chief Vladimir Boldyrev said that half of the Russian land forces were reformed by 1 June and that 85 brigades of constant combat preparedness had already been created.
Among them are the combined-arms brigade, missile brigades, assault brigades and electronic warfare brigades.

===
Reforms Under Sergey Shoygu ===
After Sergey Shoygu took over the role of minister of defense, the reforms Serdyukov had implemented were redirected and corrected.
Sergey Shoygu replaced the purpose of the reforms to instead cover military training.
Sergey Shoygu also has helped restore trust with senior officers as well as the defense ministry.
He did this a number of ways but one of the ways was integrating himself by wearing a military uniform.
Sergey Shoygu helped improve operational readiness by ordering 750 military exercises including some that are very large (Vostok 2018).
The exercises also seemed to have helped validate the general direction of reform.
the effect of this readiness was seen during Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014.
Since Serdyukov had already completed the unpopular reforms (military downsizing and reorganization), it had been relatively easy for Sergey Shoygu to be conciliatory with the officer corps and Ministry of Defense.
Rearmament has been a important goal of reform.
With the goal of 70% modernization by 2020
This was one of the main goals of these reforms.
From 1998 to 2001 The Russian Army received almost no new equipment.
Sergey Shoygu took a less confrontational approach with the defense industry.
By showing better flexibility on terms and pricing, the awarding of new contracts for the upcoming period was much better.
Sergey Shoygu promised that future contracts would be awarded primarily to domestic firms.
While easing tensions, these concessions also weakened incentives for companies to improve performance.

==
Structure ==
The President of Russia is the Supreme Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation.
The Main Command (Glavkomat) of the Ground Forces, based in Moscow, directs activities.
This body was disbanded in 1997, but reformed by President Putin in 2001 by appointing Colonel General Nikolai Kormiltsev as the commander-in-chief of the ground forces and also as a deputy minister of defense.
Kormiltsev handed over command to Colonel General (later General of the Army)
Alexey Maslov in 2004, and
in a realignment of responsibilities, the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief lost his position as a deputy minister of defence.
Like Kormiltsev, while serving as Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief Maslov has been promoted to General of the Army.

In January 2014, the acting commander of the Russian Ground Forces was Lieutenant General Sergei Istrakov, who was appointed by Russian president Vladimir Putin upon the dismissal of former commander Colonel General Vladimir Chirkin over corruption charges in December 2013.
Istrakov handed over his position to a new commander on 2 May 2014, Colonel General Oleg Salyukov.

The Main Command of the Ground Forces consists of the Main Staff of the Ground Troops, and departments for Peacekeeping Forces, Armaments of the Ground Troops, Rear Services of the Ground Troops, Cadres of the Ground Troops (personnel), Indoctrination Work, and Military Education.
There were also a number of directorates which used to be commanded by the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief in his capacity as a deputy defence minister.
They included NBC Protection Troops of the Armed Forces, Engineer Troops of the Armed Forces, and Troop Air Defence, as well as several others.
Their exact command status is now unknown.

===
Branches of service ===
The branches of service include motorized rifles, tanks, artillery and rocket forces, troop air defense, special corps (reconnaissance, signals, radioelectronic warfare, engineering, nuclear, biological and chemical protection, logistical support, automobile, and the protection of the rear), special forces, military units, and logistical establishments.
The Motorised Rifle Troops, the most numerous branch of service, constitutes the nucleus of Ground Forces' battle formations.
They are equipped with powerful armament for destruction of ground-based and aerial targets, missile complexes, tanks, artillery and mortars, anti-tank guided missiles, anti-aircraft missile systems and installations, and means of reconnaissance and control.
It is estimated that there are currently 19 motor rifle divisions, and the Navy now has several motor rifle formations under its command in the Ground and Coastal Defence Forces of the Baltic Fleet, the Northeastern Group of Troops and Forces on the Kamchatka Peninsula and other areas of the extreme northeast.
Also present are a large number of mobilisation divisions and brigades, known as "Bases for Storage of Weapons and Equipment", that in peacetime only have enough personnel assigned to guard the site and maintain the weapons.

The Tank Troops are the main impact force of the Ground Forces and a powerful means of armed struggle, intended for the accomplishment of the most important combat tasks.
As of 2007, there were three tank divisions in the force: the 4th and 10th within the Moscow Military District, and 5th Guards "Don" in the Siberian MD.

The 2nd Guards Tank Division in the Siberian Military District and the 21st Tank Division in the Far Eastern MD were disbanded.

The Artillery and Rocket Forces provide the Ground Forces' main firepower.
The Ground Forces currently include five or six static defence machine-gun/artillery divisions and seemingly now one division of field artillery—the 34th Guards in the Moscow MD.
The previous 12th in the Siberian MD, and the 15th in the Far Eastern MD, seem to have disbanded.
The Air Defense Troops (PVO) are one of the basic weapons for the destruction of enemy air forces.
They consist of surface-to-air missiles, anti-aircraft artillery and radio-technical units and subdivisions.
Army Aviation, while intended for the direct support of the Ground Forces, has been under the control of the Air Forces (VVS) since 2003.
However, by 2015, Army Aviation will have been transferred back to the Ground Forces and 18 new aviation brigades will have been added.
Of the around 1,000 new helicopters that have been ordered under the State Armament Programmes, 900 will be for the Army Aviation.
The Spetsnaz GRU serve under the Ground Forces in peacetime and at the same time are directly subordinated to the Main Directorate of Intelligence (GRU) and will fall under GRU operational control during wartime operations or under special circumstances.
The Ground Forces currently fields 7 spetsnaz brigades of varying sizes and one spetsnaz regiment.

=== Dispositions since 2010 ===
As a result of the 2008 Russian military reforms, the ground forces now consist of armies subordinate to the four new military districts: (Western, Southern, Central, and Eastern Military Districts).
The new districts have the role of 'operational strategic commands,' which command the Ground Forces as well as the Naval Forces and part of the Air and Air Defence Forces within their areas of responsibility.
Each major formation is bolded, and directs the non-bolded major subordinate formations.
It is not entirely clear to which superior(s) the four operational-strategic commands will report from 1 December 2010, as they command formations from multiple services (Air Force, Ground Forces & Navy).
A current detailed list of the subordinate units of the four military districts can be found in the respective articles.
During 2009, all 23 remaining divisions were reorganised into four tank brigades, 35 motor-rifle brigades, one prikritiya brigade formed from a machinegun-light artillery division, and three airborne-assault brigades (pre-existing).
Almost all are now designated otdelnaya (separate), with only several brigades retaining the guards honorific title.

In 2013, two of these brigades were reactivated as full divisions: the 2nd Guards Tamanskaya Motor Rifle Division and 4th Guards
Kantemirovskaya Tank Division.
These two divisions marked the beginning of the expansion of the Ground Forces as more brigades are being reformed into full divisions within each military district.

==
Personnel ==
In 2006, the Ground Forces included an estimated total of 395,000 persons, including approximately 190,000 conscripts and 35,000 personnel of the Airborne Forces (VDV).
This can be compared to an estimated 670,000, with 210,000 conscripts, in 1995–96.
These numbers should be treated with caution, however, due to the difficulty for those outside Russia to make accurate assessments, and confusion even within the General Staff on the numbers of conscripts within the force.
The Ground Forces began their existence in 1992, inheriting the Soviet military manpower system practically unchanged, though it was in a state of rapid decay.
The Soviet Ground Forces were traditionally manned through terms of conscription, which had been reduced in 1967 from three to two years.
This system was administered through the thousands of military commissariats (Russian: военный комиссариат, военкомат, voyenkomat) located throughout the Soviet Union.
Between January and May of each year, every young Soviet male citizen was required to report to the local voyenkomat for assessment for military service, following a summons based on lists from every school and employer in the area.

The voyenkomat worked to quotas sent out by a department of the General Staff, listing how many young men were required by each service and branch of the Armed Forces.
(
Since the fall of the Soviet Union, draft evasion has skyrocketed; officials regularly bemoan the ten or so percent that actually appear when summoned.)
The new conscripts were then picked up by an officer from their future unit and usually sent by train across the country.
On arrival, they would begin the Young Soldiers' course, and become part of the system of senior rule, known as dedovshchina, literally "rule by the grandfathers.
"
There were only a very small number of professional non-commissioned officers (NCOs), as most NCOs were conscripts sent on short courses to prepare them for section commanders' and platoon sergeants' positions.
These conscript NCOs were supplemented by praporshchik warrant officers, positions created in the 1960s to support the increased variety of skills required for modern weapons.
The Soviet Army's officer-to-soldier ratio was extremely top-heavy, partially in order to compensate for the relatively low education level of the military manpower base and the absence of professional NCOs.
Following World War II and the great expansion of officer education, officers became the product of four-to-five-year higher military colleges.
As in most armies, newly commissioned officers usually become platoon leaders, having to accept responsibility for the soldiers' welfare and training (with the exceptions noted above).
Young officers in Soviet Army units were worked round the clock, normally receiving only three days off per month.
Annual vacations were under threat if deficiencies emerged within the unit, and the pressure created enormous stress.
Towards the end of the Soviet Union, this led to a decline in morale amongst young officers.
In the early 2000s, many junior officers did not wish to serve—in 2002, more than half the officers who left the forces did so early.
Their morale was low, among other reasons because their postings were entirely in the hands of their immediate superiors and the personnel department.
"
Without having to account for their actions, they can choose to promote or not promote him, to send him to Moscow or to some godforsaken post on the Chinese border.
"There is little available information on the current status of women, who are not conscripted, in the Russian Ground Forces.
According to the BBC, there were 90,000 women in the Russian Army in 2002, though estimates on numbers of women across the entire Russian Armed Forces in 2000 ranged from 115,000 to 160,000.
Women serve in support roles, most commonly in the fields of nursing, communications, and engineering.
Some officers' wives have become contract service personnel.

== Equipment ==
The Russian Ground Forces retain a very large quantity of vehicles and equipment.
There is also likely to be a great deal of older equipment in state military storage, a practice continued from the Soviet Union.
However, following the collapse of the USSR, the newly independent republics became host to most of the formations with modern equipment, whereas Russia was left with lower-category units, usually with older equipment.
As financial stringency began to bite harder, the amount of new equipment fell as well, and by 1998, only ten tanks and about 30 BMP infantry fighting vehicles were being purchased each year.
New equipment, like the Armata Universal Combat Platform, Bumerang and Kurganets-25 will be equipped from 2015 and replace many old tanks, BMPs, BTRs like the T-72, T-90, BMP-1/2/3, and BTR-80 in active service.
Funding for new equipment has greatly risen in recent years, and the Russian defence industry continues to develop new weapons systems for the Ground Forces.
Level of modern weapons in the Ground Forces is 60 per cent in late 2019.
Two Iskander-M missile system brigade sets, over 60 Tornado-G MLRS and more than 20 Msta-SM self-propelled howitzers have been received in 2016.
More than 70 upgraded Grad-M MLRS have been fielded too.
The Russian Ground Forces received two brigade sets of Buk-M3 and Buk-M2 air defence missile complexes in 2016.
Troops also received two division sets of Tor-M2 and two of Tor-M2U air defence missile complexes.
Moreover, the Forces received Verba MANPADS, more than 130 BMP-3 IFVs and BTR-82A APCs as well as more than 20 Tigr-M armored vehicles equipped with the Arbalet-DM combat module.
Russian troops have reportedly received 2,930 new or modernized systems allowing for two missile brigades, two SAM brigades and two SAM regiments, one Spetsnaz brigade, 12 motorized rifle and tank battalions, and three artillery divisions to be reequipped.
The share of modern weapons and equipment in the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 increased by 4 times.
Over eight years, more than 2.5 thousand units of armored weapons have been delivered to tank formations and military units of the Ground Forces, including more than 1,000 upgraded tanks
T-72B3, T-72B3M, T-80BVM and
T-90M.
The motorized rifle troops received more than 1.5 thousand units of infantry fighting vehicles BMP-3, upgraded BMP-2 and armored personnel carriers BTR-82A (AM).

The missile forces and artillery of the Ground Forces from 2012 to 2020 received over 1.5 thousand units of military equipment - operational-tactical missile systems "Iskander-M", multiple launch rocket systems of the "Tornado" family, self-propelled howitzers "Msta-SM".

Air Defense Troops of the Ground Forces received over 900 units of military equipment - long-range anti-aircraft missile systems S-300V4, short-range and medium-range anti-aircraft missile systems "Tor-M2" and "Buk-M3", portable anti-aircraft missile systems "Verba".
=== Equipment summary ===
Figures listed as "Active" only include equipment that circulated in active service.

==
Ranks and insignia ==
The newly re-emergent Russia retained most of the ranks of the Soviet Army, with some minor changes.
The principal difference from the usual Western style is some variation in generals' rank titles—in at least one case, Colonel General, derived from German usage.
Most of the rank names were borrowed from existing German/Prussian, French, English, Dutch, and Polish ranks upon the formation of the modern Russian Army in the late 17th century, and have lasted with few changes of title through the Soviet period.

==
Commanders ==


===
Commander-in-chief (1992–1997) ===
Vladimir Semyonov (1992–1997)


===
Chief of the Main Directorate (1998–2001) ===
Yury Bukreyev (1998–2001)


===
Commander-in-chief (2001–present) ===
Nikolai Kormiltsev (2001–2004)
Aleksei Maslov (2004–2008)
Vladimir Bondyrev (2008–2010)
Aleksandr Postnikov-Streltsov (2010–2012)
Vladimir Chirkin (2012–2013)
Sergei Istrakov (2013–2014)
Oleg Salyukov (2014–present)


==
Ground Forces Day ==
On 31 May 2006, President Vladimir Putin signed decree No.
549 "
On the establishment of professional holidays and memorable days in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation", according to which it was ordered to celebrate Ground Forces Day (Russian: День Сухопутных войск).
The date chosen for the holiday commemorates the edict made by Tsar Ivan the Terrible on 1 October 1550 on the placement in Moscow and surrounding districts of a thousand servicemen forming a local brigade of Streltsy, which essentially became a key document in the further formation and development of the Imperial Russian Army.

Forces Day was first celebrated on the Preobrazhenskaya Square in Moscow in the Church of the Transfiguration of the Lord, where a bishop's service was held.
Before the start of the service, an order of the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu and the decree of Patriarch Kirill of Moscow were read, according to which the Cathedral of the Transfiguration of the Lord officially became the main temple of the RF Ground Forces.
A year later, the holiday was celebrated with the adoption of the Ground Forces Anthem.
The following holidays are also celebrated by the Ground Forces:
Day of Tankmen, Day of Rocket Forces and Artillery, Day of Air Defense.
==
Gallery ==
==
See also ==
Russian Airborne Forces
Naval Infantry (Russia)
Awards and emblems of the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==


==
External links ==
 Media related to Army of Russia at Wikimedia Commons
This article provides the list of active Indian military aircraft  currently in service or on order with the Indian Armed Forces.
For a list of historical military aircraft used by the Indian military, see list of historical aircraft of the Indian Air Force.

==
Air Force ==


==
Army Aviation Corps ==


==
Naval Air Arm ==


==
Indian Coast Guard ==


==
See also ==
List of historical aircraft of the Indian Air Force
List of Indian naval aircraft
Currently active military equipment by country
Military of India
Indian Air Force
Indian Naval Air Arm
Future of the Indian Air Force
Border Security Force


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The Official Home Page of Indian Air Force.
Archived 23 September 2010 at the Wayback Machine
Weapon Plus is a fictional clandestine program appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics.
It was created by Grant Morrison during his run in New X-Men.
The program's purpose is the creation of super-soldiers intended to fight the wars of the future, especially a mutant-human war.
Weapon X, the organization's most well-known program, was originally the tenth installation, but eventually it branched off and became an independent program with similar purposes.
Morrison's introduction of Weapon Plus also shed new information about the origins of Weapon X, Captain America and other Marvel Comics supersoldiers.

==
Fictional team history ==
During the 1940s the existence of mutants was not yet known to the general public.
A few individuals were aware of the coming of Homo superior and the fact that they had the potential to replace baseline humans as the dominant species of Earth.
Thus Weapon Plus was created to address the so-called mutant problem.
What was unknown by everyone involved in Weapon Plus is that its mastermind, John Sublime, was actually the host body for a sentient bacteria present in every living creature on the planet, save for mutants, who were genetically immune to the Sublime infection.
The first nine installments of Weapon Plus were partially successful.
Weapon X produced a number of agents, though it branched off and even became opposed to Weapon Plus's interests.
To prevent subsidiary programs from going rogue, Weapon Plus directly oversaw the creation of the last living weapons operating in the clandestine facilities of The World, employing Bolivar Trask's Sentinel technology.
Throughout the decades, Weapon Plus has used increasingly more extreme methods to create its super-soldiers.
Captain America was enhanced to peak human levels.
Weapon X employed genetic alteration, brainwashing and memory implants.
The latest creations were bred specifically to become mutant-hunting weapons much deadlier than Sentinels.
Following M-Day, most of mutantkind has been rendered powerless, and mutants as a race are on the brink of extinction.
Weapon Plus appears again as Sublime attempts to use the Stepford Cuckoos to wipe out the surviving mutants.

==
Programs ==


=== Weapon 0 ===
Project
: Rebirth began as a collaboration between the American, British and German eugenicists led by Doctors Reinstein and Koch.
When World War II began, Koch took over the German program, and Josef Reinstein (Erskine) moved to the American program.

John Steele, also known as American Soldier, was a Super-Soldier of unknown origin who fought in World War I.
His body was kept in stasis by Nazi scientists, including Abraham Ersekine, who sought to replicate his abilities as part of Project: Nietzche, but with little success.

===
Weapon
I ===
Project:
Rebirth, headed by Professor Abraham Erskine (given the alias Josef Reinstein as a cover identity) managed to produce Captain America (Steve Rogers).
However, Erskine was murdered moments after Rogers was successfully empowered.
The refinements he introduced which made the process successful were lost with his death.
With his demise, Koch took over the American program.

Two other subjects, Clinton McIntyre, a.k.a.
Protocide, a failed experiment who was placed in suspended animation and was revived in the modern era by AIM, and the first mutant experiment designated Queen seem to have occurred prior to the Super Soldier Serum being tested on Steve Rogers.

Early attempts to recreate the formula resulted in African American super soldiers (most prominently Isaiah Bradley).
Three hundred African-American soldiers were taken from Camp Cathcart and subjected to potentially fatal experiments at an undisclosed location, as seen in Truth: Red, White & Black in an attempt to recreate the Super Soldier formula.
Only five men survived the original trials; hundreds of test subjects left behind at Camp Cathcart and the camp's commander were executed by US soldiers in the name of secrecy, the families of the three hundred were told that they had died in battle.
Isaiah Bradley was the lone survivor.

Although there were many later attempts to recreate or reverse-engineer Project: Rebirth's Super-Soldier Serum, none are known to have been involved with Weapon Plus except for the attempt that resulted in the creation of Isaiah Bradley's son Josiah X. Weapon Plus considers Captain America as its most successful creation, despite the fact that Rogers has been at odds with the United States government a number of times.
Project:
Rebirth was retroactively made a part of the Weapon Plus after WWII when Weapon Plus was actually formed.

=== Weapon II ===
Weapon II experimented on animals.
It was implied by Grant Morrison that these animal weapons were the animal cyborgs in the comic We3, not published by Marvel.
Weapon II was later captured as part of a group of semi-animal characters including Howard the Duck, Squirrel Girl, Beast, and Rocket Raccoon.
He appeared as a squirrel with Wolverine's "Adamantium skeleton, claws, intelligence, and healing factor" (though his claws make a "SNUKT" sound compared to Wolverine's "SNIKT").
Weapon II also sports a visor and many of Wolverine's mannerisms.
In Wolverine and Captain America Weapon Plus #1 (July 2019), it is implied that the team Brute Force, made of animal cyborg hybrids, was part of the Weapon II program.

===
Weapon III ===
Like Weapons II and IV, Weapon III was originally said to be experiments on animals, however, this was later retconned.

Weapon III (Harry Pizer) was a mutant with elastic multi-sensory skin.
Originally a barrister, he was recruited by the Weapon Plus program to help protect his nation from the approaching Cold War.
His skin's durability and elasticity was enhanced.
He originally worked in espionage, gathering intelligence from the Soviets.

He was eventually sent to Otherworld in order to retrieve the Orb of Necromancy.
However he was stopped by Fantomex and, for the many deaths he caused, subsequently punished by the Captain Britain Corps and flayed alive, his skin machined off and used to form sentient bullets, some of which came to be possessed by Genoshan soldiers.
He survived, however, and taught his muscles to function in a similar manner to his former mutant skin.
He later worked with Black Air and the Brotherhood of Mutants and was known as the Skinless Man.
He developed a hatred of Fantomex, who he blamed for his current state.
He later murdered Fantomex by ripping out his heart.
He was later killed in retaliation by Deadpool.

===
Weapons IV ===
Weapons IV, was said to be employed on various criminals that were ethnic minorities as test subjects.
However, Weapon IV is actually 'Project Sulfur' - the project spearheaded by Ted Sallis, whose research led him to become the Man-Thing.
===
Weapon V ===
Weapon V was originally believed to have been performed on ethnic people, but then during the Vietnam War, the program under the name of Sym-soldier program used pieces of the ancient symbiote named Grendel and bonded to various soldiers in order to fight in the War.
However, the program was shut down after the soldiers were driven mad by the symbiotes and were captured by Nick Fury and Logan.

When the government got hold of the Venom symbiote, they decided to use it as part of Weapon V under the name of Project Rebirth 2.0 to create a new soldier with symbiote augmentation.
They bonded the suit to former veteran Flash Thompson which resulted in the creation of Agent Venom.
Project Rebirth 2.0 is later shut down by Captain America.

=== Weapon VI ===
Weapon VI was led by Dr. Noah Burstein and was responsible for giving Luke Cage his powers.

===
Weapon VII ===
Weapon VII, a.k.a.
Project: Homegrown, experimented on human soldiers during the Vietnam War.
Some of the known participants who died in Project: Homegrown included Andrew Perlmutter, Michael Labash, John Walsh, James MacPherson and fourteen other unknown recruits.
The only known successful subject of Project:
Homegrown was Nuke, who had armored implants under his epidermis and was addicted to powerful narcotics.
Logan, who would later become one of Weapon Plus' victims, kidnapped Nuke as a child, and oversaw his conditioning.

Weapon VII also experimented with adamantium bonding, which helped create Cyber.

The United Kingdom also had its own version of Project:
Homegrown, a.k.a.
the Black Budget, which managed to create the team known as the Super Soldiers: Dauntless, Gog, Dreadnaught, Revenge, Victory, Invincible, Challenger, and some unnamed super-soldiers.

The Mercy Corporation, an offshoot of S.H.I.E.L.D. that worked on super-soldiers and eventually broke off, also had its own unit of super-soldiers, using a serum similar to previous derivatives of the Super-Soldier Serum from Weapon I.
Their agents included Jack Reno, Keel, Kyle, Agent Villarosa, Agent Davis and Agent Milo.

=== Weapon VIII ===
Weapons VIII experimented on criminals and psychopaths.

===
Weapon IX ===
Weapon IX (according to artist Rob Liefeld) was originally supposed to be Wade Wilson, a.k.a.
Deadpool.
Weapon IX is later revealed to be project 'Psyche', none other than Typhoid Mary.

===
Weapon X ===
The Weapon X Program experimented on mutants, most notably Wolverine.
Later, however, the Weapon X Program branched off into other fields, employing and/or experimenting on a number of test subjects such as Sabretooth.
Eventually the program was shut down and became a part of the Canadian government known as Department K.  Deadpool, who was a Weapon X reject, was created by Department
K. The Facility, a civilian project with connections to the military Weapon X program, would eventually create X-23, a female clone of Wolverine created using genetic material salvaged from the original project.

===
Weapon XI ===
No character under the official title of Weapon XI has been revealed.
However; according to artist Rob Liefeld, Weapon XI was originally intended to be Garrison Kane, who went on to be better known as simply Kane, or confusingly Weapon X.


===
Weapon XII ===
Weapon Plus created Weapon XII (a.k.a.
Huntsman, real name Zona Cluster 6) at the England-based facilities of The World.
He was the first living weapon created employing artificial evolution and nanosentinel technology.
Weapon XII was "accidentally" unleashed on the Channel Tunnel and fought X-Corporation members Cannonball, M, Darkstar, Rictor, Siryn and Multiple Man.
Weapon XII was eliminated by Fantomex with the aid of Jean Grey and Professor X, but at the cost of Darkstar's life.
Huntsman was created to be part of the Super-Sentinels, a mutant-hunting team of superheroes with a base in a Weapon Plus space station.
This team, a brainchild of John Sublime, was intended to be a publicity stunt to make the genocide of mutants much more acceptable to the public.

===
Weapon XIII ===
Weapon Plus created Weapon XIII, also known as Fantomex, at The World.
However, Fantomex rebelled against his creators.
As in the case of Weapon XII, Fantomex's powers derive from Nanosentinel technology.

===
Weapon XIV ===
In New X-Men #154 (May 2004), Grant Morrison's last issue of New X-Men, the telepathic quintuplets called the Stepford Cuckoos were identified as Weapon XIV.

The Stepford Cuckoos' link to Weapon Plus has finally been addressed in the Phoenix: Warsong miniseries, written by Greg Pak, which explores unresolved storylines from Morrison's New X-Men and Pak's Phoenix: Endsong.
===
Weapon XV ===
Weapon XV,
a.k.a.
Ultimaton, was designed to be the Super-Sentinels' grand powerhouse.
He was killed after Wolverine destroyed the Weapon Plus space station that was designed as the Super-Sentinels HQ.

Ultimaton was recently resurrected in The World and tasked by Fantomex with guarding a hidden chamber which held a child Apocalypse clone created from a blood sample taken from the one previously executed on the Celestial Ship.

===
Weapon XVI ===
Weapon XVI, a.k.a.
Allgod, is a "living religion", a virus that "attacks the faith reserves".
People infected by Allgod worship the World, and become fanatically devoted slaves to it.
Wolverine, Fantomex, and Noh-Varr team up to shut down the World (which has now become sentient), its weapons production, and Allgod along with it.
===
Weapon Infinity ===
Weapon Infinity, also known as Project: Deathlok, is the cyborg conversion of both ordinary citizens and then all superheroes in the future.
The first steps were the reanimation of military corpses, then the wholesale conversion of dead bodies into "Deathloks", modeled after the hero of the same name.
The Deathloks were then used to hunt down and convert all heroes of the future.
Project:
Deathlok was first seen in Dark Reign:
The List: Wolverine, and
later fleshed out in the final arc of Wolverine: Weapon X.
Uncanny X-Force has since elaborated on the project, revealing it to be Weapon Infinity during the 'Deathlok Nation' arc.
===
Weapon
Minus ===
A number of scientists were funded by S.H.I.E.L.D to counteract the Weapon Plus program in case it went rogue.
In what was explicitly labelled the Weapon Minus program, one of these scientists, when his branch of the project had his funding and materials cut, was forced to test the resultant mixture of Super-Soldier Serum and LSD on himself, the result was named Doctor Mindbubble, who had the psychic ability to create miniature mind-universes that could trap almost anyone.
He was intended to counter Weapon VII.

===
American Kaiju ===
This program used already existing substances in order to create a new super-soldier.
They used the Gamma radiaton, Beast's Mutant Growth Hormone, Pym Particles and the Lizard formula which resulted in Todd Ziller becoming a monster similar to Godzilla.

==
The World ==
The World is a secret lab owned by the Weapon Plus Project, in which the program scientists intend to create superior humans employing eugenics, nanotechnology and artificial evolution technology
(time is "artificial" at the World and it can be frozen or altered in any way the Program Scientists desire).
The artificial time technology employed by Weapon Plus was stolen from AIM.
A low level of gamma radiation is constantly present to produce mutations in the population.

The human DNA of the inhabitants' ancestors in this artificial environment was spliced with sentinel microtechnology, meaning they are no longer humans in the traditional meaning of the word, as they have evolved into a race of mutated and naturally born cyborgs refined through eugenics.

Because the scientists have absolute control over the time inside The World (according to Fantomex the time is "liquid"), both freezing it and speeding it up so that decades and centuries can pass within it while time runs normally in the real world, this opens up for new possibilities within the areas of eugenics and genetic engineering.
The most promising individuals in each generation are selected while the others are terminated.
Also natural selection in the form of the survival of the fittest is possible by exposing the population to different forms of selective pressure.
This way, new breeds of superhumans can be evolved within a few months, instead of hundreds or thousands of years.
Half a million years inside The World represents only eighteen months on the outside.

The World's facilities contains a population (with its own religion, history and culture) that is led to believe that beyond the World's limits there's nothing, other than endless rock and mutants who are coming to destroy them.
Those who are selected for termination believe there is a reward awaiting them at the other side.
The World is also filled with numerous experiments and prototypes of Weapon Plus, such as techno-organic human-animal car-cops.

The World was partially destroyed when agents of AIM attacked the facilities in order to recover the technology Weapon Plus stole from them.
They are soon killed by Weapon XV.

After years of being uninhabited the World itself, still operational though abandoned, has itself became sentient, and is continuing to make super advanced Weapons.
Wolverine and Noh-Varr head to the World to try and stop Norman Osborn from claiming it and its creations as part of H.A.M.M.E.R.
While there they are attacked by a large army of mutant zombies, soon revealed to be infected by Weapon XVI, "Allgod".
Noh-Varr is rescued by Fantomex, who is there to retrieve the World's brain to help reprogram it into becoming a more benevolent and peaceful being.
The two make their way to the World's brain, where they are confronted by the Allgod zombies, which now include Wolverine.
Noh-Varr is able to disarm Allgod by kissing the World's brain, showing it some compassion.
Immediately after this, Osborn's agent, a remote controlled robot zombie, plunges its fist into the World's brain, removing part of the brain, only for Wolverine to slice the robot zombie's arm off.
Fantomex then uses a shrink-ray he stole from Doctor Doom to shrink the brain, and he takes the brain for his own currently unrevealed purposes.

==
In other media ==


===
Film ===
In the films X-Men and X2, flashbacks show Wolverine has participated in the Weapon X program run by William Stryker, but has no memory of it.
The Weapon X facility is revealed to be in Alkali Lake, Alberta.
It is destroyed when the dam fails.
Jean Grey holds back the water allowing the X-Men to escape, but is killed in the process.

In X-Men: The Last Stand, Alkali is revisited by Scott Summers who is telekinetically drawn to Alkali.

He sees the reborn Jean who inadvertently kills him.
Logan and Storm are sent to Alkali Lake to investigate, where they find Jean as Phoenix.

In the 2008 Marvel Studios film
The Incredible Hulk, General Ross can be seen extracting an experimental super-soldier serum created by Dr. Reinstein from a cold storage lab where the containers are marked "Weapons Plus".
After the success of the three X-Men films, the studio produced a spin-off film X-Men Origins: Wolverine.
This film explains and expands on the origins of Logan/Wolverine, including his time at the Weapon X facility.
It explains that Weapon X is the tenth weapon created by the lab.
Each weapon is a living mutant enhanced by technological means.
Weapon X (Wolverine) is given adamantium bones to increase his durability.
Weapon XI was portrayed in the film as a genetically altered Wade Wilson played by both Scott Adkins and Ryan Reynolds.
Weapon XI is also referred to by Col.
William Stryker as "Deadpool", due to having powers "pooled" from many other mutants killed and/or kidnapped in the film, including Wolverine's healing factor, Cyclops' optic blasts, Wraith's teleportation ability, and Chris Bradley's technopathy.
He also has retractable blades extending from his arms.
Weapon XI is the final antagonist of the film, having been genetically altered to be the ultimate mutant killer.
His head is cut off by Wolverine while his back is turned battling Sabretooth.
In a post-credits scene of some prints, his body looks for and finds his head in the rubble, which returns to life (and gains a mouth, which he previously lacked).

Project Rebirth (Weapon I) appears in Captain America:
The First Avenger.
Rebirth is Strategic Scientific Reserve project to create a new line of Super-Soldiers for its World War II effort against the Red Skull and his division.
It began with a collaboration between US, British and German scientists led by Dr. Abraham Erskine and under the supervision of Peggy Carter, Howard Stark and Chester Phillips.

Alkali Lake is featured again in X-Men:
Apocalypse run again by Stryker.
In 1983, he captured members of the X-Men, because they were suspects behind sudden nuclear launches into space by the ancient mutant Apocalypse.
However, Jean, Scott and Kurt, who infiltrated the base, released an imprisoned Weapon X upon the base, and he tore through the base's security and escaped.
The X-Men were freed by Scott and used a jet in the hangar to escape, while later he was mugged by Essex Corporation to reclaim what was left of the Weapon X Program.
===
Novels ===
In the non-canonical novel Wolverine: Violent Tendencies, Weapon 0 is referred to as "Weapon Null", and is an early and dismissed branch of a super-soldier program completely different from the Weapon Plus program of the comics.
Weapon Null was focused on the utilisation of bioenhancement to upgrade soldiers into organic self-contained weapons; the grotesque creations require extensive and expensive maintenance and transportation conditions, so the program was shelved.
During the course of the novel, Wolverine encounters four of
Weapon Null's more successful creations: "Slammer", "Blowtorch", "Cypher" and "Bipolar".
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Weapon Plus at Marvel.com
Weapon Plus at Marvel Wiki
weaponx.net.ru Alkali Lake
In 1987 Turkey received its first F-16 Fighting Falcon under the 'Peace Onyx-1' deal, further examples have been locally produced through Turkish Aerospace Industries.
Other modern platforms that have entered service is the Boeing 737 Peace Eagle for Airborne early warning and control, the Airbus A400M Atlas for  strategic airlift, the KC-135 Stratotanker for  aerial refueling, and a host of other helicopters and trainers.
Turkey placed an order for 30 F-35 Lightning II's with four delivered to Luke Air Force Base, and then had the order cancelled due to the country's acquisition of the S-400 SAM systems from Russia.

==
Aircraft ==


===
Current inventory ===


==
See also ==
Modern equipment of the Turkish Land Forces
Equipment of the Turkish Navy
Equipment of the Turkish Gendarmerie
Equipment of the Turkish Coast Guard


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official Turkish Air Force Website
The State Peace and Development Council (Burmese: နိုင်ငံတော် အေးချမ်းသာယာရေး နှင့် ဖွံ့ဖြိုးရေး
ကောင်စီ
[nàɪɰ̃ŋàɰ̃dɔ̀ ʔédʑáɰ̃θàjajé n̥ḭɰ̃ pʰʊ̰ɰ̃bjó jé kaʊ̀ɰ̃sì]
; abbreviated SPDC or နအဖ, [na̰ʔa̰pʰa̰]) was the official name of the military government of Burma, which seized power under the rule of Saw Maung in 1988.
On 30 March 2011, Senior General and Council Chairman Than Shwe signed a decree that officially dissolved the Council.
From 1988 to 1997, the SPDC was known as the State Law and Order Restoration Council
(Burmese: နိုင်ငံတော် ငြိမ်ဝပ်ပိပြားမှု တည်ဆောက်ရေးအဖွဲ့ abbreviated SLORC or နဝတ), which had replaced the Burma Socialist Programme Party.
In 1997, SLORC was abolished and reconstituted as the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC).
The powerful regional military commanders, who were members of SLORC, were promoted to new positions and transferred to the capital of Rangoon (now Yangon).
The new regional military commanders were not included in the membership of the SPDC.

The SPDC consisted of eleven senior military officers.
The members of the junta wielded a great deal more power than the cabinet ministers, who were either more-junior military officers or civilians.
The exception was the Defence Ministry portfolio, which was in the hands of junta leader Than Shwe himself.
On 15 September 1993, it established the Union Solidarity and Development Association which was replaced by Union Solidarity and Development Party in 29 March 2010 in time for the elections.

Although the regime retreated from the totalitarian Burmese Way to Socialism of BSPP when it took power in 1988, the regime was widely accused of human rights abuses.
It rejected the 1990 election results and kept Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest until her release on 13 November 2010.
The council was officially dissolved on 30 March 2011, with the inauguration of the newly elected government, led by its former member and Prime Minister, President Thein Sein.
==
History ==
The State Law and Order Restoration Council was formed when the Burmese Armed Forces, commanded by General Saw Maung (later self-promoted to Senior General Saw Maung, died July 1997), seized power on 18 September 1988 crushing the 8888 Uprising.
On the day it seized power SLORC issued Order No.1/1988 stating that the Armed Forces had taken over power and announced the formation of the SLORC.
With Order
No.
2/1988, the SLORC abolished all organs of state power that were formed under the 1974 Burmese constitution.
The Pyithu Hluttaw (the legislature under the 1974 Constitution), the Council of Ministers (the Cabinet), the Council of People's Justices (the Judiciary), the Council of People's Attorneys (the Attorney-General Office), the Council of People's Inspectors (the Auditor-General Office), as well as the State/Region, Township,
Ward/Village People's Councils were abolished.

The SLORC also stated that the services of the Deputy Ministers in the previous Burma Socialist Programme Party (BSPP)
government which it replaced were also terminated.
(
Under the 1974 Burmese Constitution the Council of Ministers acted as a Cabinet but since the Deputy Ministers were not considered to be formally part of the Council of Ministers, the SLORC made sure that the Deputy Ministers – together with the Ministers' – services in the previous BSPP government from whom it had taken over power were also terminated.)
The Orders that SLORC issued on the day of its takeover can be seen in the 19 September 1988 issue of The Working People's Daily.
The first Chairman of SLORC was General Saw Maung, later Senior General, who was also the Prime Minister.
He was removed as both Chairman of SLORC and Prime Minister on 23 April 1992 when General Than Shwe, later Senior General, took over both posts from him.

On 15 November 1997, SLORC was abolished and reconstituted as the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC).
Most, but not all members of the abolished SLORC, were in the SPDC military regime.

==
Leadership ==


===
Chairmen ===


===
Vice Chairmen ===


==
Former members ==
Ordered by protocol:

Senior General Than Shwe, Chairman of the SPDC, Commander-in-Chief of Defence Services
Vice Senior General Maung Aye, Deputy Chairman of the SPDC, Deputy Commander-in-Chief of Defence Services, Commander-in-Chief of the Army
Retired General Thura U Shwe Mann, Former Joint Chief of Staff of the Army, Navy and Air Force
Retired General U Thein Sein, Prime Minister and former President
Retired General U
Thiha Thura
Tin Aung Myint
Oo, Secretary-1 of the SPDC, Former Quartermaster General and ex-Vice-President
Major-General Ohn Myint, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation – 1
(Kachin State, Mandalay Region, Chin State, Sagaing Region)
Lieutenant-General Min Aung Hlaing, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation – 2
(Shan State, Kayah State)
Lieutenant-General Ko Ko, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation – 3
(Bago Region, Ayeyarwady Region)
Lieutenant-General Tha Aye, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation – 4
(Karen State, Mon State, Tanintharyi Region)
Lieutenant-General Myint Swe, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation – 5 (Yangon Region)
Lieutenant-General Khin Zaw, Chief of Bureau of Special Operation −6 (Magwe Region, Rakhine State)
Major-General Hla Htay Win, Chief of Armed Forces Training
Retired Lieutenant-General U Tin Aye, Former Chief of Military Ordnance, Current Head of Election Council
Lieutenant-General Thura Myint Aung, Adjutant General


==
Human rights abuses ==
Western non-governmental organisations, such as the Burma Campaign UK, the US Campaign for Burma, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have made a variety of serious accusations against the SPDC.
Reports by these organisations as well as the United Nations and the Karen Human Rights Group alleged gross human rights abuses that took place in Burma under their regime, including:

Murder and arbitrary executions
Torture and rape
Recruitment of child soldiers
Forced relocations
Forced labour
Political imprisonment


===
Murder ===
One of the worst atrocities in Burma took place during the uprising of August 1988, when millions of Burmese marched throughout the country calling for an end to military rule.
Soldiers shot hundreds of protesters and killed an estimated 3,000 people in the following weeks.
During the August and September demonstrations of 2007, at least 184 protesters were shot and killed and many were tortured.
Under the SPDC, the Burmese army engaged in military offensives against ethnic minority populations, committing acts that violated international humanitarian law.

===
Recruitment of child soldiers ===
It has been alleged that the SPDC forcibly recruited children – some as young as 10 – to serve in its army, the Tatmadaw.
It is difficult to estimate the number of child soldiers used to serve in the Burmese army, but there were thousands, according to Human Rights Watch [1]
[2] [3] the Child Soldiers Global Report 2008 [4] and Amnesty International.
The UN Secretary-General named the SPDC in four consecutive reports for violating international standards prohibiting the recruitment and use of child soldiers.

Children and Armed Conflict, Report of the Secretary-General, 26 October 2006
UN Doc.
A/61/529
S2006/826.

[5]
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict in
Myanmar to the Security Council, 16 November 2007, UN Doc.
S/2007/666.[6]
Report of the Secretary-General on Children and armed conflict to the UN Security Council, 21 December 2007, UN Doc.
A/62/609-S/2007/757.

[7]
Report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict in Myanmar
1 June 2009 UN Doc.
S/2009/278
[8]


=== Forced relocations ===
Human Rights Watch reported [9] that since Cyclone Nargis in May 2008, the Burmese authorities expelled hundreds, if not thousands, of displaced persons from schools, monasteries, and public buildings, and encouraged them to return to their destroyed villages in the Irrawaddy Delta.
The authorities emptied some public buildings and schools to use as polling stations for the 24 May referendum on a new constitution, despite pleas from United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to postpone the referendum and focus their resources on humanitarian relief.
The SPDC was alleged to have evicted people from dozens of government-operated tented relief camps in the vicinity of the former capital Yangon, ordering the residents to return to their homes, regardless of the conditions they face.

The forced evictions were part of government efforts to demonstrate that the emergency relief period was over and that the affected population were capable of rebuilding their lives without foreign aid.
People who were forced from their homes by Cyclone Nargis are considered to be internally displaced persons under international law.
Under the UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, the Burmese government was urged to ensure the right of "internally displaced persons to return voluntarily, in safety and with dignity, to their homes or places of habitual residence, or to resettle voluntarily in another part of the country."

=== Forced labour ===
According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), despite the new quasi-civilian government taking power in Burma, forced labour continues to be widespread in Burma.
It is imposed mainly by the military, for portering (that is, carrying of provisions to remote bases, or on military operations), road construction, camp construction and repair, and for a range of other tasks.
In March 1997, the European Union withdrew Burma's trade privileges because of the prevalence of forced labour and other abuses.
The same year, the ILO established a Commission of Inquiry to look into allegations of forced labour, coming up with a damning report the following year.

In November 2006, the International Labour Organization (ILO) announced it was to seek at the International Criminal Court "to prosecute members of the ruling Myanmar junta for crimes against humanity" over the allegations of forced labour of its citizens by the military.
According to the ILO, an estimated 800,000 people are subject to forced labour in Burma.

===
Political imprisonment ===
Even before the large-scale demonstrations began in August 2007, the authorities arrested many well-known opponents of the government on political grounds, several of whom had only been released from prison several months earlier.
Before the 25–29 September crackdown, more arrests of members of the opposition party National League for Democracy (NLD) took place, which critics say was a pre-emptive measure before the crackdown.

Mass round-ups occurred during the crackdown itself, and the authorities continued to arrest protesters and supporters throughout 2007.
Between 3,000 and 4,000 political prisoners were detained, including children and pregnant women, 700 of whom were believed still in detention at year's end.
At least 20 were charged and sentenced under anti-terrorism legislation in proceedings which did not meet international fair trial standards.
Detainees and defendants were denied the right to legal counsel.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Myanmar.gov:
Official State Peace And Development Council (SPDC)
website
Irrawaddy.org: Members of State Peace and Development Council (SPDC)
Burma Campaign UK
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to engineering:
Engineering is the scientific discipline and profession that applies scientific theories, mathematical methods, and empirical evidence to design, create, and analyze technological solutions cognizant of safety, human factors, physical laws, regulations, practicality, and cost.

==
Branches of Engineering ==
Aerospace engineering – branch of engineering behind the design, construction and science of aircraft and spacecraft.
It is broken into two major and overlapping branches:
Aeronautical engineering – deals with craft that stay within Earth's atmosphere
Astronautical engineering – deals with craft that operate outside of Earth's atmosphere
Applied engineering – application of management, design, and technical skills for the design and integration of systems,
the execution of new product designs, the improvement of manufacturing processes, and the management and direction of physical and/or technical functions of a firm or organization.

Biological engineering
Agricultural engineering
Bionics
Genetic engineering
Biomedical engineering
Metabolic engineering
Neural engineering
Tissue engineering
Civil engineering
Environmental engineering
Architectural engineering
Construction engineering
Geotechnical engineering
Transportation engineering
Hydro engineering
Structural engineering
Urban engineering (Municipal engineering)
Architectonics
Chemical engineering (outline)
Materials engineering
Molecular engineering
Process engineering- also appears under industrial engineering
Electrical engineering (outline)
Broadcast engineering
Computer engineering (outline)
Power systems engineering
Telecommunications engineering
Electronic engineering (includes microelectronics engineering, microelectronics and semiconductor engineering)
Optical engineering
Electromechanical engineering
Control engineering(outline)
Mechatronics
Electromechanics
Instrumentation engineering
Industrial engineering
Engineering psychology
Ergonomics
Facilities engineering
Logistic engineering
Performance engineering
Process engineering- also appears under chemical engineering
Quality engineering (quality assurance engineering)
Reliability engineering
Safety engineering
Security engineering
Support
engineering
Information engineering
Materials
Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Surface Engineering
Biomaterials Engineering
Crystal Engineering
Amorphous Metals
Metal Forming
Ceramic Engineering
Plastics Engineering
Forensic Materials Engineering
Composite Materials
Casting
Electronic Materials
Nano materials
Corrosion Engineering
Vitreous Materials
Welding
Mechanical engineering
Acoustical engineering- includes audio engineering
Aeronautical engineering
Automotive engineering (automotive systems engineering)
Manufacturing engineering
Marine engineering
Thermal engineering
Naval architecture
Sports engineering
Vacuum engineering
Military engineering
Combat engineering
Military technology engineering
Radiation engineering
Nuclear Engineering
Radiation Protection Engineering
Planetary engineering / Climate engineering (Geoengineering)
– planetary engineering is the application of technology for the purpose of influencing the global properties of a planet.
The goal of this theoretical task is usually to make other worlds habitable for life.
Perhaps the best-known type of planetary engineering is terraforming, by which a planet's surface conditions are altered to be more like those of Earth.

Software engineering
Computer-aided engineering
Knowledge engineering
Language
engineering
Release engineering
Teletraffic engineering
Usability engineering
Systems engineering – analysis, design, and control of gigantic engineering systems.

==
History of Engineering ==
History of engineering

Greatest Engineering Achievements
History of chemical engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of software engineering
Roman engineering
Roman military engineering


==
Engineering Concepts ==
Compensation
Crystallization
Earthworks
Exploratory engineering
Fasteners
Flexibility
Freeze
Gate
Good Engineering Practice
Hand tools
Machine tools - Punch
Measuring -- measurement
Materials -- material science --
Tie
Corrosion
Design
Drawings -- drawing -- CAD -- drafting
Cost
Ecological engineering methods
Engineering, procurement and construction
Engineering
economics
Engineering overhead
Engineering society
Management -- planning -- teamwork -- peopleware
Model engineering
Non-recurring engineering
Personalization
Process
Quality -- validation -- quality control
Reverse
engineering
Risk analysis
Systems engineering process
Tolerance
Traction
Value-driven design
Yield


===
Engineering education and certification ===
Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering
Certified Engineering Technologist
Engineer's degree
Engineering
doctorate
Engineering education
Engineering science and mechanics
Fundamentals of Engineering exam
Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering
==
Engineering Awards ==
Academy Scientific and Technical Award
Award of Merit in Structural Engineering
British Construction Industry Awards
British Engineering Excellence Awards
Charles Stark Draper Prize
Engineering Heritage Awards
Engineering Leadership Award
Federal Engineer of the Year Award
Gordon Prize
IEEE Control Systems Award
Louis Schwitzer Award
Mondialogo Engineering Award
NAS Award in Aeronautical Engineering
Percy Nicholls Award
Russ Prize
Seymour Cray Computer Engineering Award
Software Process Achievement Award
Technology & Engineering Emmy Award
The Science, Engineering & Technology Student of the Year
Awards


==
Engineering publications ==
Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century


==
Persons influential in the field of engineering ==
Lists of engineers


==
Lists ==
Index of aerospace engineering articles
Index of electrical engineering articles
Index of genetic engineering articles
Index of mechanical engineering articles
Outline of nanotechnology
Index of software engineering articles


==
See also ==
Outline of architecture
Outline of construction
Outline of design
Infrastructure
Outline of science
Outline of technology
Lethal Weapon 4 is a 1998 American buddy cop action film directed and produced by Richard Donner, and starring Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Rene Russo, Chris Rock, and Jet Li (in his international film debut).
It is the fourth and most recent instalment in the Lethal Weapon film series.

==
Plot ==
Lorna Cole (Rene Russo) is pregnant with LAPD Sergeant Martin Riggs' baby; they are not married, but both are thinking about it.
LAPD Sergeant Roger Murtaugh's daughter Rianne (Tracie Wolfe), is also pregnant.
Due to issues with the department's insurance carrier over Riggs and Murtaugh's actions as sergeants, the Police Chief has Captain Murphy (Steve Kahan) promote them to captains.

The officers along with Leo Getz (Joe Pesci) come upon a Chinese immigrant smuggling ring after running an ocean-going vessel aground, though the captain of the boat escapes.
In the subsequent investigation, Murtaugh finds Hong (Eddy Ko) and his family hiding from US Immigration officers to avoid deportation.
Murtaugh offers them shelter in his home, and their families, along with Riggs and Cole, quickly bond.
Hong reveals he is looking for his uncle, a skilled engraver, who had paid for their passage to the United States.
Riggs discovers through Lorna that Murtaugh's yet-to-be-born grandchild from Rianne is by Detective Lee Butters (Chris Rock), which Murtaugh cannot possibly tolerate as he did not want his daughter to marry a police officer, and that Murtaugh still does not know who the father is due to the family hiding it from him.

Continued investigation of the smuggling ring leads the officers to
"Uncle" Benny Chan, a crime boss operating from a Chinatown restaurant.
There, they are introduced to high-ranking Triad negotiator Wah Sing Ku (Jet Li).
Chan forces them out of his restaurant when the officers show no probable cause.
Outside, Riggs spots the escaped captain and tries to give chase but fails to capture him.
However, Ku later intercepts the captain and kills him as punishment for attracting the police's attention.
Chan and Ku take steps to eliminate all those in on their plans.

Hong is able to contact his uncle, but this leads the Triads to Murtaugh's house.
Ku and the Triad thugs kidnap the Hongs, tie up Murtaugh, his family, Riggs and Cole and set the house ablaze.
Ping, Hong's grandson, has evaded capture and helps to free the others in time.
Though Riggs and Murtaugh chase down and kill some of the Triad members, Ku escapes.
Ku brings Hong to his uncle at a warehouse, where he has been engraving plates for a counterfeiting operation for Ku and Chan in exchange for transit for his family.
Ku kills Hong in front of his uncle to assure his continued work.

The officers confront Chan at his dentist's office (using Getz as a distraction) to interrogate him for more information but are unable to get any leads, and during which Riggs and Butters accidentally reveal (from inhaling the laughing gas they used to interrogate Chan) that Butters is the father of Rianne's child.
Later, as they discuss what they know with Detective Ng (Calvin Jung), who has worked on cases involving the Chinese government before, Ng recognizes that Ku must be trying to negotiate with a corrupt Chinese general for the release of the Four Fathers, high-ranking Triad members that include Ku's brother (Conan Lee).
New information leads them to the abandoned warehouse where they find the bodies of Hong, his uncle, and Chan, the latter two killed by Ku after they served their usefulness.
Knowing that Ku plans to use counterfeit money, the police intercept the exchange between Ku and the general, telling the general that the money is fake.
The enraged general reacts by executing most of the Four Fathers before being shot and killed by the Triads, at which a firefight breaks out between the Triad, the general's private army and the police, and most of the Triad and army are killed.
Ku attempts to escape with his brother, but his brother is shot and killed by Murtaugh (who was aiming at Ku).
Riggs and Murtaugh pursue Ku to a pier where they engage him in a brutal fistfight.
Murtaugh impales Ku through the stomach with a rebar before being knocked out by Ku, after which the pier collapses and sends Riggs and Ku into the water.
Riggs is able to find a Kalashnikov assault rifle and finish off Ku, while Murtaugh recovers in time to rescue Riggs from a piece of concrete that had pinned him underwater.

Later, Riggs visits his dead wife's grave and asks her for advice about his impending marriage with Lorna, about which he still has doubts; Getz arrives and offers a heartfelt childhood story (where in the process, he admits that Riggs and Murtaugh are like his family) that gives Riggs both a new light on the situation and a new perspective of Getz, himself.
They soon discover Lorna is about to give birth and race to the hospital, where Riggs and Lorna are ceremonially married by a rabbi just before she enters labor.
Their son and Rianne's daughter are born, and Murtaugh accepts Butters as his son-in-law (due to the latter having taken a bullet for him during the shootout).
Murphy gives Riggs and Murtaugh their rank of Sergeant back since the city is insured again and Hong's family is granted asylum.

== Cast ==
Mel Gibson as Martin Riggs
Danny Glover as Roger Murtaugh
Joe Pesci as Leo Getz
Rene Russo as Lorna Cole
Chris Rock as Detective Lee Butters
Jet Li as Wah
Sing
Ku
Kim Chan as Uncle Benny Chan
Steve Kahan as Captain Ed Murphy
Calvin Jung as Detective Ng
Jack Kehler as U.S. State Department Official
Eddy Ko as Hong, Chinese Refugee
Mary Ellen Trainor as Dr. Stephanie Woods
Conan Lee as Ku's brother
Darlene Love as Trish Murtaugh
Traci Wolfe as Rianne Murtaugh-Butters
Damon Hines as Nick Murtaugh
Ebonie Smith as Carrie Murtaugh


==
Release ==


===
Box office ===
Lethal Weapon 4 debuted at No.
1 at the box office with $34.05 million.
Although the film grossed $130 million in the U.S., it was not considered a runaway financial success as the previous three films had been.
Shooting began in January 1998, just months before the film's release, with a production budget estimated at $120–$150 million (although Warner Bros. maintained it cost less than $100 million) and an additional $50 million spent on marketing and distribution.
This made the fourth film the most expensive entry of the series.
Its profit margin was saved in part due to the combined foreign box office sales making the film gross approximately $285 million in total, making the second highest-grossing film in the Lethal Weapon film series behind, Lethal Weapon 3 (1992).
Still, like its predecessors, Lethal Weapon 4 was among the top ten grossing films of its release year.

===
Reception ===
Critical reaction to Lethal Weapon 4 was mixed.
The film currently holds a rating of 54% on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 69 critics, and an average rating of 5.87 out of 10.
The site's consensus states: "Jet Li's arrival breathes fresh life into a tired franchise formula -- but not enough to put Lethal Weapon 4 on equal footing with its predecessors.
"
Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating of 0-100 from mainstream critics, calculated a score of 37 out of 100 based on reviews from 21 critics, which means it has an indication of "generally unfavorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A-" on an A+ to F scale.
James Berardinelli gave the film three stars out of four, writing: "
Given the expectations that constrain it, Lethal Weapon 4 is probably the best motion picture that could possibly result from another teaming of Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh.
The series has lost a lot of steam since the first two entries, and, although the fourth movie ratchets up the energy level from the moribund state of the disappointing Lethal Weapon 3, there's no sense of spontaneity."
Roger Ebert gave Lethal Weapon 4 two stars out of four, writing: "
Lethal Weapon 4 has all the technical skill of the first three movies in the series, but lacks the secret weapon, which was conviction.
All four movies take two cop buddies and put them into spectacular and absurd action sequences, but the first three at least went through the motions of taking the plot seriously (and the first one did such a good job, it made my 'best 10' list of that year).
This time, we're watching an exercise."

Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post called it a "stupid and violent delicacy" that balances a "patented blend of high action and low
comedy".
The film was nominated for a Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actor for Pesci.

===
Home media ===
Lethal Weapon 4 has been released on VHS and DVD numerous times.
It has been re-released in numerous sets that contain all four films in the series.
Lethal Weapon 4 was released on Blu-ray Disc as part of a box set with the additional Lethal Weapon films on May 22, 2012.

==
Soundtrack ==
The film's music was composed by Michael Kamen, Eric Clapton, and David Sanborn.
This was the only film in the series not to have a soundtrack album released alongside it, but in 2013 La-La Land Records released the score as discs seven and eight of its limited edition Lethal Weapon Soundtrack Collection.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Official website
Lethal Weapon 4 at IMDb
Lethal Weapon 4 at Box Office Mojo
Lethal Weapon 4 at AllMovie
The Government Junta of Chile (Spanish: Junta Militar de Gobierno) was the military junta established to rule Chile during the military dictatorship that followed the overthrow of President Salvador Allende in the 1973 Chilean coup d'état.
It was the executive and legislative branch of government until December 17, 1974.
After that date, it functioned strictly as a legislative body until the return to democracy in 1990.

== Creation ==
On September 11, 1973, the day of the coup, the military officers issued an Act of Constitution.
The act established a junta government that immediately suspended the constitution, suspended Congress, imposed strict censorship and curfew, proscribed the leftist parties that had constituted Salvador Allende's Popular Unity coalition, and halted all political activity, effectively establishing a dictatorship.
The judicial branch continued to operate under the Junta, and nominally had jurisdiction over its repressive activities, but rarely interfered.

The new junta was made up of General Gustavo Leigh representing the Air Force, General Augusto Pinochet representing the Army, Admiral José Toribio Merino representing the Navy, and General César Mendoza representing the Carabineros (uniformed Gendarmerie).

==
Members ==


==
Chiefs ==


==
History ==
Once the Junta was in power, General Pinochet soon consolidated his control.
Since he was the commander-in-chief of the oldest branch of the military forces (the Army), he was made the head of the military junta.
This position was originally to be rotated among the four branches, but was later made permanent.
He began by retaining sole chairmanship of the junta as Supreme Chief of the Nation from June 27, 1974 until December 17, 1974 when he was proclaimed President.

General Pinochet took over as President, following a referendum that approved a new constitution.
On March 11, 1981, he resigned his position in the Junta, and was replaced by the most senior General officer from the Army, who was nominated by himself.
After that date, the Junta remained only as a legislative body under the presidency of Admiral Merino, until the return to democracy in 1990.

Eventually, General Leigh, head of the Air Force, became increasingly opposed to Pinochet's policies and was forced into retirement on July 24, 1978, in a very tense moment that almost caused a military insurrection.
He was replaced by General Fernando Matthei.

In 1985, three communists were found with their throats slit by the side of a road.
The guilty party turned out to be the Carabineros' secret service, and the Caso Degollados ("case of the slit throats") caused General Mendoza's resignation on August 2, 1985, being replaced by General Rodolfo Stange.

==
Human rights record ==
Immediately after the coup the junta moved to crush their left-wing opposition.
In addition to pursuing armed revolutionary groups it embarked on a campaign against opponents and perceived leftists in the country.
As a result, according to the Rettig Commission, approximately 3,000 people are known to have been killed, 27,000 were incarcerated and in a great many cases tortured.
Many were exiled and received abroad, in particular in Argentina, as political refugees; however, they were followed in their exile by the DINA secret police, in the frame of Operation Condor which linked South-American dictatorships together against political opponents.

== See also ==
1973
Chilean coup d'état
Military dictatorship of Chile (1973–1990)
History of Chile
List of Government Juntas of Chile


== Notes ==
A military, also known collectively as armed forces, is a heavily armed, highly organized force primarily intended for warfare.
It is typically officially authorized and maintained by a sovereign state, with its members identifiable by their distinct military uniform.
It may consist of one or more military branches such as an army, navy, air force, space force, marines, or coast guard.
The main task of the military is usually defined as defence of the state and its interests against external armed threats.

In broad usage, the terms armed forces and military are often treated as synonymous, although in technical usage a distinction is sometimes made in which a country's armed forces may include both its military and other paramilitary forces.
There are various forms of irregular military forces, not belonging to a recognized state; though they share many attributes with regular military forces, they are less often referred to as simply military.

A nation's military may function as a discrete social subculture, with dedicated infrastructure such as military housing, schools, utilities, logistics, hospitals, legal services, food production, finance, and banking services.
Beyond warfare, the military may be employed in additional sanctioned and non-sanctioned functions within the state, including internal security threats, population control, the promotion of a political agenda, emergency services and reconstruction, protecting corporate economic interests, social ceremonies and national honour guards.
The profession of soldiering as part of a military is older than recorded history itself.
Some of the most enduring images of  classical antiquity portray the power and feats of its military leaders.
The Battle of Kadesh in 1274 BC was one of the defining points of Pharaoh Ramses II's reign, and his monuments commemorate it in bas-relief.
A thousand years later, the first emperor of unified China, Qin Shi Huang, was so determined to impress the gods with his military might that he had himself buried with an army of  terracotta soldiers.

The  Romans paid considerable attention to military matters, leaving to posterity many treatises and writings on the subject, as well as many lavishly carved triumphal arches and victory columns.

==
Etymology and definitions ==
The first recorded use of the word military in English, spelled militarie, was in 1582.
It comes from the Latin militaris (from Latin miles, meaning "soldier") through French, but is of uncertain etymology, one suggestion being derived from *mil-it- – going in a body or mass.
As a noun, the military usually refers generally to a country's armed forces, or sometimes, more specifically, to the senior officers who command them.
In general, it refers to the physicality of armed forces, their personnel, equipment, and the physical area which they occupy.

As an adjective, military originally referred only to soldiers and soldiering, but it soon broadened to apply to land forces in general, and anything to do with their profession.
The names of both the Royal Military Academy (1741) and United States Military Academy (1802) reflect this.
However, at about the time of the Napoleonic Wars, 'military' began to be used in reference to armed forces as a whole, such as 'military service', 'military intelligence', and 'military history'.
As such, it now connotes any activity performed by armed force personnel.

==
History ==
Military history is often considered to be the history of all conflicts, not just the history of the state militaries.
It differs somewhat from the history of war, with military history focusing on the people and institutions of war-making, while the history of war focuses on the evolution of war itself in the face of changing technology, governments, and geography.

Military history has a number of facets.
One main facet is to learn from past accomplishments and mistakes, so as to more effectively wage war in the future.
Another is to create a sense of military tradition, which is used to create cohesive military forces.
Still, another may be to learn to prevent wars more effectively.
Human knowledge about the military is largely based on both recorded and oral history of military conflicts (war), their participating armies and navies and, more recently, air forces.

== Organization ==


===
Personnel and units ===
Despite the growing importance of military technology, military activity depends above all on people.
For example, in 2000 the British Army declared: "Man is still the first weapon of war."
====
Rank and role ====
The military organization is characterized by a strict command hierarchy divided by military rank, with ranks normally grouped (in descending order of authority) as officers (e.g. Colonel), non-commissioned officers (e.g. Sergeant), and personnel at the lowest rank (e.g. Private Soldier).
While senior officers make strategic decisions, subordinated military personnel (soldiers, sailors, marines, or airmen) fulfil them.
Although rank titles vary by military branch and country, the rank hierarchy is common to all state armed forces worldwide.

In addition to their rank, personnel occupy one of many trade roles, which are often grouped according to the nature of the role's military tasks on combat operations:
combat roles (e.g. infantry), combat support roles (e.g. combat engineers), and combat service support roles (e.g. logistical support).
====
Recruitment ====
Personnel may be recruited or conscripted, depending on the system chosen by the state.
Most military personnel are males; the minority proportion of female personnel varies internationally
(approximately 3% in India, 10% in the UK, 13% in Sweden, 16% in the US, and 27% in South Africa).
While two-thirds of states now recruit or conscript only adults, as of 2017 50 states still relied partly on children under the age of 18 (usually aged 16 or 17) to staff their armed forces.
Whereas recruits who join as officers tend to be upwardly-mobile, most enlisted personnel have a childhood background of relative socio-economic deprivation.
For example, after the US suspended conscription in 1973, "the military disproportionately attracted African American men, men from lower-status socioeconomic backgrounds, men who had been in nonacademic high school programs, and men whose high school grades tended to be low".
However, a study released in 2020 on the socio-economic backgrounds of U.S. Armed Forces personnel suggests that they are at parity or slightly higher than the civilian population with respect to socio-economic indicators such as parental income, parental wealth and cognitive abilities.
The study found that technological, tactical, operational and doctrinal changes have led to a change in the demand for personnel.
Furthermore, the study suggests that the most disadvantaged socio-economic groups are less likely to meet the requirements of the modern U.S. military.

====
Obligations ====
The obligations of military employment are many.
Full-time military employment normally requires a minimum period of service of several years; between two and six years is typical of armed forces in Australia, the UK and the US, for example, depending on role, branch, and rank.
Some armed forces allow a short discharge window, normally during training, when recruits may leave the armed force as of right.
Alternatively, part-time military employment, known as reserve service, allows a recruit to maintain a civilian job while training under military discipline at weekends; he or she may be called out to deploy on operations to supplement the full-time personnel complement.
After leaving the armed forces, recruits may remain liable for compulsory return to full-time military employment in order to train or deploy on operations.
Military law introduces offences not recognised by civilian courts, such as absence without leave (AWOL), desertion, political acts, malingering, behaving disrespectfully, and disobedience (see, for example, offences against military law in the United Kingdom).
Penalties range from a summary reprimand to imprisonment for several years following a court martial.
Certain fundamental rights are also restricted or suspended, including the freedom of association (e.g. union organizing) and freedom of speech (speaking to the media).
Military personnel in some countries have a right of conscientious objection if they believe an order is immoral or unlawful, or cannot in good conscience carry it out.

Personnel may be posted to bases in their home country or overseas, according to operational need, and may be deployed from those bases on exercises or operations anywhere in the world.
During peacetime, when military personnel are generally stationed in garrisons or other permanent military facilities, they mostly conduct administrative tasks, training and education activities, technology maintenance, and recruitment.

====
Training ====
Initial training conditions recruits for the demands of military life, including preparedness to injure and kill other people, and to face mortal danger without fleeing.
It is a physically and psychologically intensive process which resocializes recruits for the unique nature of military demands.
For example:

Individuality is suppressed (e.g. by shaving the head of new recruits, issuing uniforms, denying privacy, and prohibiting the use of first names);
Daily routine is tightly controlled (e.g. recruits must make their beds, polish boots, and stack their clothes in a certain way, and mistakes are punished);
Continuous stressors deplete psychological resistance to the demands of their instructors (e.g. depriving recruits of sleep, food, or shelter, shouting insults and giving orders intended to humiliate)
Frequent punishments serve to condition group conformity and discourage poor performance;
The disciplined drill instructor is presented as a role model of the ideal soldier.

===
Intelligence ===
The next requirement comes as a fairly basic need for the military to identify possible threats it may be called upon to face.
For this purpose, some of the commanding forces and other military, as well as often civilian personnel participate in identification of these threats.
This is at once an organization, a system and a process collectively called military intelligence (MI).

The difficulty in using military intelligence concepts and military intelligence methods is in the nature of the secrecy of the information they seek, and the clandestine nature that intelligence operatives work in obtaining what may be plans for a conflict escalation, initiation of combat, or an invasion.

An important part of the military intelligence role is the military analysis performed to assess military capability of potential future aggressors, and provide combat modelling that helps to understand factors on which comparison of forces can be made.
This helps to quantify and qualify such statements as: "China and India maintain the largest armed forces in the World" or that "the U.S. Military is considered to be the world's strongest".

Although some groups engaged in combat, such as militants or resistance movements, refer to themselves using military terminology, notably 'Army' or 'Front', none have had the structure of a national military to justify the reference, and usually have had to rely on support of outside national militaries.
They also use these terms to conceal from the MI their true capabilities, and to impress potential ideological recruits.

Having military intelligence representatives participate in the execution of the national defence policy is important, because it becomes the first respondent and commentator on the policy expected strategic goal, compared to the realities of identified threats.
When the intelligence reporting is compared to the policy, it becomes possible for the national leadership to consider allocating resources over and above the officers and their subordinates military pay, and the expense of maintaining military facilities and military support services for them.

===
Economics ===
Defense economics is the financial and monetary efforts made to resource and sustain militaries, and to finance military operations, including war.

The process of allocating resources is conducted by determining a military budget, which is administered by a military finance organization within the military.
Military procurement is then authorized to purchase or contract provision of goods and services to the military, whether in peacetime at a permanent base, or in a combat zone from local population.

===
Capability development ===
Capability development, which is often referred to as the military 'strength', is arguably one of the most complex activities known to humanity; because it requires determining: strategic, operational, and tactical capability requirements to counter the identified threats; strategic, operational, and tactical doctrines by which the acquired capabilities will be used; identifying concepts, methods, and systems involved in executing the doctrines; creating design specifications for the manufacturers who would produce these in adequate quantity and quality for their use in combat; purchase the concepts, methods, and systems; create a forces structure that would use the concepts, methods, and systems most effectively and efficiently; integrate these concepts, methods, and systems into the force structure by providing military education, training, and practice that preferably resembles combat environment of intended use; create military logistics systems to allow continued and uninterrupted performance of military organizations under combat conditions, including provision of health services to the personnel, and maintenance for the equipment; the services to assist recovery of wounded personnel, and repair of damaged equipment; and finally, post-conflict demobilization, and disposal of war stocks surplus to peacetime requirements.

Development of military doctrine is perhaps the more important of all capability development activities, because it determines how military forces were, and are used in conflicts, the concepts and methods used by the command to employ appropriately military skilled, armed and equipped personnel in achievement of the tangible goals and objectives of the war, campaign, battle, engagement, action or a duel.
The line between strategy and tactics is not easily blurred, although deciding which is being discussed had sometimes been a matter of personal judgement by some commentators, and military historians.
The use of forces at the level of organization between strategic and tactical is called operational mobility.

There have been attempts to produce a military strength index
: this is an example taken from a Credit Suisse report in September 2015.
The factors under consideration for that military strength indicator and their total weights were: number of active personnel in the armed forces (5%), tanks (10%), attack helicopters (15%), aircraft (20%), aircraft carriers (25%), and submarines (25%).
It was practically impossible to make an estimation of the actual training of the armed forces.

These were the results:


===
Science ===
Because most of the concepts and methods used by the military, and many of its systems are not found in commercial branches, much of the material is researched, designed, developed, and offered for inclusion in arsenals by military science organizations within the overall structure of the military.
Military scientists are therefore found to interact with all Arms and Services of the armed forces, and at all levels of the military hierarchy of command.

Although concerned with research into military psychology, particularly combat stress and
how it affect troop morale, often the bulk of military science activities is directed at military intelligence technology, military communications, and improving military capability through research.
The design, development, and prototyping of weapons, military support equipment, and military technology in general, is also an area in which much effort is invested – it includes everything from global communication networks and aircraft carriers to paint and food.

===
Logistics ===
Possessing military capability is not sufficient if this capability cannot be deployed for, and employed in combat operations.
To achieve this, military logistics are used for the logistics management and logistics planning of the forces military supply chain management, the consumables, and capital equipment of the troops.

Although mostly concerned with the military transport, as a means of delivery using different modes of transport; from military trucks, to container ships operating from permanent military base, it also involves creating field supply dumps at the rear of the combat zone, and even forward supply points in specific unit's Tactical Area of Responsibility.

These supply points are also used to provide military engineering services, such as the recovery of defective and derelict vehicles and weapons, maintenance of weapons in the field, the repair and field modification of weapons and equipment; and in peacetime, the life-extension programmes undertaken to allow continued use of equipment.
One of the most important role of logistics is the supply of munitions as a primary type of consumable, their storage, and disposal.

==
In combat ==
The primary reason for the existence of the military is to engage in combat, should it be required to do so by the national defence policy, and to win.
This represents an organisational goal of any military, and the primary focus for military thought through military history.
How victory is achieved, and what shape it assumes, is studied by most, if not all, military groups on three levels.

===
Strategic victory ===
Military strategy is the management of forces in wars and military campaigns by a commander-in-chief, employing large military forces, either national and allied as a whole, or the component elements of armies, navies and air forces; such as army groups, naval fleets, and large numbers of aircraft.
Military strategy is a long-term projection of belligerents' policy, with a broad view of outcome implications, including outside the concerns of military command.
Military strategy is more concerned with the supply of war and planning, than management of field forces and combat between them.
The scope of strategic military planning can span weeks, but is more often months or even years.
===
Operational victory ===
Operational mobility is, within warfare and military doctrine, the level of command which coordinates the minute details of tactics with the overarching goals of strategy.
A common synonym is operational art.

The operational level is at a scale bigger than one where line of sight and the time of day are important, and smaller than the strategic level, where production and politics are considerations.
Formations are of the operational level if they are able to conduct operations on their own, and are of sufficient size to be directly handled or have a significant impact at the strategic level.
This concept was pioneered by the German army prior to and during the Second World War.
At this level, planning and duration of activities takes from one week to a month, and are executed by Field Armies and Army Corps and their naval and air equivalents.

===
Tactical victory ===
Military tactics concerns itself with the methods for engaging and defeating the enemy in direct combat.
Military tactics are usually used by units over hours or days, and are focused on the specific, close proximity tasks and objectives of squadrons, companies, battalions, regiments, brigades, and divisions, and their naval and air force equivalents.
One of the oldest military publications is The Art of War, by the Chinese philosopher Sun Tzu.
Written in the 6th century BCE, the 13-chapter book is intended as military instruction, and not as military theory, but has had a huge influence on Asian military doctrine, and from the late 19th century, on European and United States military planning.
It has even been used to formulate business tactics, and can even be applied in social and political areas.

The Classical Greeks and the Romans wrote prolifically on military campaigning.
Among the best-known Roman works are Julius Caesar's commentaries on the Gallic Wars, and the Roman Civil war – written about 50 BC.

Two major works on tactics come from the late Roman period:
Taktike Theoria by Aelianus Tacticus, and De Re Militari ('On military matters') by Vegetius.
Taktike Theoria examined Greek military tactics, and was most influential in the Byzantine world and during the Golden Age of Islam.

De Re Militari formed the basis of European military tactics until the late 17th century.
Perhaps its most enduring maxim is Igitur qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum (let he who desires peace prepare for war).

Due to the changing nature of combat with the introduction of artillery in the European Middle Ages, and infantry firearms in the Renaissance, attempts were made to define and identify those strategies, grand tactics, and tactics that would produce a victory more often than that achieved by the Romans in praying to the gods before the battle.

Later this became known as military science, and later still, would adopt the scientific method approach to the conduct of military operations under the influence of the Industrial Revolution thinking.
In his seminal book On War, the Prussian Major-General and leading expert on modern military strategy, Carl von Clausewitz defined military strategy as 'the employment of battles to gain the end of war'.
According to Clausewitz: 
strategy forms the plan of the War, and to this end it links together the series of acts which are to lead to the final decision, that is to say, it makes the plans for the separate campaigns and regulates the combats to be fought in each.

Hence, Clausewitz placed political aims above military goals, ensuring civilian control of the military.
Military strategy was one of a triumvirate of 'arts' or 'sciences' that governed the conduct of warfare, the others being: military tactics, the execution of plans and manoeuvring of forces in battle, and maintenance of an army.

The meaning of military tactics has changed over time; from the deployment and manoeuvring of entire land armies on the fields of ancient battles, and galley fleets; to modern use of small unit ambushes, encirclements, bombardment attacks, frontal assaults, air assaults, hit-and-run tactics used mainly by guerrilla forces, and, in some cases, suicide attacks on land and at sea.
Evolution of aerial warfare introduced its own air combat tactics.
Often, military deception, in the form of military camouflage or misdirection using decoys, is used to confuse the enemy as a tactic.

A major development in infantry tactics came with the increased use of trench warfare in the 19th and 20th centuries.
This was mainly employed in World War I in the Gallipoli campaign, and the Western Front.
Trench warfare often turned to a stalemate, only broken by a large loss of life, because, in order to attack an enemy entrenchment, soldiers had to run through an exposed 'no man's land' under heavy fire from their opposing entrenched enemy.

==
Technology ==
As with any occupation, since the ancient times, the military has been distinguished from other members of the society by their tools, the military weapons, and military equipment used in combat.
When Stone Age humans first took a sliver of flint to tip the spear, it was the first example of applying technology to improve the weapon.

Since then, the advances made by human societies, and that of weapons, has been irretrievably linked.
Stone weapons gave way to Bronze Age weapons, and later, the Iron Age weapons.
With each technological change, was realized some tangible increase in military capability, such as through greater effectiveness of a sharper edge in defeating leather armour, or improved density of materials used in manufacture of weapons.

On land, the first really significant technological advance in warfare was the development of the ranged weapons, and notably, the sling.
The next significant advance came with the domestication of the horses and mastering of equestrianism.

Arguably, the greatest invention that affected not just the military, but all society, after adoption of fire, was the wheel, and its use in the construction of the chariot.
There were no advances in military technology, until, from the mechanical arm action of a slinger, the Greeks, Egyptians, Romans, Persians, Chinese, etc.,
developed the siege engines.
The bow was manufactured in increasingly larger and more powerful versions, to increase both the weapon range, and armour penetration performance.
These developed into the powerful composite and recurve bows, and crossbows of Ancient China.
These proved particularly useful during the rise of cavalry, as horsemen encased in ever-more sophisticated armour came to dominate the battlefield.

Somewhat earlier, in medieval China, gunpowder had been invented, and was increasingly used by the military in combat.
The use of gunpowder in the early vase-like mortars in Europe, and advanced versions of the long bow and cross bow, which all had armour-piercing arrowheads, that put an end to the dominance of the armoured knight.
After the long bow, which required great skill and strength to use, the next most significant technological advance was the musket, which could be used effectively, with little training.
In time, the successors to muskets and cannon, in the form of rifles and artillery, would become core battlefield technology.

As the speed of technological advances accelerated in civilian applications, so too warfare became more industrialized.
The newly invented machine gun and repeating rifle redefined firepower on the battlefield, and, in part, explains the high casualty rates of the American Civil War.
The next breakthrough was the conversion of artillery parks from the muzzle loading guns, to the quicker loading breech loading guns with recoiling barrel that allowed quicker aimed fire and use of a shield.
The widespread introduction of low smoke (smokeless) propellant powders since the 1880s also allowed for a great improvement of artillery ranges.

The development of breech loading had the greatest effect on naval warfare, for the first time since the Middle Ages, altering the way weapons are mounted on warships, and therefore naval tactics, now divorced from the reliance on sails with the invention of the internal combustion.
A further advance in military naval technology was the design of the submarine, and its weapon, the torpedo.

Main battle tanks, and other heavy equipment such as armoured fighting vehicles, military aircraft, and ships, are characteristic to organized military forces.

During World War I, the need to break the deadlock of trench warfare saw the rapid development of many new technologies, particularly tanks.
Military aviation was extensively used, and bombers became decisive in many battles of World War II, which marked the most frantic period of weapons development in history.
Many new designs, and concepts were used in combat, and all existing technologies of warfare were improved between 1939 and 1945.

During the war, significant advances were made in military communications through increased use of radio, military intelligence through use of the radar, and in military medicine through use of penicillin, while in the air, the guided missile, jet aircraft, and helicopters were seen for the first time.
Perhaps the most infamous of all military technologies was the creation of the atomic bomb, although the exact effects of its radiation were unknown until the early 1950s.
Far greater use of military vehicles had finally eliminated the cavalry from the military force structure.

After World War II, with the onset of the Cold War, the constant technological development of new weapons was institutionalized, as participants engaged in a constant 'arms race' in capability development.
This constant state of weapons development continues into the present, and remains a constant drain on national resources, which some blame on the military-industrial complex.

The most significant technological developments that influenced combat have been the guided missiles, which can be used by all branches of the armed services.
More recently, information technology, and its use in surveillance, including space-based reconnaissance systems, have played an increasing role in military operations.

The impact of information warfare that focuses on attacking command communication systems, and military databases, has been coupled with the new development in military technology, has been the use of robotic systems in intelligence combat, both in hardware and software applications.

Recently, there has also been a particular focus towards the use of renewable fuels for running military vehicles on.
Unlike fossil fuels, renewable fuels can be produced in any country, creating a strategic advantage.
The US military has committed itself to have 50% of its energy consumption come from alternative sources.

==
As part of society ==
For much of military history, the armed forces were considered to be for use by the heads of their societies, until recently, the crowned heads of states.
In a democracy or other political system run in the public interest, it is a public force.

The relationship between the military and the society it serves is a complicated and ever-evolving one.
Much depends on the nature of the society itself, and whether it sees the military as important, as for example in time of threat or war, or a burdensome expense typified by defence cuts in time of peace.

One difficult matter in the relation between military and society is control and transparency.
In some countries, limited information on military operations and budgeting is accessible for the public.
However transparency in the military sector is crucial to fight corruption.
This showed the Government Defence Anti-corruption Index Transparency International UK published in 2013.Militaries often function as societies within societies, by having their own military communities, economies, education, medicine, and other aspects of a functioning civilian society.
Although a 'military' is not limited to nations in of itself as many private military companies (or PMC's) can be used or 'hired' by organizations and figures as security, escort, or other means of protection; where police, agencies, or militaries are absent or not trusted.

===
Ideology and ethics ===
Militarist ideology is the society's social attitude of being best served, or being a beneficiary of a government, or guided by concepts embodied in the military culture, doctrine, system, or leaders.

Either because of the cultural memory, national history, or the potentiality of a military threat, the militarist argument asserts that a civilian population is dependent upon, and thereby subservient to the needs and goals of its military for continued independence.
Militarism is sometimes contrasted with the concepts of comprehensive national power, soft power and hard power.

Most nations have separate military laws which regulate conduct in war and during peacetime.
An early exponent was
Hugo Grotius, whose On the Law of War and Peace (1625) had a major impact of the humanitarian approach to warfare development.
His theme was echoed by Gustavus Adolphus.

Ethics of warfare have developed since 1945, to create constraints on the military treatment of prisoners and civilians, primarily by the Geneva Conventions; but rarely apply to use of the military forces as internal security troops during times of political conflict that results in popular protests and incitement to popular uprising.

International protocols restrict the use, or have even created international bans on some types of weapons, notably weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
International conventions define what constitutes a war crime, and provides for war crimes prosecution.
Individual countries also have elaborate codes of military justice, an example being the United States' Uniform Code of Military Justice that can lead to court martial for military personnel found guilty of war crimes.

Military actions are sometimes argued to be justified by furthering a humanitarian cause, such as disaster relief operations, or in defence of refugees.
The term military humanism is used to refer to such actions.

==
See also ==
Armed forces of the worldList of countries by number of military and paramilitary personnel
List of countries by Military Strength Index
List of countries by level of military equipment
List of countries by Global Militarization Index
List of countries without armed forces
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by past military expenditure
List of countries by military expenditure per capita
List of air forces
List of armies
List of navies


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Military Expenditure % of GDP hosted by Lebanese economy forum, extracted from the World Bank public data.

Military at Curlie
The Peruvian Military Junta or Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces was a military junta in Peru.
The Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces was led by Juan Velasco Alvarado.

==
Coup d'etat ==
In 1968 the Ejército del Perú led by Juan Velasco Alvarado led a Coup d'etat against President Fernando Belaunde's government.
The end result was that Velasco's forces took power in 1968 and shifted more to a soviet style dictatorship.

==
Military revolution and dictatorship (1968–1975) ==
The coup leaders named their administration the Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces, with Velasco at its helm as President.
Velasco's administration articulated a desire to give justice to the poor through a regime of nationalization known as Peruanismo.
Velasco's rule was characterized by left-leaning policies, which aimed to create a strong national industry to increase the international independence of Peru.
To that end, he nationalised entire industries, expropriated companies in a wide range of activities from fisheries to mining to telecommunications to power production and consolidated them into single industry-centric government-run entities (PescaPeru, MineroPeru, Petroperú, SiderPeru,Centromin Peru, ElectroPeru, Enapu, EnatruPeru, Enafer, Compañia Peruana de Telefonos, EntelPeru, Correos del Peru, etc.),
and increased government control over economic activity by enforcing those entities as monopolies and disincentivized private activity in those sectors.
Most reforms were planned by left-leaning intellectuals of the time, and some of them successfully improved the Peruvian quality of life.

A root and branch education reform was in march looking to include all Peruvians and move them towards to a new national thinking and feeling; the poor and the most excluded were prioritized in this system and the Día del Indio or Peruvian Indian's day name was changed to Día del Campesino or Peruvian Peasant's day every June 24, a traditional holiday of the land, the day of winter solstice.
The education reform of 1972 provided for bilingual education for the indigenous people of the Andes and the Amazon, which consisted nearly half of the population.
In 1975, the Velasco government enacted a law making Quechua an official language of Peru equal to Spanish.
Thus, Peru was the first Latin American country to officialize an indigenous language.
However, this law was never enforced and ceased to be valid when the 1979 constitution became effective, according to which Quechua and Aymara are official only where they predominate, as mandated by law – a law that was never enacted.
Peruanismo was also characterized by authoritarianism, as the administration grew away from tolerating any level of dissent, periodically jailing, deporting and harassing suspected political opponents and repeatedly closing and censoring broadcast and print news media, finally expropriating all of the newspapers in 1974 and sending the publishers into exile.
A cornerstone of Velasco's political and economic strategy was the implementation by dictate of an agrarian reform program to expropriate farms and diversify land ownership.

In its first ten years in power, the Revolutionary Government of the Armed Forces (GRFA) expropriated 15,000 properties (totaling nine million hectares) and benefited some 300,000 families.

The former landlords who opposed this program believed that they did not receive adequate compensation for their confiscated assets and lamented that the state officials and peasant beneficiaries mismanaged their properties after the expropriation.

==
Foreign Relations ==
In foreign policy, in contrast with his 1970s Latin American contemporaries, which were mostly right-wing military dictatorships, Velasco pursued a partnership with communist countries, beginning with Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia.
By 1969 he established warm relations with the Soviet bloc, tightening relations with Cuba and Fidel Castro as well as Romania and Nicolae Ceaușescu and undertaking major purchases of Soviet military hardware.
Velasco was greatly influenced by socialist Yugoslavia's policies of self-management and worked with Yugoslav economist Edvard Kardelj to help implement similar policies in Peru.
Yugoslavia aided the Junta financially and diplomatically, and the two nations remained close allies.
Relations between the United States and Peru were tense and even hostile, as soon as General Velasco and his junta took power.

Just five days after Velasco seized power in 1968, the General began the nationalization of the Peruvian Economy with the expropriation and nationalization of the American International Petroleum Company (IPC) oil fields located in the northern Peruvian oil port and refinery of Talara, Piura, near the Peruvian border with Ecuador, Piura, being the region where Velasco was born.

IPC was a subsidiary of Standard Oil, and although the claims over the IPC were ultimately resolved in negotiations between the two governments, the US after this seizure no longer considered Peru an ally or a friendly country.

Instead, the CIA started to organize plans to destabilize and to overthrow General Velasco.

US-Peru disagreements continued over a broad range of issues including even Peru's claim to a 200-nautical-mile (370 km) fishing limit that resulted in the seizure of several US commercial fishing boats and the expropriation of the American copper mining company Cerro de Pasco Corporation.

However, in spite of these provocations, the U.S. responded immediately with humanitarian aid in 1970, when an earthquake killed about 50,000 persons and left over 600,000 homeless.

==
Military ==
Velasco's army was one of the strongest armies in Latin America.
It consisted of the Ejército del Perú, Fuerza Aérea del Perú and Marina de Guerra del Perú.

it is estimated that from 1970 to 1975 Peru spent up to US$2 Billion (roughly US$20 Billion in 2010's valuation) on Soviet armament.
According to various sources Velasco's government bought between 600 and 1200 T-55 Main Battle Tanks, APCs, 60 to 90 Sukhoi 22 warplanes, 500,000 assault rifles, and even considered the purchase of a British carrier Centaur-class light fleet carrier HMS Bulwark.
The Ejército del Perú had 1200 units in total raging from  T-55 Main Battle Tanks and APCs.
The Fuerza Aérea del Perú had 90 Sukhoi 22 warplanes for combat and Antonov An-26 and An-32 transport aircraft, as well as Mil Mi-8,
Mi-17, Mi-25 and Mi-26 helicopters.
The Marina de Guerra del Perú's flagship was the BAP Almirante Grau (CLM-81) received from the Netherlands.
The Peruvian Navy mirrored that of Chile.

==
References ==
Lethal Weapon is an American buddy cop action comedy-drama television series that is based on the film series of the same name created by Shane Black.
The series stars Damon Wayans as Roger Murtaugh, a senior Los Angeles Police Department detective who returns to the force, after recovering from a heart attack, and is partnered with Texas transfer Martin Riggs, played by Clayne Crawford.
Riggs, a Navy SEAL-turned-police officer from El Paso, Texas, moves to Los Angeles after the death of his wife and unborn child, transferring from the El Paso County Sheriff's Office to the LAPD's Robbery-Homicide Division.

The series was ordered on May 10, 2016 and premiered on Fox on September 21, 2016.
On May 13, 2018, the series was renewed for a 15 episode third season, with Seann William Scott replacing Clayne Crawford as the series' co-lead, playing new character Wesley Cole.
During the course of the series, fifty-five episodes of Lethal Weapon aired over three seasons, between September 21, 2016, and February 26, 2019.

==
Series overview ==


==
Episodes ==


===
Season 1 (2016–17) ===


===
Season 2 (2017–18) ===


===
Season 3 (2018–19) ===


==
Ratings ==


===
Season 1 ===


===
Season 2 ===


===
Season 3 ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lethal Weapon – list of episodes at IMDb
The United States military has numerous types of watercraft, operated by the Navy, including Naval Special Warfare Command and Military Sealift Command, as well as the Coast Guard, Army and Air Force


==
Commissioned ships (USN) ==


===
Aircraft carriers ===
Nimitz class – 10 active
Gerald R. Ford class – 1 active


===
Amphibious assault ships ===
Wasp class – 7 active
America class – 2 active


===
Amphibious command ships ===
Blue Ridge class – 2 active


===
Amphibious transport docks ===
San Antonio class – 10 active


===
Attack submarines ===
Los Angeles class – 32 active
Seawolf class – 3 active
Virginia class – 19 active


===
Ballistic missile submarines ===
Ohio class – 14 active


===
Classic frigate ===
USS Constitution – oldest commissioned ship in USN, an 'Original Six' frigate,
circa.
1797.
Not counted as part of the deployed combat fleet.

===
Cruisers ===
Ticonderoga class – 22 active


===
Destroyers ===
Arleigh Burke class – 67 active
Zumwalt class – 2 active


===
Dock landing ships ===
Whidbey Island class – 8 active
Harpers Ferry class – 4
active


===
Expeditionary mobile base ===
(sub-variant of the expeditionary transfer dock)Montford Point class
USS Lewis B. Puller (ESB-3)
USS Hershel "Woody" Williams


===
Guided missile submarines ===
Ohio class –
4 active


===
Littoral combat ships ===
Freedom class – 9 active
Independence class – 11 active


===
Mine countermeasures ships ===
Avenger class – 8
active


===
Patrol boats ===
Cyclone class – 13 active


===
Submarine tenders ===
Emory S. Land class – 2
active


===
Technical research ship ===
USS Pueblo (AGER-2) – currently held captive by North Korea.
Still in commission, but not counted as part of the deployed combat fleet.

== Non-commissioned ships (MSC) ==
(List includes "Support" and "Ready Reserve Force" ships)


===
Cable repair ships ===
Zeus class –
1 active


===
Cargo and replenishment ships ===
Watson-class vehicle cargo ship – 8 active
Bob Hope-class vehicle cargo ship – 7 active
Shughart-class vehicle cargo ship – 3 active
Gordon-class vehicle cargo ship – 2 active
Supply-class fast combat support ship – 2 active
Lewis and Clark-class dry cargo ship – 14 active
Henry J. Kaiser-class replenishment oiler – 15 active


===
Crane ships ===
Gopher State class – 3 active
Keystone State class – 3
active


===
Expeditionary transfer dock ===
Montford Point class
Expeditionary Transfer Dock (ESD) –
2 active
Expeditionary Mobile Base (ESB) – 3 active (2 commissioned)


===
High speed vessels ===
Spearhead-class expeditionary fast transport – 9 activeStand-alone
vessels;Sea Fighter (FSF-1) –
active
USNS Guam (HST-1) –
active
HST-2 (unnamed) – leased to civilian ferry service


===
Hospital ships ===
Mercy class – 2 active


===
Landing craft ===
Landing Craft Air Cushion – 74 active
Landing Craft Utility 1610, 1627 and 1646 – 32
active


===
Salvage ships ===
Safeguard class – 4 active


===
Surveillance, intelligence and survey vessels ===
Howard O. Lorenzen-class instrumentation ship – 1 active
Impeccable-class ocean surveillance ship – 1 active
Pathfinder-class survey ship – 6 active
Stalwart-class ocean surveillance ship – 2 active
Victorious-class ocean surveillance ship – 4 active


===
Tug boats ===
Powhatan-class fleet ocean tug – 4 active
Natick-class large harbor tug – 8 active
Valiant-class harbor tug – 6
active


==
Special Warfare and Coastal Riverine Force (NSW) ==


===
Surface craft ===
Combat Rubber Raiding Craft
Small unit riverine craft
Riverine Command Boat
Rigid Raider
Mark V Special Operations Craft
Special Operations Craft - Riverine (SOC-R)
Mark VI Patrol Boat
Coastal Command Boat (CCB)
Combatant Craft Assault (CCA)
Combatant Craft Medium (CCM)
Combatant Craft Heavy (CCH)


===
Swimmer delivery vehicles ===
Advanced SEAL Delivery System
Swimmer Delivery Vehicle
(Mk 8)
Surface-Planing Wet Submersible


==
Cutters (USCG) ==


===
Patrol ships ===
Hamilton-class cutter 2
Legend-class National Security Cutter,
Large 8
USCGC Alex Haley (WMEC-39)
Famous-class Medium Endurance Cutter 13
Reliance-class Medium Endurance Cutter 14
Sentinel-class cutter 38


===
Patrol boats ===
Island-class patrol boat 30
Marine Protector-class coastal patrol boat
73
47-foot Motor Lifeboat 117
Response boat-medium
48
USCG Utility Boat 156
USCG Long Range Interceptor 10
Defender class Response boat-small 300
USCG transportable port security boat
Over the horizon boat
Short Range Prosecutor 10


===
Icebreakers ===
Bay-class icebreaking tug 9
active
Polar class 1 activeStand-alone
vessels;USCGC Mackinaw (WLBB-30)
USCGC Healy (WAGB-20)


===
Tenders ===
USCG seagoing buoy tender
USCG coastal buoy tender
USCG inland buoy tender
USCG inland construction tender


==
Support craft (US Army) ==


===
Logistics support vessel ===
General Frank S. Besson-class logistics support vessel –
8


===
Landing craft ===
Runnymede class large landing craft – 35
Landing Craft Mechanized
LCM-8, Mod 1 - 34
LCM-8, Mod 2 - 6


===
Tug boats ===
MGen.
Nathanael Greene-class tugboat –
6


==
Support craft (USAF) ==


===
Tug boats ===
Rising Star tugboat (Thule AFB harbor)


===
Recovery craft ===
82nd ATRS drone recovery watercraft (x3 120ft recovery vessels, x2 smaller boats)


==
See also ==
Currently active military equipment by country


==
References ==
Lethal Weapon is an American buddy cop action comedy-drama television series developed by Matt Miller and based on the film franchise created by Shane Black.
The series ran for three seasons on Fox, from September 2016 to February 2019.For its first two seasons, Lethal Weapon starred Clayne Crawford and Damon Wayans as Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh, mismatched detective partners who were also the main characters in the films, originally played by Mel Gibson and Danny Glover.
The series includes other characters directly or loosely inspired by characters from the films, including Leo Getz (played by Thomas Lennon)—a close friend of Riggs and Murtaugh, portrayed in the films by Joe Pesci.

In May 2018, amidst reports of alleged bad behavior and incidents of hostility between cast and crew on the show's set, Crawford was fired from the show, resulting in the Martin Riggs character being killed off.
Seann William Scott was hired to replace him the following season as a new character, Wesley Cole.
The third season premiered on September 25, 2018.In October 2018, Wayans announced that he would leave the series following the end-of-season production in December 2018.
Soon afterward, Fox ordered an additional two episodes for the third season, bringing the total for the season to fifteen episodes.

== Synopsis ==
For the first two seasons, Roger Murtaugh, an aging detective with a wife and three children, is partnered with Martin Riggs, a younger, somewhat unstable detective whose wife and unborn child were recently murdered.
While Riggs' devil-may-care methods of collaring criminals puts his and Murtaugh's lives in danger on a regular basis, the two are able to develop a respect and form a close friendship.
Following Riggs' death in season two, Murtaugh enters a six-month period of depression and during this time he meets and befriends Wesley Cole.
Cole is a former CIA operative who has been everywhere and seen everything, and soon finds himself navigating a new partnership with Murtaugh, as he adjusts to life in Los Angeles.

==
Episodes ==


== Cast and characters ==


===
Main ===
Damon Wayans as Roger Murtaugh, a senior Los Angeles Police Department Detective who returns to the force after recovering from a heart attack and is partnered with Texas transfer Martin Riggs.
He is married with three children (two teenagers and a toddler).
He is a native of Inglewood, California, and currently resides in Sherman Oaks.
In "Family Ties", Murtaugh is promoted to Captain after Avery decides to step down in order to run for office.
He was originally played by Danny Glover in the film series.

Clayne Crawford as Martin Riggs (seasons 1–2), a Navy SEAL-turned-police officer from El Paso, Texas.
He moved to Los Angeles after the death of his wife and unborn child, transferring from the El Paso County Sheriff's Office to the LAPD's Robbery-Homicide Division.
Riggs lived in a trailer on the beach, and is ultimately killed at the end of season two which greatly differs from his story in the film series.
He was originally played by Mel Gibson in the film series.

Jordana Brewster as Dr. Maureen Cahill (seasons 1–2;
guest season 3), the police department's psychologist who treats Det.
Riggs (and occasionally Det.
Murtaugh).
Although sometimes she is referred to as a psychiatrist and prescribes drugs (for example in "Better Living Through Chemistry").
The character is originally based on Dr. Stephanie Woods played by Mary Ellen Trainor in the film series.

Keesha Sharp as Trish Murtaugh, Det.
Murtaugh's loving wife and mother of his three children who works as a defense attorney.
In the season one episode "
As Good As It Getz", Trish quits her job after being passed over for managing partner at her law firm.
She was originally played by Darlene Love in the film series.

Kevin Rahm as Captain Brooks Avery, the Commanding Officer of Robbery-Homicide Division.
Before his promotion, Capt.
Avery was partners with Det.
Murtaugh.
In "Lawmen", it is revealed that years ago he and a Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department deputy (Malcolm-Jamal Warner) planted evidence to convict a murderer after previous evidence was excluded from trial; he was prepared to resign over the incident when it came to light, but Murtaugh convinced him to stay because if his impropriety was revealed it would mean that all of Avery's cases (many of which he worked with Murtaugh) would be reviewed if not overturned entirely.
The character is based on Captain Ed Murphy played by Steve Kahan in the film series.

Johnathan Fernandez as Bernard Scorsese, a medical examiner, forensic scientist and aspiring screenwriter who works alongside Dets.
Murtaugh and Riggs.

Michelle Mitchenor as Detective Sonya Bailey, a fellow detective with Robbery-Homicide Division.
She is partnered with Det.
Alex Cruz during the first season, Det.
Zach Bowman in the second season, and Det.
Luisa Gutierrez in the third season.

Chandler Kinney as Riana Murtaugh, Det.
Murtaugh's teenage daughter.
The character is based on Rianne Murtaugh, played by Traci Wolfe in the film series.

Dante Brown as Roger "RJ" Murtaugh Jr., Det.
Murtaugh's teenage son.
He graduated from high school at the end of season 1 and briefly attended college before dropping out during season 2.
The character is based on Nick Murtaugh, played by Damon Hines in the film series.

Seann William Scott as Wesley Cole (season 3), a war veteran, former C.I.A. field officer, and father who moves to Los Angeles to be closer to his child.
The character is based on Lorna Cole, Riggs' love interest played by Rene Russo in the film series.

===
Recurring ===
Thomas Lennon as Leo Getz, a comedic ambulance-chasing lawyer who once worked in the District Attorney's office before being fired.
He befriends Riggs and Murtaugh after he witnesses a client's murder, and is put under their protection.
He quickly takes a liking to them and their friendship strengthens by the second season.
He was originally played by Joe Pesci in the film series.

Hilarie Burton as Karen Palmer (seasons 1–2), a DEA agent who sometimes works with Riggs and Murtaugh on drug trafficking cases, and is also Riggs' love interest.
The two break up early in season 2.

Floriana Lima as Miranda Riggs (née Delgado)
(seasons 1–2), Det.
Riggs' late wife, who is seen in flashbacks.
Originally from the Los Angeles area, she moved to Texas when she married Riggs, and after her death, he moved to LA and joined the LAPD.
The character is based on Victoria Riggs from the film series, although she was never seen as she had already died before the events of the first film.

Richard Cabral as Detective Alejandro "Alex" Cruz (season 1), formerly an undercover officer with the LAPD's Gang Division who once worked at the Robbery-Homicide Division.

Tony Plana as Ronnie Delgado (seasons 1–2), the Los Angeles City Attorney and Det.
Riggs' father-in-law.
He is stabbed in prison in the Season 2 episode "Diggin' Up Dirt", and dies in the hospital.

Andrew Patrick Ralston as Jim McNeile, a dentist and neighbor of the Murtaughs.

Michelle Hurd as Gina Santos (seasons 2–3)
, a police big shot who arrives to take control of the division as chief, superseding the authority of Captain Avery.
She and Murtaugh had previously partnered as detectives on a stakeout.

Andrew Creer as Detective Zach Bowman (season 2), a young detective who starts working at the precinct.
He is soon partnered with Bailey.
Leo Getz condescendingly calls them "The B-team", which the naïve Bowman thinks is because their last names both start with "B".

Kristen Gutoskie as Molly Hendricks (season 2), Riggs' childhood friend and the ex-wife of his old best friend Jake, who has been in and out of prison.
Riggs and Molly have a brief relationship that Riggs ends when he sees his work is putting Molly and her son in danger.
They later are able to reconcile, and make plans to move back to Texas together just before Riggs is shot in the season 2 finale.

Rex Linn as Nathan Riggs (season 2), Riggs' abusive father
Chase Mangum as Young Martin Riggs (season 2)
Sophia Woodward as Young Molly Hendricks (season 2)
Duncan Joiner as Ben (season 2), Molly's son via her ex-husband Jake
Peter Coventry Smith as Garrett Riggs (seasons 2–3), Riggs' half-brother
Maggie Lawson as Natalie Flynn (season 3), Cole's ex-wife
Shay Rudolph as Maya Flynn (season 3), Cole and Natalie's daughter
Mykelti Williamson as Tom Barnes (season 3), Cole's former commanding officer
Paola Lazaro as Detective Luisa
"The Gute" Gutierrez (season 3), Detective Sonya Bailey's new partner
Nishi Munshi as Erica Malick (season 3), a deputy district attorney and potential love interest for Cole


==
Production ==
The series was ordered on May 10, 2016 and premiered on Fox on September 21, 2016.
On October 12, 2016, Fox picked up the series for a full season of 18 episodes.
On February 22, 2017, Fox renewed the series for a 22-episode second season, which premiered on September 26, 2017.
On May 13, 2018, the series was renewed for a 13-episode third season, with Seann William Scott replacing Clayne Crawford as the series' co-lead, playing a new character.

===
Casting ===
On February 12, 2016, Damon Wayans was cast as Roger Murtaugh.
On February 19, 2016, Golden Brooks was cast as Trish Murtaugh.
On March 3, 2016, Jordana Brewster was cast as Dr. Maureen Cahill.
On March 7, 2016, Kevin Rahm was cast as Captain Avery.
On March 10, 2016, Clayne Crawford was cast as Martin Riggs.
On March 15, 2016, Chandler Kinney was cast as Riana Murtaugh.
On March 17, 2016, it was announced that Keesha Sharp would take over the role of Trish Murtaugh from Brooks.
Also on March 17, Johnathan Fernandez was cast as Scorsese.
When the pilot was picked up to series, Johnathan Fernandez was made a series regular.
Though showrunner Matt Miller has expressed interest in making Leo Getz (Thomas Lennon)
a series regular at some point, the character is confirmed to be making frequent guest appearances throughout season two.

===
Cancellation and firing of
Crawford ===
In May 2018, it was reported that Crawford had been dismissed from the show for on-set behavioral issues and that the producers were looking to replace him for a potential third season.
On May 13, 2018, Seann William Scott had been cast as the new co-lead ahead of a third season renewal, playing a new character named Wesley Cole.
In October 2018, Damon Wayans announced his exit from the series, saying he would leave following the end of production for the third season in December 2018.
However, Fox Entertainment CEO Charlie Collier stated in February 2019 that there is a strong possibility of Wayans returning if the series were to be renewed for a fourth season.
Wayans had cited health problems as the reason for his departure, stating, "I'm a 58-year-old diabetic, and I’m working 16-hour days."
After these statements, producers rearranged Wayans' shooting schedules and provided diabetic meals for him on-set.
==
International broadcast ==
In United Kingdom, ITV started airing the series beginning on March 3, 2017.
Its viewing figures remained consistent with around 2.5 million tuning in each week.
Series 2 started January 12, 2018.
Series 3 started on July 26, 2019.
In Australia, the Nine Network premiered the series on January 29, 2017.
In the Philippines, it premiered on June 10, 2017 on ABS-CBN and ended on September 9, 2017.
Only 14 episodes were aired.
In Hong Kong, the TVB Pearl premiered the series with switchable dual-language in original English and local Cantonese version on October 11, 2017.
In India, Zee Café premiered the first season on 29 September 2016.
In Brazil, it has appeared since September 22, 2017 on the Warner Channel Brasil and on the open TV on Rede Globo.
In Canada, the series is on Netflix with new seasons arriving each September.

In Greece, Star Channel started airing the series but after the conclusion of Season 2 on February 2, 2019 plans for broadcasting the final season have yet to be announced to this day by the network.

In Bulgaria BTV (Bulgaria) started airing the series on August 1, 2019.

==
Home media ==


==
Reception ==


===
Critical reception ===
Lethal Weapon received mixed reviews from critics.
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported a 65% approval rating, with an average rating of 5.35/10 based on 40 reviews.
The consensus says, "Lethal Weapon's overly polished production values and tired narrative are somewhat overcome by solid chemistry between its two leads.
"
On Metacritic, the first season has a weighted average of 56 out of 100 based on 24 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews."
===
Ratings ===


===
Accolades ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lethal Weapon at IMDb
Physical science is a branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to life science.
It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences".

==
Definition ==
Physical science can be described as all of the following:

A branch of science  (a systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe).A branch of natural science – natural science is a major branch of science that tries to explain and predict nature's phenomena, based on empirical evidence.
In natural science, hypotheses must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.

Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are amongst the criteria and methods used for this purpose.
Natural science can be broken into two main branches: life science (for example biology) and physical science.
Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

==
Branches of physical science ==
Physics – natural and physical science that involves the study of matter and its motion through space and time, along with related concepts such as energy and force.
More broadly, it is the general analysis of nature, conducted in order to understand how the universe behaves.
Branches of physics
Astronomy – study of celestial objects (such as stars, galaxies, planets, moons, asteroids, comets and nebulae), the physics, chemistry, and evolution of such objects, and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth, including supernovae explosions, gamma ray bursts, and cosmic microwave background radiation.

Branches of astronomy
Chemistry – studies the composition, structure, properties and change of matter.
In this realm, chemistry deals with such topics as the properties of individual atoms, the manner in which atoms form chemical bonds in the formation of compounds, the interactions of substances through intermolecular forces to give matter its general properties, and the interactions between substances through chemical reactions to form different substances.

Branches of chemistry
Earth science – all-embracing term referring to the fields of science dealing with planet Earth.
Earth science is the study of how the natural environment (ecosphere or Earth system) works and how it evolved to its current state.

It includes the study of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere.

Branches of Earth science


==
History of physical science ==
History of physical science – history of the branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to the life sciences.
It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences".
However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena (organic chemistry, for example).
The four main branches of physical science are astronomy, physics, chemistry, and the Earth sciences, which include meteorology and geology.

History of physics – history of the physical science that studies matter and its motion through space-time, and related concepts such as energy and force
History of acoustics – history of the study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
History of agrophysics – history of the study of physics applied to agroecosystems
History of soil physics – history of the study of soil physical properties and processes.

History of astrophysics – history of the study of the physical aspects of celestial objects
History of astronomy – history of the study of the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.)
and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).

History of astrodynamics – history of the application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.

History of astrometry – history of the branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies.

History of cosmology – history of the discipline that deals with the nature of the Universe as a whole.

History of extragalactic astronomy – history of the branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
History of galactic astronomy – history of the study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.

History of physical cosmology – history of the study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.

History of planetary science – history of the scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.

History of stellar astronomy – history of the natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)
History of atmospheric physics – history of the study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
History of atomic, molecular, and optical physics – history of the study of how matter and light interact
History of biophysics – history of the study of physical processes relating to biology
History of medical physics – history of the application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.

History of neurophysics – history of the branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.

History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

History of computational physics – history of the study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.

History of condensed matter physics – history of the study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.

History of cryogenics – history of the cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238
°F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.

History of Dynamics – history of the study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
History of econophysics – history of the interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
History of electromagnetism – history of the branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.

History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
History of materials physics – history of the use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.

History of mathematical physics – history of the application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.

History of mechanics – history of the branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.

History of biomechanics – history of the study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.

History of classical mechanics – history of the one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.

History of continuum mechanics – history of the branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.

History of fluid mechanics – history of the study of fluids and the forces on them.

History of quantum mechanics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

History of thermodynamics – history of the branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.

History of nuclear physics – history of the field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.

History of optics – history of the branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.

History of particle physics – history of the branch of physics that studies the existence and interactions of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter or radiation.

History of psychophysics – history of the quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.

History of plasma physics – history of the state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.

History of polymer physics – history of the field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.

History of quantum physics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.

History of theory of relativity –
History of statics – history of the branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.

History of solid state physics – history of the study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.

History of vehicle dynamics – history of the dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.
History of chemistry – history of the physical science of atomic matter (matter that is composed of chemical elements), especially its chemical reactions, but also including its properties, structure, composition, behavior, and changes as they relate the chemical reactions
History of analytical chemistry – history of the study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.

History of astrochemistry – history of the study of the abundance and reactions of chemical elements and molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation.

History of cosmochemistry – history of the study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions
History of atmospheric chemistry – history of the branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied.
It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines
History of biochemistry – history of the study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter.
Biochemistry governs all living organisms and living processes.

History of agrochemistry – history of the study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.

History of bioinorganic chemistry – history of the examines the role of metals in biology.

History of bioorganic chemistry – history of the rapidly growing scientific discipline that combines organic chemistry and biochemistry.

History of biophysical chemistry – history of the new branch of chemistry that covers a broad spectrum of research activities involving biological systems.

History of environmental chemistry – history of the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

History of immunochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that involves the study of the reactions and components on the immune system.

History of medicinal chemistry – history of the discipline at the intersection of chemistry, especially synthetic organic chemistry, and pharmacology and various other biological specialties, where they are involved with design, chemical synthesis and development for market of pharmaceutical agents (drugs).

History of pharmacology – history of the branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.

History of natural product chemistry – history of the chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism – history of the found in nature that usually has a pharmacological or biological activity for use in pharmaceutical drug discovery and drug design.

History of neurochemistry – history of the specific study of neurochemicals, which include neurotransmitters and other molecules such as neuro-active drugs that influence neuron function.

History of computational chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems.

History of chemo-informatics – history of the use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry.

History of molecular mechanics – history of the uses Newtonian mechanics to model molecular systems.

History of Flavor chemistry – history of the someone who uses chemistry to engineer artificial and natural flavors.

History of Flow chemistry –
history of the chemical reaction is run in a continuously flowing stream rather than in batch production.

History of geochemistry – history of the study of the mechanisms behind major geological systems using chemistry
History of aqueous geochemistry – history of the study of the role of various elements in watersheds, including copper, sulfur, mercury, and
how elemental fluxes are exchanged through atmospheric-terrestrial-aquatic interactions
History of isotope geochemistry – history of the study of the relative and absolute concentrations of the elements and their isotopes using chemistry and geology
History of ocean chemistry – history of the studies the chemistry of marine environments including the influences of different variables.

History of organic geochemistry – history of the study of the impacts and processes that organisms have had on Earth
History of regional, environmental and exploration geochemistry – history of the study of the spatial variation in the chemical composition of materials at the surface of the Earth
History of inorganic chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.

History of nuclear chemistry – history of the subfield of chemistry dealing with radioactivity, nuclear processes and nuclear properties.

History of radiochemistry – history of the chemistry of radioactive materials, where radioactive isotopes of elements are used to study the properties and chemical reactions of non-radioactive isotopes (often within radiochemistry the absence of radioactivity leads to a substance being described as being inactive as the isotopes are stable).

History of organic chemistry – history of the study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.

History of petrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies the transformation of crude oil (petroleum) and natural gas into useful products or raw materials.

History of organometallic chemistry – history of the study of chemical compounds containing bonds between carbon and a metal.

History of photochemistry – history of the study of chemical reactions that proceed with the absorption of light by atoms or molecules..
History of physical chemistry – history of the study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.

History of chemical kinetics – history of the study of rates of chemical processes.

History of chemical thermodynamics – history of the study of the interrelation of heat and work with chemical reactions or with physical changes of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.

History of electrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies chemical reactions which take place in a solution at the interface of an electron conductor (a metal or a semiconductor) and an ionic conductor (the electrolyte), and which involve electron transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte or species in solution.

History of Femtochemistry – history of the Femtochemistry is the science that studies chemical reactions on extremely short timescales, approximately 10−15 seconds (one femtosecond, hence the name).

History of mathematical chemistry – history of the area of research engaged in novel applications of mathematics to chemistry; it concerns itself principally with the mathematical modeling of chemical phenomena.

History of mechanochemistry – history of the coupling of the mechanical and the chemical phenomena on a molecular scale and includes mechanical breakage, chemical behaviour of mechanically stressed solids (e.g., stress-corrosion cracking), tribology, polymer degradation under shear, cavitation-related phenomena (e.g., sonochemistry and sonoluminescence), shock wave chemistry and physics, and even the burgeoning field of molecular machines.

History of physical organic chemistry – history of the study of the interrelationships between structure and reactivity in organic molecules.

History of quantum chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry
whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems.

History of sonochemistry – history of the study of the effect of sonic waves and wave properties on chemical systems.

History of stereochemistry – history of the study of the relative spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules.

History of supramolecular chemistry – history of the area of chemistry beyond the molecules and focuses on the chemical systems made up of a discrete number of assembled molecular subunits or components.

History of thermochemistry – history of the study of the energy and heat associated with chemical reactions and/or physical transformations.

History of phytochemistry – history of the strict sense of the word the study of phytochemicals.

History of polymer chemistry – history of the multidisciplinary science that deals with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers or macromolecules.

History of solid-state chemistry – history of the study of the synthesis, structure, and properties of solid phase materials, particularly, but not necessarily exclusively of, non-molecular solids
Multidisciplinary fields involving chemistry
History of chemical biology – history of the scientific discipline spanning the fields of chemistry and biology that involves the application of chemical techniques and tools, often compounds produced through synthetic chemistry, to the study and manipulation of biological systems.

History of chemical engineering – history of the branch of engineering that deals with physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.

History of chemical oceanography – history of the study of the behavior of the chemical elements within the Earth's oceans.

History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.

History of materials science – history of the interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.

History of nanotechnology – history of the study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale
History of oenology – history of the science and study of all aspects of wine and winemaking except vine-growing and grape-harvesting, which is a subfield called viticulture.

History of spectroscopy – history of the study of the interaction between matter and radiated energy
History of surface science – history of the Surface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid–liquid interfaces, solid–gas interfaces, solid–vacuum interfaces, and liquid–gas interfaces.
History of Earth science – history of the all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.
Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.

History of atmospheric sciences – history of the umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.

History of climatology
History of meteorology
History of atmospheric chemistry
History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.

History of cartography – history of the study and practice of making maps or globes.

History of climatology – history of the study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
History of coastal geography – history of the study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.

History of environmental science – history of an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.

History of ecology – history of the scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.

History of Freshwater biology – history of the scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of limnology
History of marine biology – history of the scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
History of parasitology –
history of the Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.

History of population dynamics – history of the Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.

History of environmental chemistry – history of the Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

History of environmental soil science – history of the Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.

History of environmental geology – history of the Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.

History of toxicology – history of the branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

History of geodesy – history of the scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
History of geography – history of the science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
History of geoinformatics – history of the science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.

History of geology – history of the study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.

History of planetary geology – history of the planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.

History of geomorphology – history of the scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
History of geostatistics – history of the branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.

History of glaciology – history of the study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

History of hydrology – history of the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

History of hydrogeology – history of the area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).

History of mineralogy – history of the study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

History of meteorology – history of the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.

History of oceanography – history of the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
History of paleoclimatology – history of the study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
History of paleontology – history of the study of prehistoric life
History of petrology – history of the branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.

History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of seismology – history of the scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
History of soil science – history of the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.

History of topography – history of the study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.

History of volcanology – history of the study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

==
General principles of the physical sciences ==
Principle – law or rule that has to be, or usually is to be followed, or can be desirably followed, or is an inevitable consequence of something, such as the laws observed in nature or the way that a system is constructed.
The principles of such a system are understood by its users as the essential characteristics of the system, or reflecting system's designed purpose, and the effective operation or use of which would be impossible if any one of the principles was to be ignored.

===
Basic principles of physics ===
Physics – branch of science that studies matter and its motion through space and time, along with related concepts such as energy and force.

Physics is one of the "fundamental sciences" because the other natural sciences (like biology, geology etc.)
deal with systems that seem to obey the laws of physics.
According to physics, the physical laws of matter, energy and the fundamental forces of nature govern the interactions between particles and physical entities (such as planets, molecules, atoms or the subatomic particles).
Some of the basic pursuits of physics, which include some of the most prominent developments in modern science in the last millennium, include:

Describing the nature, measuring and quantifying of bodies and their motion, dynamics etc.

Newton's laws of motion
Mass, force and weight
Momentum and conservation of energy
Gravity, theories of gravity
Energy, work, and their relationship
Motion, position, and energy
Different forms of Energy, their interconversion and the inevitable loss of energy in the form of heat (Thermodynamics)
Energy conservation, conversion, and transfer.

Energy source
the transfer of energy from one source to work in another.

Kinetic molecular theory
Phases of matter and phase transitions
Temperature and thermometers
Energy and heat
Heat flow: conduction, convection, and radiation
The four laws of thermodynamics
The principles of waves and sound
The principles of electricity, magnetism, and electromagnetism
The principles, sources, and properties of light


===
Basic principles of astronomy ==
=
Astronomy – science of celestial bodies and their interactions in space.
Its studies includes the following:
The life and characteristics of stars and galaxies
Origins of the universe.
Physical science uses the Big Bang theory as the commonly accepted scientific theory of the origin of the universe.

A heliocentric Solar System.
Ancient cultures saw the Earth as the centre of the Solar System or universe (geocentrism).
In the 16th century, Nicolaus Copernicus advanced the ideas of heliocentrism, recognizing the Sun as the centre of the Solar System.

The structure of solar systems, planets, comets, asteroids, and meteors
The shape and structure of Earth (roughly spherical, see also Spherical Earth)
Earth in the Solar System
Time measurement
The composition and features of the Moon
Interactions of the Earth and Moon(Note:
Astronomy should not be confused with astrology, which assumes that people's destiny and human affairs in general correlate to the apparent positions of astronomical objects in the sky – although the two fields share a common origin, they are quite different; astronomers embrace the scientific method, while astrologers do not.)
===
Basic principles of chemistry ===
Chemistry – branch of science that studies the composition, structure, properties and change of matter.
Chemistry is chiefly concerned with atoms and molecules and their interactions and transformations, for example, the properties of the chemical bonds formed between atoms to create chemical compounds.
As such, chemistry studies the involvement of electrons and various forms of energy in photochemical reactions, oxidation-reduction reactions, changes in phases of matter, and separation of mixtures.
Preparation and properties of complex substances, such as alloys, polymers, biological molecules, and pharmaceutical agents are considered in specialized fields of chemistry.

Physical chemistry
Chemical thermodynamics
Reaction kinetics
Molecular structure
Quantum chemistry
Spectroscopy
Theoretical chemistry
Electron configuration
Molecular modelling
Molecular dynamics
Statistical mechanics
Computational chemistry
Mathematical chemistry
Cheminformatics
Nuclear chemistry
The nature of the atomic nucleus
Characterization of radioactive decay
Nuclear reactions
Organic chemistry
Organic compounds
Organic reaction
Functional groups
Organic synthesis
Inorganic chemistry
Inorganic compounds
Crystal structure
Coordination chemistry
Solid-state chemistry
Biochemistry
Analytical chemistry
Instrumental analysis
Electroanalytical method
Wet chemistry
Electrochemistry
Redox reaction
Materials chemistry


===
Basic principles of Earth science ===
Earth science – the science of the planet Earth, as of 2018 the only identified life-bearing planet.
Its studies include the following:
The water cycle and the process of transpiration
Freshwater
Oceanography
Weathering and erosion
Rocks
Agrophysics
Soil science
Pedogenesis
Soil fertility
Earth's tectonic structure
Geomorphology and geophysics
Physical geography
Seismology: stress, strain, and earthquakes
Characteristics of mountains and volcanoes
Characteristics and formation of fossils
Atmospheric sciences – the branches of science that study the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.

Atmosphere of Earth
Atmospheric pressure and winds
Evaporation, condensation, and humidity
Fog and clouds
Meteorology, weather, climatology, and climate
Hydrology, clouds and precipitation
Air masses and weather fronts
Major storms: thunderstorms, tornadoes, and hurricanes
Major climate groups
Speleology
Cave


==
Notable physical scientists ==
List of physicists
List of astronomers
List of chemists


===
Earth scientists ===
List of Russian Earth scientists


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


===
Works cited ===
Feynman, R.P.; Leighton, R.B.; Sands, M. (1963).
The Feynman Lectures on Physics.
1.
ISBN 0-201-02116-1.

Holzner, S. (2006).
Physics for Dummies.
John Wiley & Sons.
ISBN 0-470-61841-8.
Physics is the study of your world and universe around you.

Maxwell, J.C. (1878).
Matter and Motion.
D. Van Nostrand.
ISBN 0-486-66895-9.

Young, H.D.; Freedman, R.A. (2014).
Sears and Zemansky's University Physics with Modern Physics Technology Update (13th ed.).
Pearson Education.
ISBN 978-1-292-02063-1.
==
External links ==

Physical science topics and articles for school curricula (grades K-12)
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to applied science:
Applied science – the branch of science that applies existing scientific knowledge to develop more practical applications, including inventions and other technological advancements.
Science itself is the  systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.

==
Branches of applied science ==
Applied science – application of scientific knowledge transferred into a physical environment.

Agronomy – science and technology of producing and using plants for food, fuel, feed, fiber, and reclamation.

Animal husbandry – agricultural practice of breeding and raising livestock.

Aquaculture – also known as aquafarming, is the farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, molluscs and aquatic plants.
Algaculture – form of aquaculture involving the farming of species of algae.

Mariculture – cultivation of marine organisms for food and other products in the open ocean, an enclosed section of the ocean, or in tanks, ponds or raceways which are filled with seawater.

Agriculture – science of farming
Cuniculture – also known as rabbit farming, is the breeding and raising domestic rabbits, usually for their meat or fur.

Fungiculture –  process of producing food, medicine, and other products by the cultivation of mushrooms and other fungi.

Heliciculture – also called snail farming, is the process of farming or raising land snails specifically for human consumption, and more recently, to obtain snail slime for cosmetics use.

Olericulture – science of vegetable growing, dealing with the culture of non-woody (herbaceous) plants for food.

Sericulture – also called silk farming, is the rearing of silkworms for the production of silk.
Although there are several commercial species of silkworms, Bombyx mori is the most widely used and intensively studied.

Food science – study concerned with all technical aspects of foods, beginning with harvesting or slaughtering, and ending with its cooking and consumption, an ideology commonly referred to as "from field to fork".
It is the discipline in which the engineering, biological, and physical sciences are used to study the nature of foods, the causes of deterioration, the principles underlying food processing, and the improvement of foods for the consuming public.

Forestry – art and science of managing forests, tree plantations, and related natural resources.

Arboriculture – cultivation, management, and study of individual trees, shrubs, vines, and other perennial woody plants.

Silviculture – practice of controlling the establishment, growth, composition, health, and quality of forests to meet diverse needs and values.
It includes regenerating, tending and harvesting techniques.

Horticulture – art, science, technology and business of intensive plant cultivation for human use
Floriculture – discipline of horticulture concerned with the cultivation of flowering and ornamental plants for gardens and for floristry, comprising the floral industry.

Hydroculture – growing of plants in a soilless medium, or an aquatic based environment.
Plant nutrients are distributed via water.
Hydroculture is aquatic horticulture.

Hydroponics – subset of hydroculture and is a method of growing plants using mineral nutrient solutions, in water, without soil.

Permaculture – branch of ecological design and ecological engineering, which develop sustainable human settlements and self-maintained agricultural systems modeled from natural ecosystems.

Architecture – process and product of planning, designing and construction.
Architectural works, in the material form of buildings, are often perceived as cultural symbols and as works of art.

Architectural engineering – application of engineering principles and technology to building design and construction.

Building science – collection of scientific knowledge that focuses on the analysis and control of the physical phenomena affecting buildings.

Computing technology (outline) – computer hardware and software, and computing methods.

Education – any act or experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual.
In its technical sense, education is the process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another.

Electronics – branch of physics, engineering and technology dealing with electrical circuits that involve active electrical components such as vacuum tubes, transistors, diodes and integrated circuits, and associated passive interconnection technologies.

Energy technology (outline) – interdisciplinary engineering science having to do with the efficient, safe, environmentally friendly and economical extraction, conversion, transportation, storage and use of energy, targeted towards yielding high efficiency whilst skirting side effects on humans, nature and the environment.

Energy storage (outline) – accomplished by devices or physical media that store some form of energy to perform some useful operation at a later time.
A device that stores energy is sometimes called an accumulator.

Engineering (outline) –
discipline, art, skill and profession of acquiring and applying scientific, mathematical, economic, social, and practical knowledge, in order to design and build structures, machines, devices, systems, materials and processes that safely realize improvements to the lives of people.

Aerospace engineering –
Aerospace engineering is the primary branch of engineering concerned with the design, construction, and science of aircraft and spacecraft.
It is divided into two major and overlapping branches: aeronautical engineering and astronautical engineering.
The former deals with craft that stay within Earth's atmosphere, and the latter with craft that operate outside it.

Agricultural engineering – engineering discipline that applies engineering science and technology to agricultural production and processing.

Agricultural science – broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture.

Applied engineering – field concerned with the application of management, design, and technical skills for the design and integration of systems,
the execution of new product designs, the improvement of manufacturing processes, and the management and direction of physical and/or technical functions of a firm or organization.

Biomedical engineering – application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology.

Bioengineering – application of concepts and methods of biology (and secondarily of physics, chemistry, mathematics, and computer science) to solve real-world problems related to the life sciences and/or the application thereof, using engineering's own analytical and synthetic methodologies and also its traditional sensitivity to the cost and practicality of the solution(s) arrived at.

Chemical engineering – application of physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.

Civil engineering – deals with the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including works like roads, bridges, canals, dams, and buildings.
Civil engineering has many sub-disciplines.

Computer engineering – design and development of computer systems
Artificial intelligence (outline) – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Electrical engineering – field of engineering that generally deals with the study and application of electricity, electronics and electromagnetism.

Engineering technology (outline) –
development and implementation of existing technology within a field of engineering.

Environmental engineering science – multidisciplinary field of engineering science that combines the biological, chemical and physical sciences with the field of engineering.

Industrial engineering – branch of engineering dealing with the optimization of complex processes or systems
Control engineering – engineering discipline that applies control theory to design systems with desired behaviors.

Manufacturing engineering - engineering discipline of creating quality products from raw materials in the most efficient way possible.

Ceramic engineering – science and technology of creating objects from inorganic, non-metallic materials.

Language engineering – deliberate effort to influence the function, structure, or acquisition of languages or language variety within a speech community.

Marine engineering – engineering of boats, ships, oil rigs and any other marine vessel
Materials science and engineering – interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.
This scientific field investigates the relationship between the structure of materials at atomic or molecular scales and their macroscopic properties.

Mechanical engineering – discipline of engineering that applies the principles of physics and materials science for analysis, design, manufacturing, and maintenance of mechanical systems.

Mining engineering – engineering discipline that involves the practice, the theory, the science, the technology, and application of extracting and processing minerals from a naturally occurring environment.

Nuclear engineering – branch of engineering concerned with the application of the breakdown (fission) as well as the fusion of atomic nuclei and/or the application of other sub-atomic physics, based on the principles of nuclear physics.

Polymer engineering – subfield of materials science concerned with polymers, primarily synthetic polymers such as plastics.

Engineering physics – study of the combined disciplines of physics, engineering and mathematics in order to develop an understanding of the interrelationships of these three disciplines.

Security engineering – focuses on the security aspects in the design of systems that need to be able to deal robustly with possible sources of disruption, ranging from natural disasters to malicious acts.

Software engineering (outline) –
application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of software, and the study of these approaches; that is, the application of engineering to software.

Systems engineering – interdisciplinary field of engineering focusing on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed over their life cycles.

Environmental science – multidisciplinary academic field that integrates physical, biological and information sciences to the study of the environment, and the solution of environmental problems.

Environmental technology – application of one or more of environmental science, green chemistry, environmental monitoring and electronic devices to monitor, model and conserve the natural environment and resources, and to curb the negative impacts of human involvement.

Fisheries science – academic discipline of managing and understanding fisheries.
It is a multidisciplinary science, which draws on the disciplines of limnology, oceanography, freshwater biology, marine biology, conservation, ecology, population dynamics, economics and management to attempt to provide an integrated picture of fisheries.

Forensic science (outline) – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health science – application of science, technology, engineering or mathematics to the delivery of healthcare
Conservation medicine – emerging, interdisciplinary field that studies the relationship between human and animal health, and environmental conditions.

Dentistry – branch of medicine that is involved in the study, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of diseases, disorders and conditions of the oral cavity, maxillofacial area and the adjacent and associated structures and their impact on the human body.

Optometry – health care profession concerned with the health of the eyes and related structures, as well as vision, visual systems, and vision information processing in humans.

Medicine – science of healing.
To elaborate, it is the applied science of the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease.
It encompasses a variety of health care practices evolved to maintain and restore health by the prevention and treatment of illness in human beings.

Anatomy – branch of biology and medicine that is the consideration of the structure of living things.

Human anatomy – scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.

Dermatology – branch of medicine dealing with the skin and its diseases, a unique specialty with both medical and surgical aspects.

Cardiology – medical specialty dealing with disorders of the heart (specifically the human heart).

Endocrinology - medical specialty dealing with the endocrine system, its diseases, and its specific secretions (hormones), and the interactions of these with all aspects of bodily functioning
Gastroenterology – branch of medicine whereby the digestive system and its disorders are studied.

Gynecology – medical practice dealing with the health of the female reproductive system (uterus, vagina, and ovaries).

Immunology – study of the immune system.

Internal medicine – medical specialty dealing with the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of adult diseases.

Neurology – medical specialty dealing with disorders of the nervous system.

Ophthalmology – branch of medicine that deals with the anatomy, physiology and diseases of the eye.

Pathology – precise study and diagnosis of disease.

Pathophysiology – study of the changes of normal mechanical, physiological, and biochemical functions, either caused by a disease, or resulting from an abnormal syndrome.

Pediatrics – branch of medicine that deals with the medical care of infants, children, and adolescents.

Pharmacy –
health profession that links the health sciences with the chemical sciences and it is charged with ensuring the safe and effective use of pharmaceutical drugs.

Physiology – science of the function of living systems.

Psychiatry – medical specialty devoted to the study and treatment of mental disorders.

Radiology – medical specialty that employs the use of imaging to both diagnose and treat disease visualised within the human body.

Toxicology – branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

Urology – medical and surgical specialty that focuses on the urinary tracts of males and females, and on the reproductive system of males.

Nutrition – studies the relationship between diet and states of health and disease.

Nursing – Nursing is a healthcare profession focused on the care of individuals, families, and communities
so they may attain, maintain, or recover optimal health and quality of life.

Pharmacology – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action
Physical therapy –
Military Physical Therapists working with patients on balance problems, orthopedic/musculoskeletal injuries, amputee, compression wrapping to control edema,
and during evaluation/assessment of strength, flexibility, and joint range of motion, massages, etc. .

Veterinary medicine – branch of science that deals with the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disease, disorder and injury in non-human animals.

Applied linguistics – interdisciplinary field of study that identifies, investigates, and offers solutions to language-related real-life problems.

Management – getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Accounting – process of communicating financial information about a business entity to users such as shareholders and managers.

Outline of management – getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Business Strategy – field that deals with the major intended and emergent initiatives taken by general managers on behalf of owners, involving utilization of resources, to enhance the performance of firms in their external environments.

Finance –  addresses the ways in which individuals, businesses and organizations raise, allocate and use monetary resources over time, taking into account the risks entailed in their projects.

Marketing – social and managerial processes by which products, services and value are exchanged in order to fulfil individuals' or group's needs and wants.
These processes include, but are not limited to, advertising, promotion, distribution, and sales.

Organizational Behavior – field of study that investigates the impact that individuals, groups and structures have on behavior within an organization.

Operations – those ongoing recurring (cyclic) activities involved in the running of a business for the purpose of producing value for the stakeholders.

Applied mathematics – branch of mathematics concerned with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry.
Thus, "applied mathematics" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge.

Microtechnology – technology with features near one micrometre (one millionth of a metre, or 10−6 metre, or 1μm).

Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Military Organization – structuring of the armed forces of a state so as to offer military capability required by the national defence policy.

Military Education and Training –
Recruit training, more commonly known as Basic Training and colloquially called Boot Camp, is the initial indoctrination and instruction given to new military personnel, enlisted and officer.

Military history
– humanities discipline within the scope of general historical recording of armed conflict in the history of humanity, and its impact on the societies, their cultures, economies and changing intra and international relationships.

Military engineering – the art and practice of designing and building military works and maintaining lines of military transport and communications.

Military Strategy and Tactics – set of ideas implemented by military organizations to pursue desired strategic goals
Applied physics – physics intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge between "pure" physics and engineering.

Optics – branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.

Nanotechnology (outline) –
study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with developing materials, devices, or other structures possessing at least one dimension sized from 1 to 100 nanometres.
Quantum mechanical effects are important at this quantum-realm scale.

Nuclear technology (outline) – technology that involves the reactions of atomic nuclei.
Among the notable nuclear technologies are nuclear power, nuclear medicine, and nuclear weapons.
It has found applications from smoke detectors to nuclear reactors, and from gun sights to nuclear weapons.

Space Science – discipline encompassing the fields of study that involve space exploration and the study of natural phenomena occurring in outer space.

Astronautics – science of spacefaring and spaceflight.

Astronomy – the study of natural objects and phenomena.

Space Exploration – the discovery and exploration of celestial structures in outer space by developing space technology.

Spatial science – academic discipline incorporating fields such as surveying, geographic information systems, hydrography and cartography.
Spatial science is typically concerned with the measurement, management, analysis and display of spatial information describing the Earth, its physical features and the built environment.

GIS – geographic information system is a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and present all types of geographical data.

Remote sensing – acquisition of information about an object or phenomenon, without making physical contact with the object.

Photogrammetry – practice of determining the geometric properties of objects from photographic images.

==
History of applied science ==
History of applied linguistics
History of applied mathematics
History of applied physics
History of artificial intelligence
Timeline of artificial intelligence
History of ceramic engineering
History of computing technology
History of computing
History of computing hardware
History of electronics
Early electronic components
History of electronic engineering
History of energy
History of energy storage
History of environmental engineering
History of forensic science
History of forestry
History of materials science
History of medicine
History of nanotechnology
History of nuclear technology
History of optics
History of software engineering


==
Applied science education ==
Fachhochschule
Institute of technology –


==
=
Degrees and certificates ===
Bachelor of Applied Science – undergraduate degree awarded for a course of study that generally lasts three to four years in the United Kingdom and Australia, and four to six years in Canada, the Netherlands and the United States.

Applied Science Technician
Applied
Science Technologist
===
Applied science schools ===
University of applied sciences (Finland)


==
Applied science organizations ==
Fraunhofer Society
Saskatchewan Applied Science Technologists & Technicians


==
Applied science publications ==
American Journal of Applied Sciences
Foresight:
The International Journal of Applied Forecasting
Intégral:
The Journal of Applied Musical Thought
International Journal of Applied Management and Technology
International Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
International Journal of Applied Philosophy
ITL – International Journal of Applied Linguistics
Japanese Journal of Applied Physics
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis
Journal of Applied Biomechanics
Journal of Applied Biomedicine
Journal of Applied Corporate Finance
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology
Journal of Applied Ecology
Journal of Applied Econometrics
Journal of Applied Economics
Journal of Applied Electrochemistry
Journal of Applied Gerontology
Journal of Applied Horticulture
Journal of Applied Ichthyology
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics
Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology
Journal of Applied Non-Classical Logics
Journal of Applied Philosophy
Journal of Applied Physics
Journal of Applied Physiology
Journal of Applied Polymer Science
Journal of Applied Psychology
Journal of Applied Social Psychology
Journal of Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
Journal of Applied Social Science
Journal of Applied Toxicology
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science
Outline of technology


==
References ==


==
External links ==

Free Federal Resources for Educational Excellence – Applied sciences
A military government is generally any government that is administered by military forces, whether or not this government is legal under the laws of the jurisdiction at issue, and whether this government is formed by natives or by an occupying power.
It is usually carried out by military workers.

Types of military government include:

Military occupation of acquired foreign territory and the administration thereof
Martial law, temporary military rule of domestic territory
Military dictatorship, an authoritarian government controlled by a military and its political designees, called a military junta when done extralegally
Military junta, a government led by a committee of military leaders.

Stratocracy, a government traditionally or constitutionally run by a military.
A weapon, arm or armament is any implement or device that can be used with the intent to inflict damage or harm.
Weapons are used to increase the efficacy and efficiency of activities such as hunting, crime, law enforcement, self-defense, and warfare.
In broader context, weapons may be construed to include anything used to gain a tactical, strategic, material or mental advantage over an adversary or enemy target.

While ordinary objects – sticks, rocks, bottles, chairs, vehicles – can be used as weapons, many are expressly designed for the purpose; these range from simple implements such as clubs, axes and swords, to complicated modern firearms, tanks, intercontinental ballistic missiles, biological weapons, and cyberweapons.
Something that has been re-purposed, converted, or enhanced to become a weapon of war is termed weaponized, such as a weaponized virus or weaponized laser.

==
History ==
The use of weapons is a major driver of cultural evolution and human history up to today, since weapons are a type of tool which is used to dominate and subdue autonomous agents such as animals and by that allow for an expansion of the cultural niche, while simultaneously other weapon users (i.e., agents such as humans, groups, cultures) are able to adapt to weapons of enemies by learning, triggering a continuous process of competitive technological, skill and cognitive improvement (arms race).

===
Prehistoric ===
The use of objects as weapons has been observed among chimpanzees, leading to speculation that early hominids used weapons as early as five million years ago.
However, this can not be confirmed using physical evidence because wooden clubs, spears, and unshaped stones would have left an ambiguous record.
The earliest unambiguous weapons to be found are the Schöningen spears, eight wooden throwing spears dating back more than 300,000 years.
At the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, numerous human skeletons dating to 10,000 years ago may present evidence of traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including obsidian projectiles embedded in the bones that might have been caused from arrows and clubs during conflict between two hunter-gatherer groups.
But the evidence interpretation of warfare at Nataruk has been challenged.

===
Ancient history ===
The earliest ancient weapons were evolutionary improvements of late neolithic implements, but significant improvements in materials and crafting techniques led to a series of revolutions in military technology.

The development of metal tools began with copper during the Copper Age (about 3,300 BC) and was followed by the Bronze Age, leading to the creation of the Bronze Age sword and similar weapons.

During the Bronze Age, the first defensive structures and fortifications appeared as well, indicating an increased need for security.
Weapons designed to breach fortifications followed soon after, such as the battering ram, which was in use by 2500 BC.The development of iron-working around 1300 BC in Greece had an important impact on the development of ancient weapons.
It was not the introduction of early Iron Age swords, however, as they were not superior to their bronze predecessors,
but rather the domestication of the horse and widespread use of spoked wheels by c. 2000 BC.
This led to the creation of the light, horse-drawn chariot, whose improved mobility proved important during this era.
Spoke-wheeled chariot usage peaked around 1300 BC and then declined, ceasing to be militarily relevant by the 4th century BC.Cavalry developed once horses were bred to support the weight of a human.
The horse extended the range and increased the speed of attacks.

In addition to land based weaponry, warships, such as the trireme, were in use by the 7th century BC.

=== Post-classical history ===
European warfare during the Post-classical history was dominated by elite groups of knights supported by massed infantry (both in combat and ranged roles).
They were involved in mobile combat and sieges which involved various siege weapons and tactics.
Knights on horseback developed tactics for charging with lances providing an impact on the enemy formations and then drawing more practical weapons (such as swords) once they entered into the melee.
By contrast, infantry, in the age before structured formations, relied on cheap, sturdy weapons such as spears and billhooks in close combat and bows from a distance.
As armies became more professional, their equipment was standardized and infantry transitioned to pikes.
Pikes are normally seven to eight feet in length, and used in conjunction with smaller side-arms (short sword).

In Eastern and Middle Eastern warfare, similar tactics were developed independent of European influences.

The introduction of gunpowder from the Asia at the end of this period revolutionized warfare.
Formations of musketeers, protected by pikemen came to dominate open battles, and the cannon replaced the trebuchet as the dominant siege weapon.

===
Modern history ===


====
Early modern ====
The European Renaissance marked the beginning of the implementation of firearms in western warfare.
Guns and rockets were introduced to the battlefield.

Firearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants such as gunpowder, rather than from a counter-weight or spring.
This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user.
Therefore even early firearms such as the arquebus were much more powerful than human-powered weapons.
Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th century to 19th century, with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant.
During the U.S. Civil War new applications of firearms including the machine gun and ironclad warship emerged that would still be recognizable and useful military weapons today, particularly in limited conflicts.
In the 19th century warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel-powered steam engines.

Since the mid-18th century North American French-Indian war through the beginning of the 20th century, human-powered weapons were reduced from the primary weaponry of the battlefield yielding to gunpowder-based weaponry.
Sometimes referred to as the "Age of Rifles", this period was characterized by the development of firearms for infantry and cannons for support, as well as the beginnings of mechanized weapons such as the machine gun.

Of particular note, Howitzers were able to destroy masonry fortresses and other fortifications, and this single invention caused a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA), establishing tactics and doctrine that are still in use today.
See Technology during World War I for a detailed discussion.

====
Industrial age ====
An important feature of industrial age warfare was technological escalation – innovations were rapidly matched through replication or countered by another innovation.
The technological escalation during World War I (WW I) was profound, including the wide introduction of aircraft into warfare, and naval warfare with the introduction of aircraft carriers.

====
World War
I ====
World War
I marked the entry of fully industrialized warfare as well as weapons of mass destruction (e.g., chemical and biological weapons), and new weapons were developed quickly to meet wartime needs.
Above all, it promised to the military commanders the independence from the horse and the resurgence in maneuver warfare through extensive use of motor vehicles.
The changes that these military technologies underwent before and during the Second World War were evolutionary, but defined the development for the rest of the century.

====
Interwar ====
This period of innovation in weapon design continued in the inter-war period (between WW I and WW II) with continuous evolution of weapon systems by all major industrial powers.

The major armament firms were the Schneider-Creusot (based in France), the Škoda Works (Czechoslovakia), and Vickers (Great Britain).
The 1920s were committed to disarmament and outlawing of war and poison gas, but rearmament picked up rapidly in the 1930s.
The munitions makers responded nimbly to the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape.
The main purchasers of munitions from the big three companies were Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey—and, to a lesser extent, in Poland, Finland, the Baltic States, and the Soviet Union,


=====
Criminalizing poison gas =====
Realistic critics understood that war could not really be outlawed, but its worst excesses might be banned.
Poison gas became the focus of a worldwide crusade in the 1920s.

Poison gas did not win battles, and the generals did not want it.
The soldiers hated it far more intensely than bullets or explosive shells.
By 1918, chemical shells made up 35 per cent of French ammunition supplies, 25 per cent of British, and 20 per cent of the American stock.
The “Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare” ["Geneva Protocol"] was issued in 1925, and was accepted as policy by all major countries.
In 1937 poison gas was manufactured in large quantities, but not used except against nations that lacked modern weapons or gas masks.

====
World War II ====
Many modern military weapons, particularly ground-based ones, are relatively minor improvements of weapon systems developed during World War II.
See military technology during World War II for a detailed discussion.

World War II
however, perhaps marked the most frantic period of weapons development in the history of humanity.
Massive numbers of new designs and concepts were fielded, and all existing technologies were improved between 1939 and 1945.
The most powerful weapon invented during this period was the atomic bomb, however many other weapons influenced the world, such as jet planes and radar, but were overshadowed by the visibility of nuclear weapons and long-range rockets.

====
Nuclear weapons ====
Since the realization of mutually assured destruction (MAD), the nuclear option of all-out war is no longer considered a survivable scenario.

During the Cold War in the years following World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race.
Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments.
Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the Earth x100 fold, then a new tactic had to be developed.

With this realization, armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than total war.

== Types ==


===
By user ===
– what person or unit uses the weaponPersonal weapons (or small arms) – designed to be used by a single person.

Light weapons – 'man-portable' weapons that may require a small team to operate.

Heavy weapons – artillery and similar weapons larger than light weapons (see SALW).

Hunting weapon – used by hunters for sport or getting food.

Crew served weapons – larger than personal weapons, requiring two or more people to operate correctly.

Fortification weapons – mounted in a permanent installation, or used primarily within a fortification.

Mountain weapons – for use by mountain forces or those operating in difficult terrain.

Vehicle weapons – to be mounted on any type of combat vehicle.

Railway weapons – designed to be mounted on railway cars, including armored trains.

Aircraft weapons – carried on and used by some type of aircraft, helicopter, or other aerial vehicle.

Naval weapons – mounted on ships and submarines.

Space weapons – are designed to be used in or launched from space.

Autonomous weapons – are capable of accomplishing a mission with limited or no human intervention.

===
By function ===
– the construction of the weapon and principle of operationAntimatter weapons (theoretical) would combine matter and antimatter to cause a powerful explosion.

Archery weapons operate by using a tensioned string and bent solid to launch a projectile.

Artillery are firearms capable of launching heavy projectiles over long distances.

Biological weapons spread biological agents, causing disease or infection.

Chemical weapons, poisoning and causing reactions.

Energy weapons rely on concentrating forms of energy to attack, such as lasers or sonic attack.

Explosive weapons use a physical explosion to create blast concussion or spread shrapnel.

Firearms use a chemical charge to launch projectiles.

Improvised weapons are common objects, reused as weapons, such as crowbars and kitchen knives.

Incendiary weapons cause damage by fire.

Non-lethal weapons are designed to subdue without killing.

Magnetic weapons use magnetic fields to propel projectiles, or to focus particle beams.

Melee weapons operate as physical extensions of the user's body and directly impact a close target.

Blade weapons, designed to pierce through flesh and cause bleeding.

Blunt instruments, designed to break bones, concuss or produce crush injuries.

Missiles are rockets which are guided to their target after launch.
(
Also a general term for projectile weapons).

Loitering munitions, designed to loiter over a battlefield, striking once a target is located.

Nuclear weapons use radioactive materials to create nuclear fission and/or nuclear fusion detonations.

Primitive weapons make little or no use of technological or industrial elements.

Ranged weapons (unlike melee weapons), target a distant object or person.

Rockets use chemical propellant to accelerate a projectile
Suicide weapons exploit the willingness of their operator not surviving the attack.

===
By target ===
– the type of target the weapon is designed to attackAnti-aircraft weapons target missiles and aerial vehicles in flight.

Anti-fortification weapons are designed to target enemy installations.

Anti-personnel weapons are designed to attack people, either individually or in numbers.

Anti-radiation weapons target sources of electronic radiation, particularly radar emitters.

Anti-satellite weapons target orbiting satellites.

Anti-ship weapons target ships and vessels on water.

Anti-submarine weapons target submarines and other underwater targets.

Anti-tank weapons are designed to defeat armored targets.

Area denial weapons target territory, making it unsafe or unsuitable for enemy use or travel.

Hunting weapons are weapons used to hunt game animals.

Infantry support weapons are designed to attack various threats to infantry units.

==
Manufacture of weapons ==
The arms industry is a global industry that involves the sales and manufacture of weaponry.
It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities.
Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms-industry to supply their own military forces - and some also have a substantial trade in weapons for use by its citizens, for self-defence, hunting or sporting purposes.

Contracts to supply a given country's military are awarded by governments, making arms contracts of substantial political importance.
The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development a "military-industrial complex", where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked.

According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–14 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009, and the arms sales of the world’s 100 largest private arms-producing and military services companies totalled  $420 billion in 2018.

==
Legislation ==
The production, possession, trade and use of many weapons are controlled.
This may be at a local or central government level, or international treaty.
Examples of such controls include:


===
Gun laws ===
All countries have laws and policies regulating aspects such as the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification and use of small arms by civilians.

Countries which regulate access to firearms will typically restrict access to certain categories of firearms and then restrict the categories of persons who may be granted a license for access to such firearms.
There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting (a.k.a.
target shooting), self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, with different sets of requirements, permissions, and responsibilities.

===
Arms control laws ===
International treaties and agreements place restrictions upon the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation and usage of weapons from small arms and heavy weapons to weapons of mass destruction.
Arms control is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy which seeks to impose such limitations upon consenting participants, although it may also comprise efforts by a nation or group of nations to enforce limitations upon a non-consenting country.

===
Arms trafficking laws ===
Arms trafficking is the trafficking of contraband weapons and ammunition.
What constitutes legal trade in firearms varies widely, depending on local and national laws.

==
Lifecycle problems ==
There are a number of issue around the potential ongoing risks from deployed weapons, the safe storage of weapons, and their eventual disposal when no longer effective or safe.

Ocean dumping of unused weapons and bombs, including ordinary bombs, UXO, landmines and chemical weapons has been common practice by many nations, and often caused hazards.

Unexploded ordnance (UXO) are bombs, land mines and naval mines and similar that did not explode when they were employed and still pose a risk for many years or decades.

Demining or mine clearance from areas of past conflict is a difficult process, but every year, landmines kill 15,000 to 20,000 people and severely maim countless more.

Nuclear terrorism was a serious concern after the fall of the Soviet Union, with the prospect of "loose nukes" being available.
While this risk may have receded, similar situation may arise in the future.

==
In science fiction ==

Strange and exotic weapons are a recurring feature or theme in science fiction.
In some cases, weapons first introduced in science fiction have now been made a reality.
Other science fiction weapons remain purely fictional, and are often beyond the realms of known physical possibility.

At its most prosaic, science fiction features an endless variety of sidearms, mostly variations on real weapons such as guns and swords.
Among the best-known of these are the phaser used in the Star Trek television series, films and novels and the lightsaber and blaster featured in the Star Wars movies, comics, novels and TV series.

In addition to adding action and entertainment value, weaponry in science fiction sometimes become themes when they touch on deeper concerns, often motivated by contemporary issues.
One example is science fiction that deals with weapons of mass destruction.

== See also ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
The dictionary definition of weapon at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Weapon at Wikiquote
 Media related to Weapons at Wikimedia Commons
List of modern equipment of the Syrian Arab Army.
The vast majority of Syrian military equipment was Soviet manufactured but the organization and military doctrine of the armed forces 
followed a mix of French and Western influences as the Soviet Union closely guarded its operational principles and never shared them with client states.
The accuracy of the data is difficult to assess due to the ongoing Syrian Civil War, as weapons and vehicles are acquired and lost during battles.

==
Small arms ==


===
Pistols ===


===
Carbines ===


===
Assault rifles ===


===
Rifles ===


===
Light machine guns ===
===
Medium machine guns ===


===
Heavy machine guns ===


===
General-purpose machine guns ===


===
Grenades ===


===
Grenade launchers ===


===
Mines ===


===
Anti-tank ===


===
MANPADS ===
Combined total of 5,000+ launchers.

== Vehicles ==
=== Tanks ===


===
Infantry fighting vehicles ===


===
Armoured personnel carriers ===


===
Military engineering ===


===
Logistics and utility vehicles ===


==
Artillery ==
===
Mortars ===


===
Field artillery ===


===
Self-propelled field artillery ===


===
Multiple launch rocket systems ===


==
Anti-air guns and systems ==


===
Towed anti-aircraft artillery ===


===
Towed air defence ===


===
Self-propelled air defence ===


==
Ballistic missiles ==


===
Tactical ballistic missiles ===


==
Command posts ==


===
Higher level command posts ===


==
Unmanned aerial vehicles ==


===
Non-combat unmanned air vehicles ===


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Syria Land Forces military equipment and vehicles Syrian Army
Army Equipment
theglobalscout.com
amored vehicles airpower Syrian civil war
Roman military personal equipment was produced in small numbers to established patterns, and it was used in an established manner.
These standard patterns and uses were called the res militaris or disciplina.
Its regular practice during the Roman Republic and Roman Empire led to military excellence and victory.
The equipment gave the Romans a very distinct advantage over their barbarian enemies, especially so in the case of armour.
This does not mean that every Roman soldier had better equipment than the richer men among his opponents.
According to Edward Luttwak, Roman equipment was not of a better quality than that used by the majority of Rome's adversaries.
Other historians and writers have stated that the Roman army's need for large quantities of "mass produced" equipment after the Marian Reforms and subsequent civil wars led to a decline in the quality of Roman equipment compared to the earlier Republican era: 

"The production of these kinds of helmets of Italic tradition decreased in quality because of the demands of equipping huge armies, especially during civil wars...
The bad quality of these helmets is recorded by the sources describing how sometimes they were covered by wicker protections (viminea tegimenta), like those of Pompeius' soldiers during the siege of Dyrrachium in 48 BC, which were seriously damaged by the missiles of Caesar's slingers and archers."

"It would appear that armour quality suffered at times when mass production methods were being used to meet the increased demand (from the Civil and Social Wars, and following the Marian and Augustan reforms)..." and "...
the reduced size curiasses would also have been quicker and cheaper to produce, which may have been a deciding factor at times of financial crisis, or where large bodies of men were required to be mobilized at short notice, possibly reflected in the poor-quality, mass produced iron helmets of Imperial Italic type C, as found, for example, in the River Po at Cremona, associated with the Civil Wars of AD 69 AD; Russel-Robinson, 1975, 67" 
"Up until then, the quality of helmets had been fairly consistent and the bowls well decorated and finished.
However, after the Marian Reforms, with their resultant influx of the poorest citizens into the army, there must inevitably have been a massive demand for cheaper equipment, a situation which can only have been exacerbated by the Civil Wars..."
Initially, they used weapons based on Greek and Etruscan models.
On encountering the Celts, they based new varieties on Celtic equipment.
To defeat the Carthaginians, they constructed an entire fleet de novo based on the Carthaginian model.
Once a weapon was adopted, it became standard.
The standard weapons varied somewhat during Rome's long history, but the equipment and its use were never individual.

==
Personal weapons of a roman legionary ==


===
Pugio ===
A pugio was a dagger used by Roman soldiers, likely as a sidearm.
Like other items of legionary equipment, the dagger underwent some changes during the 1st century.
Generally, it had a large, leaf-shaped blade 18 to 28 cm long and 5 cm or more in width.
A raised midrib ran the length of each side, either simply standing out from the face or defined by grooves on either side.
It was changed by making the blade a little thinner, about 3 mm, and the handle was also made out of metal.
The tang was wide and flat initially, and the grip was riveted through it, as well as through the shoulders of the blade.

Around 50 AD, a rod tang was introduced, and the hilt was no longer riveted through the shoulders of the blade.
This in itself caused no great change to the pugio's appearance, but some of these later blades were narrower (under 3.5 cm wide), and/or had little or no waisting, and/or had reduced or vestigial midribs.

Throughout the period, the outline of the hilt remained approximately the same.
It was made with two layers of horn, wood or bone sandwiching the tang, each overlaid with a thin metal plate.
Often the hilt was decorated with inlaid silver.
The hilt was 10–12 cm long overall and the grip was quite narrow; which produced a very secure grip.
An expansion or lump in the middle of the handle made the user's grip even more secure.

===
Gladius ===
Gladius is the general Latin word for "sword".
In the Roman Republic, the term gladius Hispaniensis (Spanish sword) referred (and still refers) specifically to the short sword, 60 cm (24 inches)
long, used by Roman legionaries from the 3rd century BC.
Several different better-known designs followed; among collectors and historical reenactors, the two primary kinds of swords are known as the Mainz gladius, and the Pompeii gladius which follows the Mainz type, which had itself followed the 'Hispaniensis'
(these names refer to where or how the canonical example was found).
More recent archaeological finds have confirmed the appearance of the earlier version, the gladius Hispaniensis.
The legionaries wore their gladii on their right hips.

===
Spatha ===
A spatha could be any sword (in late Latin), but most often one of the longer swords characteristic of the middle and late Roman Empire.
In the 1st century, Roman cavalry started using these longer swords, and in the late 2nd or early 3rd century, Roman infantry also switched to longer swords, as well as mostly changing from carrying javelins to carrying spears.
Shorter weapons (short swords and possibly sometimes daggers) were known as semispathae or half-swords.
A large 3rd-century hoard from Künzing included one triangular-bladed short sword and several narrow-bladed short swords (with 23–39 cm blades).
Bishop and Coulston suggest that some or all were made from broken spathae.

===
Spears and javelins (hastae) ===


====
Hasta ====
Hasta is a Latin word meaning a thrusting spear.
Hastae were carried by early Roman legionaries (camillan); in particular, they were carried by and gave their name to those Roman soldiers known as hastati.
However, during republican times, the hastati were re-armed with pila and gladii, and only the triarii still used hastae.

A hasta was about 1.8 meters (six feet) in length.
The shaft was generally made from ash while the head was usually of iron, although early republican hastae also had a tip made of bronze.

====
Javelin ====
Although Romans often used the word pila to refer to all thrown javelins, the term pilum also means specifically the heavy Roman throwing javelin of the legions.
Lighter, shorter javelins existed, such as those used by the velites and the early legions, called Verutum.
Other types of javelins would be adopted by the late Roman army, such as the Lancea and the Spiculum, which were heavily influenced by the weapons of Germanic warriors.

====
Pilum ====
The pilum (plural pila) was a heavy javelin commonly used by the Roman army in ancient times.
It was generally somewhat less than two metres (6 ft 7 in)
long overall, consisting of a wooden shaft from which projected an iron shank about 7 mm (0.28 inches) in diameter and 60 cm (23.6 in) long with a pyramidal head.
The iron shank was socketed or, more usually, widened to a flat tang.
A pilum usually weighed between two and four kilograms (4.4 and 8.8 lb), with the versions produced during the empire era being somewhat lighter.

Pila were designed to penetrate both shield and armour, wounding the wearer; but, if they simply stuck in a shield, they could not easily be removed.
Some believed that the iron shank would bend upon impact, weighing down the enemy's shield and also preventing the pilum from being immediately re-used.
Some versions of the shaft may have fallen off on impact, leaving the enemy with a bent shank in their shield.
However, recent evidence suggests that many types of pilum did not bend at all, but reduced the effectiveness of enemy shields by simply getting stuck due to the shape of its larger head and thin shank.
In fact, there were many cases where the whole shank was hardened, making the pilum more suitable as a close quarters melee weapon, while also rendering it usable by enemy soldiers.
Newer work by M. C. Bishop states that the pilum is "unlikely to bend under their own weight when thrown and striking a target or ground" - rather, it is human intervention [e.g., improper removal of a pilum stuck in a target]
that is responsible in some way, and that Caesar's writings should be interpreted as the pilum bent when soldiers tried to remove them.
A sturdy pilum that does not bend upon impact would be in line with the numerous historical Roman writings that state the pilum was often used as a weapon in melee combat:
For example, in "The Gallic Wars" Caesar writes that at Alesia his troops used the pila as spears or pikes.
In the "Life of Pompey" and "Life of Antony", Plutarch describes Caesar's men at Pharsalus jabbing upwards at the faces of Pompey's cavalry with their javelins and Marc Antony's men stabbing at Parthian cavalry with theirs.
In Arrian in Array against the Alans, Arrian writes that the first four ranks of the formation should use their pila like spearmen, while the rest should use them like javelins.

===
Projectile weapons ===


====
Bow ====
The sagittarius was armed with a composite bow (arcus), shooting an arrow (sagitta), made of horn, wood, and sinew held together with hide glue.
However, Vegetius recommended training recruits "arcubus ligneis", with wooden bows.
The reinforcing laths for the composite bows were found throughout the empire, even in the western provinces where wooden bows were traditional.

====
Crossbow ====
The cheiroballistra, also known as the manuballista, was a crossbow that was occasionally used by the Romans.
The ancient world knew a variety of mechanical hand-held weapons similar to the later medieval crossbow.
The exact terminology is a subject of continuing scholarly debate.
Roman authors like Vegetius (fl.
4th century) note repeatedly the use of arrow shooting weapons such as arcuballista and manuballista respectively cheiroballista.
While most scholars agree that one or more of these terms refer to handheld mechanical weapons, there is disagreement whether these were flexion bows or torsion powered like the recent Xanten find.
The Roman commander Arrian (c. 86 – after 146) records in his Tactica Roman cavalry training for shooting some mechanical handheld weapon from horseback.

Sculptural reliefs from Roman Gaul depict the use of crossbows in hunting scenes.
These are remarkably similar to the later medieval crossbow.

====
Plumbatae ====
Late infantrymen often carried half-dozen lead-weighted throwing-darts called plumbatae (from plumbum, meaning "lead"), with an effective range of c. 30 m, well beyond that of a javelin.
The darts were carried clipped to the back of the shield.

==
Entrenching tools ==
Ancient writers, including Julius Caesar, documented the use of spades and other digging implements as important tools of war.
A Roman legion when on the march would dig a ditch and rampart around their camps every night where established camps were not available.
They were also useful as improvised weapons.

===
Dolabra ===
The dolabra was an Italian pickaxe used as an entrenching tool.

===
Ligo ===


===
Falx ===
The falx was a curved blade that was sharp on the inside edge such as a sickle or a scythe.
It was used to clear overgrowth.

==
Torso armor ==
Not all troops wore torso armor.
Light infantry, especially in the early republic, wore little or no armor.
This was both to allow swifter movement for light troops and also as a matter of cost.

Legionary soldiers of the 1st and 2nd centuries used a variety of armour types.
Some wore mail shirts, while others wore scale armor or lorica segmentata or laminated-strip cuirass.
This last type was a complex piece of armor which in certain circumstances provided superior protection to the other types of Roman armour, mail armour (lorica hamata) and scale armour (lorica squamata).
The testing of modern replicas has demonstrated that this kind of armour was impenetrable to most direct hits and missile strikes.
It was, however, uncomfortable without padding: re-enactors have confirmed that wearing a padded undergarment known as a subarmalis relieves the wearer from bruising both from prolonged wear and from shock produced by weapon blows against the armour.
It was also expensive to produce and difficult to maintain.
In the 3rd century, the segmentata appears to have been dropped and troops are depicted wearing mail armour (mainly) or scale, the standard armour of the 2nd-century auxilia.
The artistic record shows that most late soldiers wore metal armour, despite Vegetius' statement to the contrary.
For example, illustrations in the Notitia show that the army's fabricae (arms factories) were producing mail armour at the end of the 4th century.
Actual examples of both scale armour and quite large sections of mail have been recovered, at Trier and Weiler-La-Tour respectively, within 4th-century contexts.
Officers generally seem to have worn bronze or iron cuirasses, as in the days of the principate, together with traditional pteruges.

===
Lorica segmentata ===
Lorica segmentata was a type of body armour primarily used in the early Roman Empire, but the Latin name was first used in the 16th century (the ancient form is unknown).
The armour itself consisted of broad ferrous strips ('girth hoops') fastened to internal leather straps.
The strips were arranged horizontally on the body, overlapping downwards, and they surrounded the torso in two halves, being fastened at the front and back by means of brass hooks, which were joined by leather laces.
The upper body and shoulders were protected by additional strips ('shoulder guards') and breast- and backplates.
The form of the armour allowed it to be stored very compactly, since it was possible to separate it into four sections.
During the time of its use, it was modified several times, the currently recognised types being the Kalkriese (c. 20 BC to 50), Corbridge (c. 40 to 120), and Newstead (c. 120 to possibly the early 4th century) types.
There is also a little-known fourth type, known only from a statue found at Alba Julia in Romania, where there appears to have been a hybrid form, the shoulders being protected by scale armour and the torso hoops being fewer in number and deeper.

The earliest evidence of the lorica segmentata being worn is around 9 BC (Dangstetten), and the armour was evidently quite common in service until the 2nd century AD, judging from the number of finds throughout this period (over 100 sites are known, many of them in Britain).
However, even during the 2nd century AD, the segmentata never replaced the lorica hamata - thus the hamata mail was still standard issue for both heavy infantry and auxiliaries alike.
The last recorded use of this armour seems to have been for the last quarter of the 3rd century AD (Leon, Spain).

There are two opinions as to who used this form of armour.
One is that only legionaries (heavy infantry of the Roman legions) and praetorians were issued lorica segmentata.
Auxiliary forces would more commonly wear the lorica hamata, or lorica squamata.
The second viewpoint is that both legionaries and auxiliary soldiers used the segmentata armour and this latter view is supported, to some degree, by archaeological findings.
The lorica segmentata offered greater protection than the lorica hamata for about half of the weight, but was also more difficult to produce and repair.
The expenses attributed to the segmentata may account for the reversion to ring-mail after the 3rd to 4th century.
Alternatively, all forms of armour may have fallen into disuse as the need for heavy infantry waned in favour of the speed of mounted troops.

===
Lorica hamata ===
Lorica hamata was a type of mail armour used during the Roman Republic continuing throughout the Roman Empire as a standard-issue armour for the primary heavy infantry legionaries and secondary troops (auxilia).
They were mostly manufactured out of iron, though sometimes bronze was used instead.
The rings were linked together, alternating closed washer-like rings with riveted rings.
This produced a very flexible, reliable and strong armour.
Each ring had an inside diameter of between 5 and 7 mm, and an outside diameter of 7 to 9 mm.
The shoulders of the lorica hamata had flaps that were similar to those of the Greek linothorax; they ran from about mid-back to the front of the torso, and were connected by brass or iron hooks which connected to studs riveted through the ends of the flaps.
Several thousand rings would have gone into one lorica hamata.

Although labour-intensive to manufacture, it is thought that, with good maintenance, they could be continually used for several decades.
Its utility was such that the later appearance of the famous lorica segmentata—which afforded greater protection for a third of the weight—never led to the disappearance of the ubiquitous mail, and, in fact, the army of the late empire reverted to the lorica hamata once the segmentata had fallen out of fashion.

===
Lorica squamata ===
Lorica squamata was a type of scale armour used during the Roman Republic and at later periods.
It was made from small metal scales sewn to a fabric backing.
It is typically seen on depictions of standard bearers, musicians, centurions, cavalry troops, and even auxiliary infantry, but could be worn by regular legionaries as well.
A shirt of scale armour was shaped in the same way as a lorica hamata, mid-thigh length with the shoulder doublings or cape.
The individual scales (squamae) were either iron or bronze, or even alternating metals on the same shirt.
They could be tinned as well,
one surviving fragment showing bronze scales that were alternately tinned and plain.
The metal was generally not very thick, 0.5 mm to 0.8 mm (0.02 to 0.032 in) perhaps being a common range.
Since the scales overlapped in every direction, however, the multiple layers gave good protection.
The size ranged from as small as 6 mm (0.25 in) wide by 1.2 cm tall up to about 5 cm (2 in) wide by 8 cm (3 in) tall, with the most common sizes being roughly 1.25 by 2.5 cm (0.5 by 1 in).
Many had rounded bottoms, while others were pointed or had flat bottoms with the corners clipped off at an angle.
The scales could be flat, slightly domed, or have a raised midrib or edge.
All the scales in a shirt were generally of the same size; however, scales from different shirts varied significantly.

The scales were wired together in horizontal rows that were then laced or sewn to the backing.
Therefore, each scale had from four to 12 holes: two or more at each side for wiring to the next in the row, one or two at the top for fastening to the backing, and sometimes one or two at the bottom to secure the scales to the backing or to each other.
It is possible that the shirt could be opened either at the back or down one side so that it was easier to put on, the opening being closed by ties.
Much has been written about scale armour's supposed vulnerability to an upward thrust, but this is probably exaggerated.
No examples of an entire lorica squamata have been found, but there have been several archaeological finds of fragments of such shirts and individual scales are quite common finds—even in non-military contexts.

==
Shields ==


===
Scutum ===


===
Parma ===
The parma was a circular shield, three Roman feet across.
It was smaller than most shields, but was strongly made and regarded as effective protection.
This may have been due to the use of iron in its frame.
It had a handle and a shield boss (umbo).

The parma was used in the Roman army of the mid-Republic, by the lowest class division of the army — the velites.
The velites' equipment consisted of a parma, javelin, sword and helmet.
Later, the parma was replaced by the scutum.

===
Caetra ===
A light shield of wood and leather, the name from Greek (καίτρεα, Hesych.).
Used by tribesmen from Hispania, Mauretania, and Britannia.

==
Helmets ==
Roman helmets, galea or cassis, varied greatly in form.
One of the earliest types was the Montefortino helmet used by the Republic armies up to the 1st century BC.
This was replaced directly by the Coolus helmet, which "raised the neck peak to eye level and set a sturdy frontal peak to the brow of the helmet".
The Galea was used from the late 1st century BC to the late 2nd century AD and it drew influence from the Gallic tribes to the north, hence its name.
Roman helmets usually featured a bowl protecting the head, an extension at the back with a neck guard, a ridge above the forehead for additional impact protection and decoration, and hinged cheek guards which left the ears exposed for better hearing in the battlefield.
They would be eventually be replaced by the ridge helmet and the Spangenhelm during the late imperial period.

==
Limb armour ==


===
Manica ===
From early imperial times to after the fall of the Western Empire, some troops wore segmented armour on one or both arms.
The Manica was first used by gladiators and it was made either from padded cloth or overlapping metal sheets.
Roman legionaries are depicted wearing Manicas in engravings of the Dacian Wars.

===
Greave ===
Greaves, sheet metal protecting the legs, were widely used in the early republic, and by some troops in the imperial army.
Early Roman legionaries would wear a single greave on the left leg which was more exposed under the shield, as it was fashion in Italic cultures.

==
Clothing ==
Tunic: a basic garment worn under the armour by all soldiers in the republic and early empire.
Normally made of wool.
Tunics originally consisted simply of a piece of rectangular cloth sewed to an identical piece, with holes for the arms and head left unsewn.
Later, it became fashionable for tunics to be produced with sleeves, and worn with braccae.

Subarmalis:
A padded jacket made out of linen or leather, worn underneath armors such as the lorica hamata or lorica segmentata to provide impact protection as well as better weight distribution and comfort.

Focale: a scarf worn by legionaries to protect the neck from chafing caused by constant contact with the soldier's armour (typically lorica hamata or lorica segmentata) and helmet
Balteus: a sword belt
Cingulum militare: a type of decorated belt denoting rank
Braccae:
woollen trousers
Subligaria: underpants.
Their existence was confirmed by one of the Vindolanda tablets.

Cloak: two types of cloaks were used, the sagum and the paenula.
Both were made from wool, which insulated and also contained natural oil to repel water.
They were fastened with a fibula.
The paenula was hooded in colder climates.
Since every common soldier slept in the open, it was important that he have a warm full-length wrap, but necessary that he carry it with him each day regardless of his activities.

This was accomplished by a cloak of more than body length, double-folded so that it did not fall beneath the knees when worn.
An excellent illustration of this is the statue of Caesar Augustus atop the theater in the Roman city of Orange, in what is now France.

Caligae: military boots worn by legionaries and auxiliaries throughout the history of the Roman Republic and Empire.
The boots were made from leather and laced up the center of the foot and onto the top of the ankle.
Iron hobnails were hammered into the sole for added strength.
Similar to the modern cleat.

Pteruges: leather or fabric strips that formed a skirt or sleeves to protect limbs while maintaining mobility and ventilation.
They were usually part of a padding coat worn under the armor, such as the subarmalis.
Pteruges could be fitted with small metal studs and plates to provide additional protection.

== Sarcina ==
A military pack carried by legionaries.
The pack included a number of items suspended from a furca or carrying pole.
Items carried in the pack included:
Loculus: a leather satchel
Waterskin: Roman camps would typically be built near water sources, but each soldier would have to carry his water for the day's march in a waterskin.

Food: each legionary would carry some of his food.
Although a Roman army on the move would typically have a baggage train of mules or similar to carry supplies such as food, after the Marian reforms legionaries were required to carry about 15 days worth of basic food supplies with them.

Cooking equipment: including a patera, cooking pot and skewer.

Entrenching tools:
Carried by legionaries to construct fortifications and dig latrines etc.
Each legionary would typically carry either a shovel (batillum) or dolabra (mattock) for digging, a turf cutting tool or a wicker basket for hauling earth.

Sudis: stakes for construction of camps


==
Other ==


===
Ballista ===
The ballista was a powerful catapult, consisting of a beam with a frame at the end, mounting two rigid arms powered by torsion in bundles of sinew at each side, which would pull a bowstring between them propelling the projectile.
It launched heavy darts called bolts, or spherical stone projectiles of various sizes.
Ballistas were fit with grappling hooks to seize enemy vessels during the Roman civil wars.
The Romans would develop an improved version with inward facing arms in the 3rd century, the remains of such were found in the town of Hatra in Iraq.

===
Scorpio ===
The scorpio was a torsion-powered catapult-type weapon, similar to a smaller ballista, which fired bolts capable of piercing enemy shields and armour.
The Roman army supplied 60 to each legion and they were used both offensively during sieges and defensively as part of the Romans' field camp defenses.
They were also mounted on ships and carriages to provide support to infantry.

===
Onager ===
The Onager was a torsion-powered siege engine in which a sinew or horse hair spring mounted on a wooden frame swung an arm vertically against a stop, hurling projectiles in a high arc.
It launched stones from a cup or sling, and it was named after a species of Asiatic Ass due to its kick.

=== Buccina ===
A brass instrument used in the ancient Roman army.
It was originally designed as a tube measuring some 11 to 12 feet in length, of narrow cylindrical bore, and played by means of a cup-shaped mouthpiece.
The tube was bent around upon itself from the mouthpiece to the bell in the shape of a broad C and was strengthened by means of a bar across the curve, which the performer grasped while playing, in order to steady the instrument; the curves over his head or shoulder.

The buccina was used for the announcement of night watches and various other announcements in the camp.

The instrument is the ancestor of both the trumpet and the trombone.
The German word for trombone, Posaune, is derived from buccina.
===
Tribulus ===
A tribulus (caltrop) was a weapon made up of four sharp nails or spines arranged in such a manner that one of them always pointed upward from a stable base (for example, a tetrahedron).
Caltrops served to slow down the advance of horses, war elephants, and human troops.
It was said to be particularly effective against the soft feet of camels.
The late-Roman writer Vegetius, in his work De Re Militari, wrote:

The scythed chariots used in war by Antiochus and Mithridates at first terrified the Romans, but they afterwards made a jest of them.
As a chariot of this sort does not always meet with plain and level ground, the least obstruction stops it.
And if one of the horses be either killed or wounded, it falls into the enemy's hands.
The Roman soldiers rendered them useless chiefly by the following contrivance: at the instant the engagement began, they strewed the field of battle with caltrops, and the horses that drew the chariots, running full speed on them, were infallibly destroyed.
A caltrop is a machine composed of four spikes or points arranged so that in whatever manner it is thrown on the ground, it rests on three and presents the fourth upright.

== See also ==
Roman siege machines
Military of ancient Rome
Technological history of the Roman military


==
Notes ==


==
References ==
Ammianus Marcellinus, Roman History (late 4th century)
Goldsworthy, Adrian (2003).
Complete Roman Army.

D’Amato, Raffaele (2009).
Arms and Armour of the Imperial Roman Soldier From Marius to Commodus, 112 BC–AD 192.

Travis, Hilary; Travis, John (2014).
Roman Helmets.
ISBN 978-1445638423.

Bishop, M.C. (1985).
The Production and Distribution of Roman Military Equipment Proceedings of the Second Roman Military Equipment Research Seminar.
==
External links ==
Roman military equipment in the British Museum, Hunterian Museum and National Museum of Scotland
For images of authentic Roman military equipment see
http://www.romancoins.info/MilitaryEquipment.html
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to Earth science:
Earth science – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth.
It is also known as geoscience, the geosciences or the Earth sciences, and is arguably a special case in planetary science, the Earth being the only known life-bearing planet.

Earth science is a branch of the physical sciences which is a part of the natural sciences.
It in turn has many branches.

==
Earth's spheres ==
Ecosphere – there are many subsystems that make up the natural environment (the planetary ecosystem or "ecosphere") of the Earth.
Many of the subsystems are characterized as "spheres", coinciding with the shape of the planet.
The four spheres (for which most of the other spheres are a subtype of) are the atmosphere, the biosphere, the hydrosphere and the geosphere.
Listed roughly from outermost to innermost the named spheres of the Earth are:

Magnetosphere – The region around an astronomical object in which charged particles are affected by its magnetic field
Atmosphere,  the gases that surround the Earth (its air)
By altitude
Exosphere – The outermost layer of an atmosphere
Exobase – The lower boundary of the exosphere
Thermopause – The upper boundary of the thermosphere
Thermosphere –
The layer of the atmosphere above the mesosphere and below the exosphere
Mesopause – The temperature minimum at the boundary between the mesosphere and the thermosphere
Mesosphere –
The layer of the atmosphere directly above the stratosphere and below the thermosphere
Stratopause – The upper boundary of the stratosphere
Stratosphere –
The layer of the atmosphere above the troposphere
Ozone layer –
The region of Earth's stratosphere that absorbs most of the Sun's UV radiation
Tropopause –
The boundary of the atmosphere between the troposphere and stratosphere
Troposphere – The lowest layer of the atmosphere
Planetary boundary layer – The lowest part of the atmosphere, directly influenced by contact with the planetary surface
By air turbulence
Heterosphere – Upper parts of the atmosphere in which the component gases are not well mixed
Turbopause – The altitude in the Earth's atmosphere below which turbulent mixing dominates
Homosphere – Lower parts of the atmosphere in which the component gases are well mixed
Other
Ionosphere –
The ionized part of Earth's upper atmosphere
Biosphere – The global sum of all ecosystems on Earth
Anthroposphere – The part of the environment that is made or modified by humans for use in human activities and human habitat
Noosphere (rare) –
The sphere of human thought
Hydrosphere – The combined mass of water found on, under, and above the surface of a planet, minor planet or natural satellite
Cryosphere –
Those portions of Earth's surface where water is in solid form
Geosphere/Solid Earth – (Also sometimes a collective name for the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, and the atmosphere)
The union of all solid parts of Earth and the Inner of Earth.

Pedosphere –
The outermost layer of the Earth that is composed of soil and subject to soil formation processes
By composition
Crust (geology)
– The outermost solid shell of a rocky planet, dwarf planet, or natural satellite.

Moho Discontinuity–
The line between the crust and the Earth's mantle.

Earth's mantle – The part of the interior of the planet Earth between the crust and the core.

By diffusion of sismic waves
Lithosphere – The rigid, outermost shell of a terrestrial-type planet or natural satellite that is defined by its rigid mechanical properties.

Asthenosphere – The highly viscous, mechanically weak and ductile region of the Earth's upper mantle
Mesozone
– The part of the Earth's mantle below the lithosphere and the asthenosphere, but above the outer core.

Gutenberg discontinuity–
The line between the mantle and the Earth's core.

Earth's core – The inner part of the planet, formed by differential buoyancy of the component materials causing the denser materials to accumulate nearer to the centre.

Outer core – A fluid layer composed of mostly iron and nickel between Earth's solid inner core and its mantle.

Lehmann Discontinuity –
The line between the inner core and the outer core.

Inner core – The innermost part of the Earth, a solid ball of iron-nickel alloy.
==
Branches of Earth science ==


===
Atmospheric science ===
Atmospheric sciences –
The study of the atmosphere, its processes, and interactions with other systems

Climatology – The scientific study of climate, defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
Paleoclimatology – The study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
Atmospheric chemistry –
The branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the atmosphere is studied
Atmospheric physics –
The application of physics to the study of the atmosphere
Paleotempestology – The study of past tropical cyclone activity using geological proxies and historical documents


===
Geology ===
Geology –
The study of the composition, structure, physical properties, and history of Earth's components, and the processes by which they are shaped.

Environmental geology – Science of the practical application of geology in environmental problems.

Quaternary geology –
The branch of geology that studies developments more recent than 2.6 million years ago
Planetary geology –
The geology of astronomical objects apparently in orbit around stellar objects
Petroleum geology –
The study of the origin, occurrence, movement, accumulation, and exploration of hydrocarbon fuels
Historical geology –
The study of the geological history of Earth
Hydrogeology –
The study of the distribution and movement of groundwater
Structural geology –
The science of the description and interpretation of deformation in the earth's crust independent of extent
Geochemistry – Science that applies chemistry to analyse geological systems
Geochronology – Science of determining the age of rocks, sediments and fossils
Geodesy – The science of the geometric shape, orientation in space, and gravitational field of the Earth
Geomagnetics – Study of the Earth's magnetic field
Geomicrobiology – Science of the interactions between microbiology and geology
Glaciology – Scientific study of ice and natural phenomena involving ice
Geophysics – The physics of the Earth and its environment in space, and the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
Micropaleontology –
The branch of paleontology that studies microfossils
Mineralogy – Scientific study of minerals and mineralised artifacts
Gemology – Science dealing with natural and artificial gemstone materials
Mineral physics –
The science of materials that compose the interior of planets
Paleontology – Scientific study of prehistoric life
Palynology – The study of dust
Petrology – The branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks
Physical geodesy –
The study of the physical properties of the Earth's gravity field
Sedimentology – The study of natural sediments and of the processes by which they are formed
Seismology – The scientific study of earthquakes and propagation of elastic waves through a planet
Paleoseismology –
The study of earthquakes that happened in the past
Stratigraphy – The study of rock layers and their formation
Volcanology – The study of volcanoes, lava, magma and associated phenomena


===
Geography ===
Geography – The science that studies the terrestrial surface, the societies that inhabit it and the territories, landscapes, places or regions that form it.

Physical geography – The branch of natural science which deals with the study of processes and patterns in the natural environment such as the atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, and geosphere, as opposed to the cultural or built environment, the domain of human geography
Human geography –
The study of cultures, communities and activities of peoples of the world
Geostatistics – A branch of statistics focusing on spatial data sets
Environmental chemistry –
The scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places
Environmental soil science –
The study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.

Environmental geology –
An applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.

Geographic information science – Scientific study of geographic data and information
Edaphology – The science concerned with the influence of soils on living things
Pedology – The study of soils in their natural environment
Geomorphology – The scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
Spatial decision support systems –
Computerised aid to land use decisions
Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) –
Various satellite navigation systems
Economic geology – Science concerned with earth materials of economic value
Engineering geology –
The application of the geology to engineering practice
Hydrology –
The science of applying engineering techniques to the properties of the earth's water, especially its movement in relation to land.

Meteorology
– Interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere focusing on weather forecasting
Satellite navigation – Any system that uses satellite radio signals to provide autonomous geo-spatial positioning
Remote sensing – Acquisition of information at a significant distance from the subject
Photogrammetry – The science of making measurements using photography


===
Oceanography ===
Oceanography –
The study of the physical and biological aspects of the ocean

Biological oceanography –
The study of how organisms affect and are affected by the physics, chemistry, and geology of the oceanographic system.

Physical oceanography – The study of physical conditions and physical processes within the ocean
Chemical oceanography –
The study of ocean chemistry
Paleoceanography –
The study of the history of the oceans in the geologic past
Limnology – The science of inland aquatic ecosystems
Marine geology –
The study of the history and structure of the ocean floor


===
Planetary science ===
Planetary science –
The study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems (in particular those of the Solar System) and the processes that form them.

Planetary geology - study of the geology of astronomical objects apparently in orbit around stellar objects
Selenography - study of the surface and physical features of the Moon
Theoretical planetology - the theoretical study of the internal structure of planets by making assumptions about their chemical composition and the state of their materials, then calculating the radial distribution of various properties such as temperature, pressure, or density of material across the planet's internals.

==
History of Earth science ==
History of Earth science – history of the all-embracing  sciences related to the planet Earth.
Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.

History of atmospheric sciences – history of the  umbrella study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.

History of climatology
History of meteorology
History of atmospheric chemistry
History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.

History of cartography – history of the study and practice of making maps or globes.

History of climatology – history of the study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
History of coastal geography – history of the study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.

History of environmental science – history of an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.

History of ecology – history of the scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.

History of Freshwater biology – history of the scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of limnology
History of marine biology – history of the scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
History of parasitology –
history of the Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.

History of population dynamics – history of the Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.

History of environmental chemistry – history of the Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.

History of environmental soil science – history of the Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.

History of environmental geology – history of the Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.

History of toxicology – history of the branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.

History of geodesy – history of the scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
History of geography – history of the science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
History of geoinformatics – history of the science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.

History of geology – history of the study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.

History of planetary geology – history of the planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.

History of geomorphology – history of the scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
History of geostatistics – history of the branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.

History of glaciology – history of the study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.

History of hydrology – history of the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

History of hydrogeology – history of the area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).

History of mineralogy – history of the study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.

History of meteorology – history of the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.

History of oceanography – history of the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
History of paleoclimatology – history of the study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
History of paleontology – history of the study of prehistoric life
History of petrology – history of the branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.

History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of seismology – history of the scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
History of soil science – history of the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the Earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.

History of topography – history of the study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.

History of volcanology – history of the study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

==
Earth science programs ==
NASA Earth Science


==
Earth science organizations ==
List of geoscience organizations


==
Earth science journals ==


==
People influential in Earth science ==


==
See also ==
Outline of science –
Outline of natural science –
Outline of physical science –
Outline of Earth science
Outline of formal science –
Outline of social science –
Outline of applied science –


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Earth Science Picture of the Day, a service of Universities Space Research Association, sponsored by NASA Goddard Space Flight Center
Geoethics in Planetary and Space Exploration
National Earth Science Teachers Association
The Greek junta or Regime of the Colonels was a far-right military junta that ruled Greece from 1967 to 1974.
On 21 April 1967, a group of colonels overthrew the caretaker government a month before scheduled elections which Georgios Papandreou's Center Union was favored to win.
The dictatorship was characterised by right-wing cultural policies, restrictions on civil liberties, and the imprisonment, torture, and exile of political opponents.
An attempt to renew its support in a 1973 referendum on the monarchy and gradual democratisation was ended by another coup by hardliner Dimitrios Ioannidis.
The junta's rule ended on 24 July 1974 under the pressure of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, leading to the Metapolitefsi ("regime change") to democracy and the establishment of the Third Hellenic Republic.

==
Background ==
The 1967 coup and the following seven years of military rule were the culmination of 30 years of national division between the forces of the left and the right
, that can be traced to the time of the resistance against Axis occupation of Greece during World War II.
After the liberation in 1944, Greece descended into a civil war, fought between the communist forces and those loyal to the newly returned government-in-exile.

===
American influence in Greece ===
In 1944 British Prime Minister Winston Churchill determined to halt the Soviet encroachment in the Balkans, and ordered British forces to intervene in the Greek Civil War (see Dekemvriana) in the wake of the retreating German military.
This was to be a lengthy and open ended commitment.
The United States stepped in to help the Greek government against the communist forces in 1947.

In 1947, the United States formulated the Truman Doctrine, and began actively supporting a series of authoritarian governments in Greece, Turkey, and Iran in order to ensure that these states did not fall under Soviet influence.
In 1945, officer veterans of the collaborationist Security Battalions had organized themselves into a secret society known as the IDEA
(Ieros Desmos Ellinon Axiomatikon-Holy Bond of Greek Officers).
From 1947 onward, the Holy Bond was subsidized to the sum of $1 million annually by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) as one of Greece's main "democratic" (i.e. anti-communist) forces.
Several of the future leaders of the junta, such as Georgios Papadopoulos, were members of IDEA.
With American and British aid, the civil war ended with the military defeat of the communists in 1949.
The Communist Party of Greece (KKE) and its ancillary organizations were outlawed (Law 509/1947), and many Communists either fled the country or faced persecution.
The CIA and the Greek military began to work together closely, especially after Greece joined the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1952.
This included notable CIA officers Gust Avrakotos and Clair George.
Avrakotos maintained a close relationship with the colonels who would figure in the later coup.
In 1952, IDEA issued a manifesto stating that a dictatorship was the only possible solution to Greece's problems, which the Greek scholar Christos Kassimeris called an "astonishing" statement since the Communists had been defeated in 1949, Greece was enjoying relative prosperity after living standards had collapsed in the 1940s, and Greek politics were stable.
Kassimeris argued that since Papadopoulos played a large role in writing the 1952 manifesto, that it was his "personal ambition" rather than an objective fear of the Greek Communists that was driving him forward because in no way could Greece be presented as being on the brink of a Communist take-over in 1952.Greece was a vital link in the NATO defense arc which extended from the eastern border of Iran to the northernmost point in Norway.
Greece in particular was seen as being at risk, having experienced a communist insurgency.
In particular, the newly founded Hellenic National Intelligence Service (EYP) and the Mountain Raiding Companies (LOK) maintained a very close liaison with their American counterparts.
In addition to preparing for a Soviet invasion, they agreed to guard against a left-wing coup.
The LOK in particular were integrated into the European stay-behind network.
Although there have been persistent rumors about an active support of the coup by the U.S. government, there is no evidence to support such claims.
The timing of the coup apparently caught the CIA by surprise.
Nevertheless, the United States did support the military dictatorship.

===
Apostasia and political instability ===
After many years of conservative rule, the election of the Centre Union's Georgios Papandreou as Prime Minister was a sign of change.
In a bid to gain more control over the country's government than his limited constitutional powers allowed, the young and inexperienced King Constantine II clashed with liberal reformers.
In July 1964, Papandreou announced his intention to fire those officers belonging to IDEA, whom the king did not want dismissed, claiming it was his royal prerogative to protect the IDEA officers, which in turn led to massive demonstrations in Athens, which had a republican flavor.
The king dismissed Papandreou in 1965, causing a constitutional crisis known as the "Apostasia of 1965".

After making several attempts to form governments, relying on dissident Centre Union and conservative MPs, Constantine II appointed an interim government under Ioannis Paraskevopoulos, and new elections were called for 28 May 1967.
There were many indications that Papandreou's Centre Union would emerge as the largest party, but would not be able to form a single-party government and would be forced into an alliance with the United Democratic Left, which was suspected by conservatives of being a proxy for the banned KKE.
This possibility was used as a pretext for the coup.

===
A "Generals' Coup" ===
Greek historiography and journalists have hypothesized about a "Generals' Coup", a coup that would have been deployed at Constantine's behest under the pretext of combating communist subversion.
Before the elections that were scheduled for 28 May 1967, with expectations of a wide Center Union victory, a number of conservative National Radical Union politicians feared that the policies of left-wing Centrists, including Andreas Papandreou (the son of Georgios Papandreou), would lead to a constitutional crisis.
One such politician, George Rallis, proposed that, in case of such an "anomaly", the King should declare martial law as the monarchist constitution permitted him.
According to Rallis, Constantine was receptive to the idea.
According to U.S. diplomat John Day, Washington also worried that Andreas Papandreou would have a very powerful role in the next government, because of his father's old age.
According to Robert Keely and John Owens, American diplomats present in Athens at the time, Constantine asked U.S. Ambassador William Phillips Talbot what the American attitude would be to an extra-parliamentary solution to the problem.
To this the embassy responded negatively in principle – adding, however, that, "U.S. reaction to such a move cannot be determined in advance but would depend on circumstances at the time."
Constantine denies this.
According to Talbot, Constantine met the army generals, who promised him that they would not take any action before the coming elections.
However, the proclamations of Andreas Papandreou made them nervous, and they resolved to re-examine their decision after seeing the results of the elections.
In 1966, Constantine sent his envoy, Demetrios Bitsios, to Paris on a mission to persuade former prime minister Constantine Karamanlis to return to Greece and resume his prior role in politics.
According to uncorroborated claims made by the former monarch, Karamanlis replied to Bitsios that he would return only if the King imposed martial law, as was his constitutional prerogative.
According to Cyrus L. Sulzberger correspondent for The New York Times, Karamanlis flew to New York City to meet with USAF General Lauris Norstad to lobby for a conservative coup that would establish Karamanlis as Greece's leader; Sulzberger alleges that Norstad declined to involve himself in such affairs.
Sulzberger's account rests solely on the authority of his and Norstad's word.
When, in 1997, the former King reiterated Sulzberger's allegations, Karamanlis stated that he "will not deal with the former king's statements, because both their content and attitude are unworthy of comment".
The deposed King's adoption of Sulzberger's claims against Karamanlis was castigated by Greece's left-leaning media, which denounced Karamanlis as "shameless" and "brazen".
At the time Constantine referred exclusively to Sulzberger's account to support the theory of a planned coup by Karamanlis, and made no mention of the alleged 1966 meeting with Bitsios, which he referred to only after both participants had died and could not respond.

As it turned out, the constitutional crisis did not originate either from the political parties, or from the Palace, but from middle-rank army putschists.

==
Coup d'état of 21 April ==
On 21 April 1967, just weeks before the scheduled elections, a group of right-wing army officers led by Brigadier General Stylianos Pattakos and Colonels George Papadopoulos and Nikolaos Makarezos seized power in a coup d'état.
The colonels were able to seize power quickly by using elements of surprise and confusion.
Pattakos was the commander of the Armour Training Centre (Κέντρο Εκπαίδευσης Τεθωρακισμένων, ΚΕΤΘ), based in Athens.

The coup leaders placed tanks in strategic positions in Athens, effectively gaining complete control of the city.
At the same time, a large number of small mobile units were dispatched to arrest leading politicians, authority figures, and ordinary citizens suspected of left-wing sympathies, according to lists prepared in advance.
One of the first to be arrested was Lieutenant General Grigorios Spandidakis, Commander-in-Chief of the Greek Army.
The colonels persuaded Spandidakis to join them, having him activate a previously-drafted action plan to move the coup forward.
Under the command of paratrooper Brigadier General Kostas Aslanides, the LOK took over the Greek Defence Ministry while Pattakos gained control of communication centers, the parliament, the royal palace, and – according to detailed lists – arrested over 10,000 people.
By the early morning hours, the whole of Greece was in the hands of the colonels.
All leading politicians, including acting Prime Minister Panagiotis Kanellopoulos, had been arrested and were held incommunicado by the conspirators.
At 6:00 a.m. EET, Papadopoulos announced that eleven articles of the Greek constitution were suspended.
One of the consequences of these suspensions was that anyone could be arrested without warrant at any time and brought before a military court to be tried.
Ioannis Ladas, then the director of ESA, recounted in a later interview that "Within twenty minutes every politician, every man, every anarchist who was listed could be rounded up ...
It was a simple, diabolical plan".
Georgios Papandreou was arrested after a nighttime raid at his villa in Kastri, Attica.
Andreas was arrested at around the same time, after seven soldiers armed with fixed bayonets and a machine gun forcibly entered his home.
Andreas Papandreou escaped to the roof of his house, but surrendered after one of the soldiers held a gun to the head of his then-fourteen-year-old son George Papandreou.
Papadopoulos' junta attempted to re-engineer the Greek political landscape by coup.
Papadopoulos as well as the other junta members are known in Greece by the term "Aprilianoi" (Aprilians), denoting the month of the coup.
The term "Aprilianoi" has become synonymous with the term "dictators of 1974".

===
Vatican ===
According to journalist Eric Frattini the coup d'état was partly funded by Vatican agents who handed over $4 million to Georgios Papadopoulos through an intricate network of banks, as they feared the election of Andreas Papandreou, a leftist politician accused of having sympathies for communism.

===
Role of the King ===
When the tanks came to the streets of Athens on 21 April, the legitimate National Radical Union government, of which Rallis was a member, asked King Constantine to immediately mobilise the state against the coup; he declined to do so, and swore in the dictators as the legitimate government of Greece.

The King, who had relented and decided to co-operate, claims to this day that he was isolated and did not know what else to do.
He has since claimed that he was trying to gain time to organise a counter-coup and oust the Junta.
He did organise such a counter-coup; however, the fact that the new government had a legal sanction, in that it had been appointed by the legitimate head of state, played an important role in the coup's success.
The King was later to regret his decision bitterly.
For many Greeks, it served to identify him indelibly with the coup and certainly played an important role in the final decision to abolish the monarchy, sanctioned by the 1974 referendum.

The only concession the King could achieve was to appoint a civilian as prime minister, rather than Spandidakis.
Konstantinos Kollias, a former Attorney General of the Areios Pagos (supreme court), was chosen.
He was a well-known royalist and had even been disciplined under the Papandreou government for meddling in the investigation of the murder of MP Gregoris Lambrakis.
Kollias was little more than a figurehead and real power rested with the army, and
especially Papadopoulos, who emerged as the coup's strong man and became Minister to the Presidency of the Government.
Other coup members occupied key posts.

Up until then constitutional legitimacy had been preserved, since under the Greek Constitution the King could appoint whomever he wanted as prime minister, as long as Parliament endorsed the appointment with a vote of confidence or a general election was called.
It was this government, sworn-in during the early evening hours of 21 April, that formalised the coup.
It adopted a "Constituent Act", an amendment tantamount to a revolution, cancelling the elections and effectively abolishing the constitution, which would be replaced later.

In the meantime, the government was to rule by decree.
Since traditionally such Constituent Acts did not need to be signed by the Crown, the King never signed it, permitting him to claim, years later, that he had never signed any document instituting the junta.
Critics claim that Constantine II did nothing to prevent the government (and especially his chosen prime minister, Kollias) from legally instituting the authoritarian government to come.
This same government published and enforced a decree, already proclaimed on radio as the coup was in progress, instituting military law.
Constantine claimed he never signed that decree either.
===
King's counter-coup ===
From the outset, the relationship between Constantine and the colonels was an uneasy one.
The colonels were not willing to share power, whereas the young king, like his father before him, was used to playing an active role in politics and would never consent to being a mere figurehead, especially in a military administration.
Although the colonels' strong anti-communist, pro-NATO, and pro-Western views appealed to the United States, President Lyndon B. Johnson – in an attempt to avoid an international backlash – told Constantine that it would be best to replace the junta with a new government according to Paul Ioannidis in his book Destiny
Prevails:
My life with Aristóteles Onassis.
Constantine took that as an encouragement to organize a counter-coup, although no direct help or involvement of the U.S. (or Britain) was forthcoming.

The King finally decided to launch his counter-coup on 13 December 1967.
Since Athens was militarily in the hands of the colonels, Constantine decided to fly to the small northern city of Kavala, where he hoped to be among troops loyal only to him.
The vague plan that Constantine and his advisors had conceived was to form a unit that would invade and take control over Thessaloniki, where an alternative administration would be installed.
Constantine hoped that international recognition and internal pressure between the two governments would force the junta to resign, leaving the field clear for him to return triumphant to Athens.

In the early morning hours of 13 December, the King boarded the royal plane, together with Queen Anne-Marie, their two baby children Princess Alexia and Crown Prince Pavlos, his mother Frederika, and his sister, Princess Irene.
Constantine also took with him Prime Minister Kollias.
At first, things seemed to be going according to plan.
Constantine was well received in Kavala, which was under the command of a general loyal to him.
The Hellenic Air Force and Navy, both strongly royalist and not involved in the junta, immediately declared for him and mobilised.
Another of Constantine's generals effectively cut all communication between Athens and northern Greece.

However, Constantine's plans were overly bureaucratic, naïvely supposing that orders from a commanding general would automatically be obeyed.

In the circumstances, middle-ranking pro-junta officers neutralised and arrested Constantine's royalist generals and took command of their units, and subsequently put together a force to advance on Kavala to arrest the King.
The junta, not at all shaken by the loss of their figurehead premier, ridiculed Constantine by announcing that he was hiding "from village to village".
Realising that the counter-coup had failed, Constantine fled Greece on board the royal plane, taking his family and the helpless Kollias with him.
They landed in Rome early in the morning of 14 December.
Constantine remained in exile during the remainder of military rule.
Although he subsequently returned to Greece, the abolition of the monarchy in 1973 removed his status as King.

===
Regency ===
The flight of Constantine and Kollias left Greece with no legal government or head of state.
This did not concern the military junta.
Instead the Revolutionary Council, composed of Pattakos, Papadopoulos, and Makarezos, appointed another member to the military administration, Major General Georgios Zoitakis, as Regent.
Zoitakis then appointed Papadopoulos as prime minister.
This became the only government of Greece following the failure of the King's attempted counter-coup, as Constantine was unwilling to set up an alternative administration in exile.

In hopes of giving legal sanction to the regime, the junta drafted a new constitution.
It made the military the guardians of "social and political order," with wide autonomy from governmental and parliamentary oversight.
It also heavily circumscribed the activities of political parties.
The new constitution was approved in a 15 November referendum, with over 92 percent approval.
However, the referendum was conducted in less-than-free circumstances; the regime deployed extensive propaganda in favor of the new document while muzzling any opposition.
Under the new constitution, the regency would continue until elections were held, unless the junta called Constantine back sooner (though Constantine never acknowledged, let alone recognized, the regency).
However, the junta announced that the "Revolution of April 21" (as the regime called itself) would need time to reform the "Greek mentality" before holding elections.
It also suspended most of the constitution's guarantees of civil rights until the restoration of civilian rule.

In a legally controversial move, even under the junta's own Constitution, the Cabinet voted on 21 March 1972 to oust Zoitakis and replace him with Papadopoulos, thus combining the offices of Regent and Prime Minister.
It was thought Zoitakis was problematic and interfered too much with the military.
The King's portrait remained on coins, in public buildings, etc.,
but slowly, the military chipped away at the institution of the monarchy: the royal family's tax immunity was abolished, the complex network of royal charities was brought under direct state control, the royal arms were removed from coins, the Navy and Air Force dropped their "Royal" names, and newspapers were prohibited from publishing the King's photo or any interviews.

During this period, resistance against the colonels' rule became better organized among exiles in Europe and the United States.
There was also considerable political infighting within the junta.
Still, up until 1973, the junta appeared in firm control of Greece, and not likely to be ousted by violent means.

==
Characteristics of the Junta ==


===
Ideology ===
The colonels preferred to call the coup
an Ethnosotirios Epanastasis (Εθνοσωτήριος Επανάστασις, 'revolution to save the nation').
Their official justification was that a "communist conspiracy" had infiltrated Greece's bureaucracy, academia, press, and military, to such an extent that drastic action was needed to protect the country from communist takeover.
Thus, the defining characteristic of the Junta was its staunch anti-communism.
They used the term anarchokommounisté
(αναρχοκομμουνισταί, 'anarcho-communist') to describe leftists in general.
In a similar vein, the junta attempted to steer Greek public opinion not only by propaganda but also by inventing new words and slogans, such as paleokommatismos (Παλαιοκομματισμός, 'old-partyism') to discredit parliamentary democracy, or Ellas Ellinon Christianon (Ελλάς Ελλήνων Χριστιανών, 'Greece for Christian Greeks') to underscore its ideology.
The junta's main ideological spokesmen included Georgios Georgalas and journalist Savvas Konstantopoulos, both former Marxists.

In 1970, Georgalas published a book The Decline of Consumer Society, stating that consumerism had destroyed the Christian spiritual values of the West, leaving Greece as the last solitary outpost of Christian civilization.
In the same book, Georgalas stated the solution to social problems was not as many believed increased employment, but instead "lengthy psycho-therapeutic programmes" which would create "the free man in harmonious co-existence with himself and his fellow beings".
The British historian Richard Clogg described the writings of Georgalas and Konstantopoluos as "pretentious verbiage", noting that they tended to use elaborate and impressive-sounding language to mask the shallowness of their theories.
In essence, intellectuals like Georgalas and Konstantopoulos argued that materialism and consumerism were corroding the spiritual strength of the Greek people, and the military regime would "cure" the Greeks by restoring the traditional values of Orthodoxy (Greek Christianity).
One of Papadopoulos' first acts after the coup was to change the pension laws to allow the veterans of the Security Battalions to collect pensions.
A central part of the regime's ideology was xenophobia, which presented Greeks as the creators of civilization with the rest of the world jealous of the debts they owed to Greece.
Colonel Ioannis Ladas, the Secretary-general of the Ministry of Public Order, came to international prominence in the summer of 1968 when he personally beat up Panayiotis Lambrias, the editor of magazine Eikones for running an article saying that homosexuality was accepted as normal in ancient Greece.
When the BBC's Greek service reported the incident, Ladas gave a rant at a press conference, claiming that the BBC was run by homosexuals, making him into a sort of unofficial spokesman for the regime.
At a subsequent speech before a visiting group of Greek-Americans on 6 August 1968, Ladas quoted Friderich Nietzsche's statement that the ancient Greeks invented everything and went on to say: "Foreigners confess and acknowledge Greek superiority.
Human civilization was wholly fashioned by our race.
Even the enemies of Greece recognize that civilization is an exclusively Greek creation".
Ladas went on to denounce young men with long hair as "the degenerate phenomenon of hippy-ism", calling hippies "anti-social elements, drug addicts, sex maniacs, thieves, etc.
It is only natural that they should be enemies of the army and the ideals which the military way of life serves".
Ladas ended his speech by arguing that Greeks for racial reasons were still the world's preeminent people, but had only declined of inadequate leadership, a problem which had been solved by the "revolution" of 21 April 1967.
Ladas claimed that Greece under military leadership would be "cured" of its problems and resume its rightful place in the world.
Clogg noted that before the coup, Ladas had been associated with the far-right 4th of August Party, and contributed many articles to that party's journal, which was a "racist and anti-Semitic" magazine which glorified not only 4 August Regime, but also the Third Reich.
The Greek novelist Yiorgos Theotokas once coined the term progonoplexia (Προγονοπληξία, 'ancestoritis') to describe an obsession with the heritage of the past, which many felt that Papadopoulos and the rest of the junta suffered from.
Papadopoulos often described the Greeks in his speeches as the "elect of God", claiming the regenerated Ellas Ellinon Christianon ('Greece for Christian Greeks') would be the example to the rest of the world as maintained that people all over the world would regard his ideology of "Helleno-Christian civilization" alongside the philosophy of Plato and Aristotle as the summit of intellectual achievement.
The Greek junta has also been described as Fascist.

=== "Patient in a cast" and other metaphors ===
Throughout his tenure as the junta strongman, Papadopoulos often employed what have been described by the BBC as gory medical metaphors, where he or the junta assumed the role of the "medical doctor".
The supposed "patient" was Greece.
Typically Papadopoulos or the junta portrayed themselves as the "doctor" who operated on the "patient" by putting the patient's "foot" in an orthopedic cast and applying restraints on the "patient", tying him on a surgical bed and putting him under anesthesia to perform the "operation" so that the life of the "patient" would not be "endangered" during the operation.
In one of his famous speeches Papadopoulos mentioned:
We are in front of a patient who we have on a surgical bed, and who, should the surgeon not strap on the surgical bed during the operation and the anesthesia, there is a probability, rather than the surgery granting him the restoration of the health, to lead him to his death. ...
The restrictions are the strapping of the patient to the surgical bed so that he will undergo the surgery without danger.

In the same speech Papadopoulos continued:
We have a patient.
We have put him in a plaster cast.
We are checking him to find out if he can walk without the plaster cast.
We break the initial cast, potentially to replace it with a new one, where necessary.
The referendum shall become a general overview of the patient's capabilities.
Let us pray for him never to need a cast again; and should he need one, we will put it to him.
And the one thing I can promise you, is to invite you to witness the foot without a cast!

Other metaphors contained religious imagery related to the resurrection of Christ at Easter
: "Χριστός Ανέστη – Ελλάς Ανέστη" ("Christ has risen – Greece has risen"), alluding that the junta would save Greece and resurrect her into a greater, new Land.
The theme of rebirth was used many times as a standard reply to avoid answering any questions as to how long the dictatorship would last:
Because the latter is someone else's concern.
They are the concerns of those, who lit the fuse of the dynamite for the explosion which led to the rebirth of the State the night of 21 April 1967.

The religious themes and rebirth metaphors are also seen in the following:
Our obligations are described by both our religion and our history.
Christ teaches concord and love.
Our history demands faith in the Fatherland. ...
Hellas is being reborn, Hellas will accomplish great things, Hellas will live forever.

===
Civil rights ===
As soon as the coup d'état was announced over Greek radio, martial music was continuously broadcast over the airwaves.
This was interrupted from time to time with announcements of the junta issuing orders, which always started with the introduction, Apofasizomen ke diatassomen (Αποφασίζομεν και διατάσσομεν, 'We decide and we order').
Long-standing political freedoms and civil liberties
, that had been taken for granted and enjoyed by the Greek people for decades, were instantly suppressed.
Article 14 of the Greek Constitution, which protected freedom of thought and freedom of the press, was immediately suspended.
Military courts were established, and political parties were dissolved.
Legislation that took decades to fine tune and multiple parliaments to enact was thus erased in a matter of days.
The rapid dismantling of Greek democracy had begun.

In fact, the junta crackdown was so fast that by September 1967, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands went before the European Commission of Human Rights to accuse Greece of violating most of the human rights protected by the European Convention on Human Rights.
Following the coup, 6,188 suspected communists and political opponents were imprisoned or exiled to remote Greek islands within the first week after the coup.
Under the junta, torture became a deliberate practice carried out both by the Security Police and the Greek Military Police (ESA), with an estimated 3,500 people detained in torture centers run by ESA.
Commonly used methods of torture included, but were not limited to, beating the soles of detainees' feet, sexual torture, choking and ripping out body hair.
The Special Interrogation Unit of the Greek Military Police (EAT/ESA) used a combination of techniques that included continuous standing in an empty room, sleep and food deprivation, beatings and loud sounds.

According to recent research based on new interviews with survivors, in the period from May to November 1973 this combination of interrogation techniques also included the repetition of songs that were popular hits of the time.
These were played loudly and repeatedly from loudspeakers.
These methods attacked the senses without leaving any visible traces and have been classified since as torture by international organisations.

According to a human rights report by Amnesty International, in the first month of the 21 April coup an estimated 8,000 people were arrested.
James Becket, an American attorney and author of Barbarism in Greece, was sent to Greece by Amnesty International.

He wrote in December 1969 that "a conservative estimate would place at not less than two thousand" the number of people tortured.
The citizens' right of assembly was revoked and no political demonstrations were allowed.
Surveillance on citizens was a fact of life, even during permitted social activities.
That had a continuously chilling effect on the population who realized that, even though they were allowed certain social activities, they could not overstep the boundaries and delve into or discuss forbidden subjects.
This realization, including the absence of any civil rights as well as maltreatment during police arrest, ranging from threats to beatings or worse, made life under the junta a difficult proposition for many ordinary citizens.
Photography by ordinary citizens was banned in public locations.

The junta allowed citizens to participate in ordinary societal events that reflected those of the United States and United Kingdom, such as rock concerts for example.
However, citizens lived in extreme fear, as any behavior that the junta disapproved of, coupled with the complete absence of any civil rights or freedoms, could easily result in torture, beatings, exile, imprisonment, or worse, and the labeling of the victims as anarcho-communists, or worse.
The absence of a valid code of jurisprudence led to the unequal application of the law among the citizens and to rampant favoritism and nepotism.
Absence of elected representation meant that the citizens' stark and only choice was to submit to these arbitrary measures exactly as dictated by the junta.
The country had become a true police state.
Thousands were jailed for political reasons by the dictatorship and thousands were forced into exile.
More than 10,000 were estimated to have been arrested in the first few days after the coup.
Complete lack of press freedom coupled with nonexistent civil rights meant that continuous cases of civil rights abuses could neither be reported nor investigated by an independent press or any other reputable authority.
This led to a psychology of fear among the citizens during the Papadopoulos dictatorship, which became worse under Ioannidis.

===
External relations ===
The military government was given support by the United States as a Cold War ally, due to its proximity to the Eastern European Soviet bloc, and the fact that the previous Truman administration had given the country millions of dollars in economic aid to discourage Communism.
U.S. support for the junta, which was staunchly anti-Communist, is claimed to be the cause of rising anti-Americanism in Greece during and following the junta's undemocratic rule.
There was a mixed response to the junta from Western Europe.
The Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands filed a complaint before the Human Rights Commission of the Council of Europe in September 1967.
The Commission on Human Rights took the exceptional step of constituting a Sub-Commission to investigate the accusations of gross human rights abuses.
The sub-commission reported its extensive on-site investigation and unearthed significant evidence of torture and human rights violations.
Greece however opted to leave the Council of Europe in December 1969 before a full verdict of the commission could be handed down.

Countries such as the United Kingdom and the Federal Republic of Germany on the other hand were voicing criticism about Greece's human rights record but supported the country's continued membership in the Council of Europe and NATO because of the country's strategic value for the western alliance.

===
Sociocultural policies ===
To gain support for his rule, Papadopoulos projected an image that appealed to some key segments of Greek society.
The son of a poor but educated rural family, he was educated at the prestigious Hellenic Military Academy.
Papadopoulos allowed substantial social and cultural freedoms to all social classes, but political oppression and censorship were at times heavy-handed, especially in areas deemed sensitive by the junta, such as political activities, and politically related art, literature, film and music.
Costa-Gavras's film Z and Mikis Theodorakis's music, among others, were never allowed even during the most relaxed times of the dictatorship, and an index of prohibited songs, literature and art was kept.

====
Western music and film ===
=
Remarkably, after some initial hesitation and as long as they were not deemed to be politically damaging to the junta, junta censors allowed wide access to Western music and films.
Even the then-racy West German film Helga, a 1967 sex education documentary featuring a live birth scene, had no trouble making its debut in Greece just like in any other Western country.
Moreover, the film was only restricted for those under 13 years of age.
In 1971 Robert Hartford-Davis was allowed by the junta to film the classic horror film Incense for the Damned, starring Peter Cushing and Patrick Macnee and suitably featuring Chryseis (Χρυσηίς), a beguiling Greek siren with vampire tendencies, on the Greek island of Hydra.
In 1970 the film Woodstock was shown all over Greece, with reports of arrests and disturbances especially in Athens as many youths flocked to see the film and filled theatres to capacity, while many others were left outside.
Films such as Marijuana Stop!
dealt with the hippie culture and its perception in Greek society as drug-using.
Meanwhile, at Matala, Crete, a hippie colony which had been living in the caves since the 1960s was never disturbed.
Singer-songwriter Joni Mitchell was inspired to write the song "Carey" after staying in the Matala caves with the hippie community in 1971.
Hippie colonies also existed in other popular tourist spots such as "Paradise Beach" in Mykonos.

====
Greek folk music ====
During its rule, the dictatorship heavily utilized folk music in mass media in order to help solidify the relationship between the junta and Greek national identity, in turn legitimizing its rule over the country.
The regime sponsored song contests and concerts featuring folk musicians throughout its existence.
The favored types of music employed by the government were those which accompanied the Kalamatianos and Tsamiko folk dances.
Additionally, the regime encouraged the production of new folk songs with lyrics praising the government and its leaders, like Georgios Papadopoulos.
Because the clarinet was so strongly featured in the music of the junta, it remains associated with the Colonels by many Greeks today.
The ideology behind the promotion of folk music was twofold: to bridge the gap of continuity with Greece's past and present, and to limit foreign cultural influences such as psychedelic music (which could hold political connotations contrary to those of the junta) by substituting them with traditionally Greek ones.
Folk music was also used as an ideological weapon against dissidents, and it was played constantly in detention centers to help break prisoners.

====
Greek rock ====
In the early days of the dictatorship, Western music broadcasts were limited from the airwaves in favour of martial music, but this was eventually relaxed.
In addition, pop/rock music programmes such as the one hosted by famous Greek music/radio/television personality and promoter Nico Mastorakis were very popular throughout the dictatorship years both on radio and television.
Most Western record sales were similarly not restricted.
In fact, even rock concerts and tours were allowed such as by the then popular rock groups Socrates Drank the Conium and Nostradamos.
Another pop group, Poll, was a pioneer of Greek pop music in the early 1970s.
Its lead singer and composer was Robert Williams, who was later joined, in 1971, by Kostas Tournas.
Poll enjoyed a number of nationwide hits, such as "Anthrope Agapa (Mankind Love One Another)", an anti-war song composed by Tournas, and "Ela Ilie Mou (Come, My Sun)", composed by Tournas, Williams.
Tournas later pursued a solo career and in 1972 produced the progressive psychedelic hit solo album Aperanta Chorafia (Απέραντα Χωράφια, 'Infinite Fields').
He wrote and arranged the album using an orchestra and a rock group ("Ruth") combination, producing a rock opera which is considered a landmark of Greek rock.
In 1973 Kostas Tournas created the album Astroneira (Stardreams), influenced by David Bowie's Ziggy Stardust.
Songwriter Dionysis Savvopoulos, who was initially imprisoned by the regime, nevertheless rose to great popularity and produced a number of influential and highly politically allegorical, especially against the junta, albums during the period, including To Perivoli tou Trellou
(Το Περιβόλι του Τρελλού, 'The Madman's Orchard'), Ballos (Μπάλλος, the name of Greek folk dance) and Vromiko Psomi
(Βρώμικο Ψωμί, 'Dirty Bread').
====
Tourism ====
Concurrently, tourism was actively encouraged by Papadopoulos' government and, funding scandals notwithstanding, there was great development of the tourist sector.
With tourism came nightlife.
However, under Papadopoulos, in the absence of any civil rights these sociocultural freedoms existed in a legal vacuum that meant they were not guaranteed, but rather dispensed at the whim of the junta.
In addition any transgressing into political matters during social or cultural activities usually meant arrest and punishment.
Tourism was furthered by the 1969 European Championships in Athletics in Athens which showed political normality.
Even the boycott of the West German team was not directed against the junta, but against its own team leadership.
Although discos and nightclubs were, initially, subjected to a curfew, partially due to an energy crisis, this was eventually extended from 1:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. as the energy crisis eased.
These freedoms were later reversed by Dimitrios Ioannidis after his coup.

====
Agriculture ====
The farmers were Papadopoulos's natural constituency and were more likely to support him, seeing him as one of their own because of his rural roots.
He cultivated this relationship by appealing to them, calling them i rahokokalia tou laou (η ραχοκοκαλιά του λαού, '
the backbone of the people') and cancelling all agricultural loans.
By further insisting on promoting, but not really enforcing for fear of middle-class backlash, religion and patriotism, he further appealed to the simpler ideals of rural Greece and strengthened his image as people's champion among farmers, who tended to ridicule the middle class.
Furthermore, the regime promoted a policy of economic development in rural areas, which were mostly neglected by the previous governments, that had focused largely on urban industrial development.

====
Urban classes ====
Papadopoulos was less likely to appeal to the largely civilian and city-oriented middle class, since he was a military man from a rural background.
In addition, he had promised from the beginning that the dictatorship would not be permanent, and that when political order was established democratic rule would return.
On top of that, his promotion of tourism and other beneficial economic measures and the fact that, with the notable exceptions of political freedoms and press censorship, he did not otherwise substantially restrict the middle class, had the effect of assisting the junta in establishing its control over the country by gaining, at least initially, the reluctant acquiescence of some key segments of the population.

===
Economic policies ===
The 1967–1973 period was marked by high rates of economic growth coupled with low inflation and low unemployment.
Economic growth was driven by investment in the tourism industry, loose emigration policies, public spending, and pro-business incentives that fostered both domestic and foreign capital spending.
Several international companies invested in Greece at the time, including The Coca-Cola Company.
Economic growth started losing steam by 1972.In addition, large scale construction of hydroelectric dam projects, such as in Aliakmon, Kastrakion, Polyphytos, the expansion of thermoelectric generation units and other significant infrastructure development, took place.
The junta used to proudly announce these projects with the slogan:
I Ellas ine ena ergotaxion (
Η Ελλάς είναι ένα εργοτάξιον, 'Greece is a construction zone').
The always smiling Stylianos Pattakos, also known as to proto mistri
tis elladas
(Το πρώτο μυστρί της Ελλάδας, 'the first trowel of Greece'), since he frequently appeared at project inaugurations with a trowel in hand,
starred in many of the Epikaira propaganda documentaries that were screened before feature film presentation in Greek cinemas.

===
Financial scandals ===
Cases of non-transparent public deals and corruption allegedly occurred at the time, given the lack of democratic checks and balances and the absence of a free press.
One such event is associated with the regime's tourism minister, Ioannis Ladas.
During his administration, several low-interest loans, amortized over a twenty-year period, were issued for tourist development.
This fostered the erection of a multitude of hotels, sometimes in non-tourist areas, and with no underlying business rationale.
Several such hotels were abandoned unfinished as soon as the loans were secured, and their remains still dot the Greek countryside.
These questionable loans are referred to as Thalassodania (Θαλασσοδάνεια, 'loans of the sea'), to indicate the loose terms under which they were granted.
Another contested policy of the regime was the writing-off of agricultural loans, up to a value of 100,000 drachmas, to farmers.
This has been attributed to an attempt by Papadopoulos to gain public support for his regime.

==
Italian connection ==
At the time, the Italian far right was very impressed with the methods of Papadopoulos and his junta.

In April 1968, Papadopoulos invited fifty members of the Italian far right on a Greek tour, to demonstrate the junta's methods.
Invitees included Stefano Delle Chiaie and members of Ordine Nuovo, Avanguardia Nazionale, Europa Civiltà, and FUAN-La Caravella.
(
cf Frattini, Entity, 2004, p. 304)
The Italians were impressed.

Upon returning to their country, they escalated their political violence, embarking on a terror campaign of bombings and other violence which killed and injured hundreds.
Afterwards, the right-wing instigators of this violence blamed the communists.
After their visit to Greece, the Italian neo-fascists also engaged in false flag operations and embarked on a campaign of infiltration of leftist, anarchist, and Marxist–Leninist organisations.
One of the neo-fascists conducted frequent provocations and infiltrations in the months leading to the Piazza Fontana bombing on 12 December 1969.
The Greek junta was so impressed with the manner in which their Italian counterparts were paving the way toward an Italian coup d'état that, on 15 May 1969, Papadopoulos sent them a congratulatory message stating that "His Excellency the Prime Minister notes that the efforts that have been undertaken by the Greek National government in Italy for some time start to have some impact".

==
Anti-Junta movement ==
The democratic elements of Greek society were opposed to the junta, from the start.

This included the entire left wing of the Greek political spectrum, including the Communist Party of Greece, which was outlawed long before the junta.

Many new militant groups formed in 1968, both in exile and in Greece, to promote democratic rule.

These included Panhellenic Liberation Movement, Democratic Defense, and the Socialist Democratic Union.

The first armed action against the junta was Alexandros Panagoulis's failed attempt to assassinate George Papadopoulos, on 13 August 1968.

===
Assassination attempt by Panagoulis ===
The assassination attempt took place on the morning of 13 August, when Papadopoulos went from his summer residence in Lagonisi to Athens, escorted by his personal security motorcycles and cars.
Alexandros Panagoulis ignited a bomb at a point of the coastal road where the limousine carrying Papadopoulos had to slow down, but the bomb failed to harm Papadopoulos.
Panagoulis was captured a few hours later in a nearby sea cave, as the boat that would let him escape the scene of the attack had not shown up.

Panagoulis was transferred to the Greek Military Police (EAT-ESA) offices, where he was questioned, beaten, and tortured (see the proceedings of Theofiloyiannakos's trial).

On 17 November 1968, he was sentenced to death.

He remained in prison for five years.

After democracy was restored, Panagoulis was elected into Parliament.

He is regarded as emblematic of the struggle to restore democracy.

===
Broadening of the movement ===
The funeral of George Papandreou, Sr.,
on 3 November 1968, spontaneously turned into a massive demonstration against the junta.

Thousands of Athenians disobeyed the military's orders, and followed the casket to the cemetery.

The junta arrested 41 people.

On 28 March 1969, after two years of widespread censorship, political detentions and torture, Giorgos Seferis, recipient of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1963, took a stand against the junta.
He made a statement on the BBC World Service, with copies simultaneously distributed to every newspaper in Athens.
Attacking the colonels, he passionately demanded that "This anomaly must end".

Seferis died before the junta ended.

His funeral, on 20 September 1972, turned into a massive demonstration against the military government.

Also in 1969, Costa-Gavras released the film Z, based on a book by celebrated left-wing writer Vassilis Vassilikos.
The film, banned in Greece, presented a lightly fictionalized account of the events surrounding the assassination of United Democratic Left MP Gregoris Lambrakis in 1963.
The film captured the sense of outrage about the junta.
The soundtrack of the film was written by Mikis Theodorakis, who was imprisoned by the junta and later went into exile, and the music was smuggled into the country and added to other inspirational, underground Theodorakis tracks.

A lesser known Danish film, in Greek, Your Neighbor's Son, detailed the subordination and training of simple youths to become torturers for the junta.

===
International protest ===
The junta exiled thousands, on the grounds that they were communists and/or "enemies of the country".
Most of them were subjected to internal exile on Greek deserted islands, such as Makronisos, Gyaros, Gioura, or inhabited islands such as Leros, Agios Eustratios or Trikeri.

The most famous were in external exile, most of whom were substantially involved in the resistance, organising protests in European capital cities or helping and hiding refugees from Greece.

These included:
Melina Mercouri, actor, singer (and, after 1981 Minister for Culture); Mikis Theodorakis, composer of resistance songs; Costas Simitis (prime minister from 1996 to 2004); Andreas Papandreou (prime minister from 1981 to 1989 and again from 1993 to 1996); and Lady Amalia Fleming (wife of Sir Alexander Fleming, philanthropist, political activist).
Some chose exile, unable to stand life under the junta.
For example, Melina Mercouri was allowed to enter Greece, but stayed away on her own accord.

In the early hours of 19 September 1970, in Matteotti square in Genoa, geology student Kostas Georgakis set himself ablaze in protest against the dictatorship of George Papadopoulos.
The junta delayed the arrival of his remains to Corfu for four months, fearing public reaction and protests.
At the time, his death caused a sensation in Greece and abroad, as it was the first tangible manifestation of the depth of resistance against the junta.
He is the only known anti-junta resistance activist to have sacrificed himself.

He is considered the precursor of later student protest, such as the Athens Polytechnic uprising.
The Municipality of Corfu dedicated a memorial in his honour, near his home in Corfu city.

In a speech before the U.S. Senate on 6 November 1971, Senator Lee Metcalf listed the members of the Greek junta who had served in the collaborationist Security Battalions and denounced the administration of Richard Nixon for supporting what he called a "junta of Nazi collaborators".
The German writer, investigative reporter and journalist Günter Wallraff traveled to Greece in May 1974.
While in Syntagma Square, he protested against human right violations.
He was arrested and tortured by the police, as he did not carry, on purpose, any papers on him that could identify him as a foreigner.
After his identity was revealed, Wallraff was convicted and sentenced to 14 months in jail.
He was released in August, after the end of the dictatorship.

===
Velos mutiny ===
In an anti-junta protest, on 23 May 1973, HNS Velos, under the command of Commander Nikolaos Pappas, refused to return to Greece after participating in a NATO exercise and remained anchored at Fiumicino, Italy.
During a patrol with other NATO vessels between continental Italy and Sardinia, the commander and the officers heard over the radio that a number of fellow naval officers had been arrested in Greece.
Commander Pappas was involved in a group of democratic officers who remained loyal to their oath to obey the Constitution and planned to act against the junta.
Evangelos Averoff also participated in the Velos mutiny, for which he was later arrested as
an "instigator".
Pappas believed that since his fellow anti-junta officers had been arrested, there was no more hope for a movement inside Greece.
He therefore decided to act alone in order to motivate global public opinion.
He mustered all the crew to the stern and announced his decision, which was received with enthusiasm by the crew.
Pappas signaled his intentions to the squadron commander and NATO headquarters, quoting the preamble of the North Atlantic Treaty, which declares that "all governments ... are determined to safeguard the freedom, common heritage and civilisation of their peoples, founded on the principles of democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law", and, leaving formation, sailed for Rome.
There, anchored about 3.5 nautical miles (6 km) away from the coast of Fiumicino, three ensigns sailed ashore with a whaleboat, went to Fiumicino Airport and telephoned the international press agencies, notifying them of the situation in Greece, the presence of the destroyer, and that the captain would hold a press conference the next day.
This action increased international interest in the situation in Greece.
The commander, six officers, and twenty five petty officers requested permission to remain abroad as political refugees.
Indeed, the whole crew wished to follow their commander but were advised by its officers to remain onboard and return to Greece to inform families and friends about what happened.
Velos returned to Greece after a month with a replacement crew.
After the fall of the junta all officers and petty officers returned to the Navy.

== Collapse ==
The collapse of the junta both ideologically and politically was triggered by a series of events which unfolded soon after Papadopoulos' attempt at liberalisation, with ideological collapse preceding its eventual political collapse.
During and following this ill-fated process the internal political strains of the junta came to the fore and pitted the junta factions against each other, thus destroying the seemingly monolithic cohesion of the dictatorship.

This had the effect of seriously weakening the coherence of the political message and, consequently, the regime's credibility.

Later events showed that this was a fatal blow, from which the junta never recovered.

At the same time, during Papadopoulos' attempt at liberalisation, some of the junta constraints were removed from Greece's body politic.

This led to demands for more freedoms, and political unrest, in a society well used to democratic action prior to the dictatorship.

===
Normalization and attempts at liberalization ===
Papadopoulos had indicated as early as 1968 that he was eager for a reform process.
He had declared at the time that he did not want the "Revolution" (junta speak for the "dictatorship") to become a "regime".

He attempted to initiate reforms in 1969 and 1970 but was thwarted by the hardliners, including Ioannidis.

Subsequent to his 1970 failed attempt at reform, he threatened to resign.

He was dissuaded when the hardliners renewed their personal allegiance to him.
On 10 April 1970 Papadopoulos announced the formation of the Simvouleftiki Epitropi (Συμβουλευτική Επιτροπή, 'Advisory Council') otherwise known as Papadopoulos' (pseudo) Parliament.
Composed of members elected through an electoral type process but limited only to ethnikofrones (Εθνικόφρων, 'regime supporters'), it was bicameral, composed of the Central Advisory Council and the Provincial Advisory Council.
The Central Council met in Athens in the Parliament Building.
Both councils had the purpose to advise the dictator.
At the time of the announcement of the formation of the council, Papadopoulos explained that he wanted to avoid using the term Vouli (Βουλή, 'Parliament') for the Committee because it sounded bad.
The council was dissolved just prior to Papadopoulos' failed attempt to liberalise his regime.
As internal dissatisfaction grew in the early 1970s, and especially after an abortive coup by the Navy in early 1973, Papadopoulos attempted to legitimize the regime by beginning a gradual "democratization"
(See also the article on Metapolitefsi).

On 1 June 1973, he abolished the monarchy and declared Greece a republic with himself as president.
He was confirmed in office after a controversial referendum, the results of which were not recognised by the political parties.
He furthermore sought the support of the old political establishment, but secured only the cooperation of Spiros Markezinis, who was appointed Prime Minister.
Concurrently, many restrictions were lifted, and the army's role significantly reduced.
Papadopoulos intended to establish a presidential republic, with extensive–and within the context of the system, almost dictatorial–powers vested in the office of President, which he held.
The decision to return to political rule and the restriction of their role was resented by many of the regime's supporters in the Army, whose dissatisfaction with Papadopoulos would become evident a few months later.
===
Uprising at the Polytechnic ===
Papadopoulos' heavy-handed attempt at liberalisation did not find favour among many in Greece.
The stilted democratisation process he proposed was constrained by multiple factors.
His inexperience at carrying out an unprecedented political experiment of democratisation was burdened by his tendency to concentrate as much power in his hands as possible, a weakness he exhibited during the junta years when he would sometimes hold multiple high-echelon government portfolios.
This especially antagonised the intelligentsia, whose primary exponents were the students.
The students at the Law School in Athens, for example, demonstrated multiple times against the dictatorship prior to the events at the Polytechneion.

The tradition of student protest was always strong in Greece, even before the dictatorship.
Papadopoulos tried hard to suppress and discredit the student movement during his tenure at the helm of the junta.
But the liberalisation process he undertook allowed the students to organise more freely, and this gave the opportunity to the students at the National Technical University of Athens to organise a demonstration that grew progressively larger and more effective.
The political momentum was on the side of the students.
Sensing this, the junta panicked and reacted violently.
In the early hours of Saturday, 17 November 1973, Papadopoulos sent the army to suppress the student strike and sit-in of the Eleftheri Poliorkimeni (Ελεύθεροι Πολιορκημένοι, 'Free Besieged'), as the students called themselves, at the Athens Polytechnic which had commenced on 14 November.
Shortly after 3:00 am.
EET, under almost complete cover of darkness, an AMX 30 tank crashed through the rail gate of the Athens Polytechnic with subsequent loss of life.
An estimated 24 students were killed.
The army also occupied Syntagma Square for at least the following day.
Even the sidewalk cafes were closed.

Ioannidis' involvement in inciting unit commanders to commit criminal acts during the uprising, so that he could facilitate his own upcoming coup, was noted in the indictment presented to the court by the prosecutor during the Greek junta trials, and in his subsequent conviction in the Polytechneion trial where he was found to have been morally responsible for the events.

===
Ioannidis coup and regime ===
The uprising triggered a series of events that put an abrupt end to Papadopoulos' attempts at "liberalisation".
Brigadier Dimitrios Ioannidis, a disgruntled junta hardliner and long-time protégé of Papadopoulos as head of the feared Military Police, used the uprising as a pretext to reestablish public order, and staged a counter-coup that overthrew Papadopoulos and Spyros Markezinis on 25 November.
Military law was reinstated, and the new Junta appointed General Phaedon Gizikis as president and economist Adamantios Androutsopoulos as Prime Minister, although Ioannidis remained the behind-the-scenes strongman.

Ioannidis's heavy-handed and opportunistic intervention had the effect of destroying the myth that the junta was an idealistic group of army officers with exactly the same ideals who came to save Greece by using their collective wisdom.
The main tenet of the junta ideology (and mythology) was gone and so was the collective.
By default, he remained the only man at the top after toppling the other three principals of the junta.
Characteristically, he cited ideological reasons for ousting the Papadopoulos faction, accusing them with straying from the principles of the Revolution, especially of being corrupt and misusing their privileges as army officers for financial gains.

Papadopoulos and his junta always claimed that the 21 April 1967 "revolution" saved Greece from the old party system.
Now Ioannidis was, in effect, claiming that his coup saved the revolution from the Papadopoulos faction.
The dysfunction as well as the ideological fragmentation and fractionalisation of the junta was finally out in the open.
Ioannidis, however, did not make these accusations personally as he always tried to avoid unnecessary publicity.
The radio broadcasts, following the now familiar "coup in progress" scenario featuring martial music interspersed with military orders and curfew announcements, kept repeating that the army was taking back the reins of power in order to save the principles of the revolution and that the overthrow of the Papadopoulos-Markezinis government was supported by the army, navy and air force.
At the same time they announced that the new coup was a "continuation of the revolution of 1967" and accused Papadopoulos with "straying from the ideals of the 1967 revolution" and "pushing the country towards parliamentary rule too quickly".
Prior to seizing power, Ioannidis preferred to work in the background and he never held any formal office in the junta.
He was now the de facto leader of a puppet regime composed by members some of whom were rounded up by Greek Military Police (ESA) soldiers in roving jeeps to serve and others that were simply chosen by mistake.
The Ioannidis method of forming a government dealt yet another blow to the rapidly diminishing credibility of the regime both at home and abroad.

The new junta, despite its rather inauspicious origins, pursued an aggressive internal crackdown and an expansionist foreign policy.

===
Cypriot coup d'état, Turkish invasion and fall of the Junta ===
Sponsored by Ioannidis, on 15 July 1974 a coup d'état on the island of Cyprus overthrew Archbishop Makarios III, the Cypriot president.
Turkey replied to this intervention by invading Cyprus and occupying the northern part of the island, after heavy fighting with the Cypriot and Greek ELDYK Forces (ΕΛ.ΔΥ.Κ. (Ελληνική Δύναμη Κύπρου), "Greek Force for Cyprus").
During a military council, Ioannidis is reported to have said angrily to the American minister Joseph J. Sisco (who was present)
"You betrayed us!
You had assured us that you would prevent any Turkish landing".
There was a well-founded fear that an all-out war with Turkey was imminent.
The Cyprus fiasco led to senior Greek military officers withdrawing their support for Junta strongman Brigadier Dimitrios Ioannidis.
Junta-appointed President Phaedon Gizikis called a meeting of old guard politicians, including Panagiotis Kanellopoulos, Spiros Markezinis, Stephanos Stephanopoulos, Evangelos Averoff, and others.

The agenda was to appoint a national unity government that would lead the country to elections.
Although former Prime Minister Panagiotis Kanellopoulos was originally backed, on 23 July, Gizikis finally invited former Prime Minister Konstantinos Karamanlis, who had resided in Paris since 1963, to assume the role.
Karamanlis returned to Athens on a French Presidency Learjet made available to him by President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, a close personal friend, and was sworn in as Prime Minister under President Phaedon Gizikis.
Karamanlis' new party, New Democracy, won the November 1974 general election, and he became prime minister.

Parliamentary democracy was thus restored and the Greek legislative elections of 1974 were the first free elections held in a decade.
A referendum held 8 December 1974 rejected re-establishment of the monarchy by a 2-to-1 margin, and Greece became a republic.
While the physical collapse of the junta as a government was immediately caused by the Cyprus debacle, its ideological collapse was already triggered by the 1973 Athens Polytechnic uprising.
The uprising at the Polytechneion was the event that discredited the military government most and acted as a key catalyst for its eventual demise by exposing the internal contradictions and stresses of the regime, thus destroying the myth of the political cohesion of the junta and, therefore, irreparably damaging the political credibility of the Ethnosotirios Epanastasis and its message.

==
Trials of the junta (1975) ==
In January 1975 the junta members were arrested and in early August of the same year the government of Konstantinos Karamanlis brought charges of high treason and insurrection against Georgios Papadopoulos and nineteen other co-conspirators of the military junta.
The mass trial was staged at the Korydallos Prison.
The trial was described as "Greece's Nuremberg".
One thousand soldiers armed with submachine guns provided security.
The roads leading to the jail were patrolled by tanks.

Papadopoulos, Pattakos, Makarezos and Ioannidis were sentenced to death for high treason.
These sentences were later commuted to life imprisonment by the Karamanlis government for humanitarian reasons.
A plan to grant amnesty to the junta principals by the Konstantinos Mitsotakis government in 1990 was cancelled after protests from conservatives, socialists and communists.
Papadopoulos died in the hospital in 1999 after being transferred from Korydallos while Ioannidis remained incarcerated until his death in 2010.
This trial was followed by a second trial which centered on the events and the murders during the Athens Polytechnic uprising and a third called "The trial of the torturers".
==
Legacy and Greek public opinion ==
The historical repercussions of the junta were profound and are still felt to this day in Greece.
Internally the absence of civil rights and the oppression that followed created a sense of fear and persecution among many in the population creating trauma and division that persisted long after the fall of the junta.
The Cyprus debacle created a tragedy that is still unfolding.
While the Cyprus fiasco was due to the actions of Ioannidis, it was Papadopoulos who started the cycle of coups.
Externally, the absence of human rights in a country belonging to the Western Bloc during the Cold War was a continuous source of embarrassment for the free world (considering Greece is seen as the inventor of democracy), and this and other reasons made Greece an international pariah abroad and interrupted its process of integration with the European Union with incalculable opportunity costs.
The 21 April regime remains highly controversial to this day, with most Greeks holding very strong and polarized views in regards to it.
According to a survey by Kapa Research published in the centre-left newspaper To Vima in 2002, the majority of the electoral body (54.7%) consider the regime to have been bad or harmful for Greece while 20.7% consider it to have been good for Greece and 19.8% believe that it was neither good nor harmful.
In April 2013, the Metron Analysis Poll, found that 30% of Greeks yearned for the "better" days of the Junta.
The experiences in Greece were formative for several CIA officers, including Clair George and Gust Avrakotos.
Avrakotos, for example, dealt with the aftermath when Revolutionary Organization 17 November murdered his superior, CIA station chief Richard Welch in 1975.
Many of his junta-connected associates were also assassinated in this time period.
Avrakotos himself had his cover blown by the media and his life became endangered.
In 1999, U.S. President Bill Clinton apologised on the behalf of the U.S. government for supporting the military junta in the name of Cold War tactics.
There has been speculation that lingering social effects of the junta played a role in the rise of Golden Dawn, an extreme right-wing party which gained eighteen seats in parliament in two successive elections in 2012, in the midst of Greece's ongoing debt crisis.
Golden Dawn's leader, Nikolaos Michaloliakos, met the leaders of the junta while in prison and was inspired to lay the foundations for the party.
Some have linked alleged support of Golden Dawn by Hellenic Police officers to the party's statements sympathizing with the junta, which commentators note would appeal to policemen whose livelihoods are threatened by harsh austerity measures.

== See also ==
History of modern Greece
A Man
Imaste dio, a song by Mikis Theodorakis
Your Neighbor's Son, about the making of the junta torturers
Loafing and Camouflage
Timeline of modern Greek history


==
Notes ==


==
References ==


==
Bibliography ==
Woodhouse, C. M. (1998).
Modern Greece: a Short History.
London: Faber & Faber.
ISBN 978-0-571-19794-1.

Woodhouse, C. M. (1985).
The Rise and Fall of the Greek Colonels.
London.

Nafpliotis, Alexandros (2012).
Britain and the Greek Colonels:
Accommodating the Junta in the Cold War.
London: I. B. Tauris.
ISBN 978-1848859524.

==
External links ==
Matt Barrett, "The Rise of the Junta in Greece"
Matt Barrett, "November 17, Cyprus and the Fall of the Junta"
The United States Military Government of the Philippine Islands (Filipino:
Pamahalaang Militar ng Estados Unidos sa Kapuluan ng Pilipinas
; Spanish: Gobierno Militar de los Estados Unidos de las Islas Filipinas) was a military government in the Philippines established by the United States on August 14, 1898, a day after the capture of Manila, with General Wesley Merritt acting as military governor.
During military rule (1898–1902), the U.S. military commander governed the Philippines under the authority of the U.S. president as Commander-in-Chief of the United States Armed Forces.
After the appointment of a civil Governor-General, the procedure developed that as parts of the country were pacified and placed firmly under American control, responsibility for the area would be passed to the civilian.

General Merritt was succeeded by General Elwell S. Otis as military governor, who in turn was succeeded by General Arthur MacArthur.
Major General Adna Chaffee was the final military governor.
The position of military governor was abolished in July 1902, after which the civil Governor-General became the sole executive authority in the Philippines.
Under the military government, an American-style school system was introduced, initially with soldiers as teachers; civil and criminal courts were reestablished, including a supreme court; and local governments were established in towns and provinces.
The first local election was conducted by General Harold W. Lawton on May 7, 1899, in Baliuag, Bulacan.

==
Capture of Manila ==
By June, U.S. and Filipino forces had taken control of most of the islands, except for the walled city of Intramuros.
Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were able to work out a bloodless solution with acting Governor-General Fermín Jáudenes.
The negotiating parties made a secret agreement to stage a mock battle in which the Spanish forces would be defeated by the American forces, but the Filipino forces would not be allowed to enter the city.
This plan minimized the risk of unnecessary casualties on all sides, while the Spanish would also avoid the shame of possibly having to surrender Intramuros to the Filipino forces.
On the eve of the mock battle, General Anderson telegraphed Aguinaldo, "Do not let your troops enter Manila without the permission of the American commander.
On this side of the Pasig River you will be under fire.
"On
August 13, with American commanders unaware that a ceasefire had already been signed between Spain and the U.S. on the previous day, American forces captured the city of Manila from the Spanish in the Battle of Manila.
The battle started when Dewey's ships bombarded Fort San Antonio Abad, a decrepit structure on the southern outskirts of Manila, and the virtually impregnable walls of Intramuros.
In accordance with the plan, the Spanish forces withdrew while U.S. forces advanced.
Once a sufficient show of battle had been made, Dewey hoisted the signal "D.W.H.B." (meaning "Do you surrender?),
whereupon the Spanish hoisted a white flag and Manila was formally surrendered to U.S. forces.
This battle marked the end of Filipino-American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos.
This later led to the Philippine–American War (1899–1902), which would prove to be more deadly and costly than the Spanish–American War (1898).

==
Spanish–
American War ends ==
Article V of the peace protocol signed on August 12 had mandated negotiations to conclude a treaty of peace to begin in Paris not later than October 1, 1898.
President McKinley sent a five-man commission, initially instructed to demand no more than Luzon, Guam, and Puerto Rico; which would have provided a limited U.S. empire of pinpoint colonies to support a global fleet and provide communication links.
In Paris, the commission was besieged with advice, particularly from American generals and European diplomats, to demand the entire Philippine archipelago.
The unanimous recommendation was that "it would certainly be cheaper and more humane to take the entire Philippines than to keep only part of it."
On October 28, 1898, McKinley wired the commission that "cessation of Luzon alone, leaving the rest of the islands subject to Spanish rule, or to be the subject of future contention, cannot be justified on political, commercial, or humanitarian grounds.
The cessation must be the whole archipeligo or none.
The latter is wholly inadmissible, and the former must therefore be required.
"
The Spanish negotiators were furious over the "immodist demands of a conqueror", but their wounded pride was assauged by an offer of twenty million dollars for "Spanish improvements" to the islands.
The Spaniards capitulated, and on December 10, 1898, the U.S. and Spain signed the Treaty of Paris, formally ending the Spanish–American War.
In Article III, Spain ceded the Philippine archipelago to the United States, as follows: "Spain cedes to the United States the archipelago known as the Philippine Islands, and comprehending the islands lying within the following line: [... geographic description elided ...].
The United States will pay to Spain the sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000) within three months after the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty.
"In
the U.S., there was a movement for Philippine independence; some said that the U.S. had no right to a land where many of the people wanted self-government.
In 1898 Andrew Carnegie, an industrialist and steel magnate, offered to buy the Philippines for $20 million and give it to the Filipinos so that they could be free of United States government.
On November 7, 1900, Spain and the U.S. signed the Treaty of Washington, clarifying that the territories relinquished by Spain to the United States included any and all islands belonging to the Philippine Archipelago, but lying outside the lines described in the Treaty of Paris.
That treaty explicitly named the islands of Cagayan Sulu and Sibutu and their dependencies as among the relinquished territories.

==
Philippine–American War (1899–1902) ==


===
Escalatation of tensions ===
The Spanish had yielded Iloilo to the insurgents in 1898 to trouble the Americans.
On January 1, 1899, news had come to Washington, DC, from Manila that American forces, which had been sent to Iloilo under the command of General Marcus Miller, had been confronted by 6,000 armed Filipinos, who refused them permission to land.
A Filipino official styling himself "Presidente Lopez of the Federal Government of the Visayas" informed Miller that "foreign troops" would not land "without express orders from the central government of Luzon.
"
On December 21, 1898, McKinley issued a Proclamation of Benevolent Assimilation.
General Otis delayed its publication until January 4, 1899 and published a version that had been edited to avoid conveying the meanings of the terms "sovereignty," "protection," and "right of cessation," which occurred in the unedited version.
Unknown to Otis, the US Department of War had also sent an enciphered copy of the proclamation to General Marcus Miller in Iloilo for informational purposes.
Miller assumed that it was for distribution and, unaware that a politically-expired version had been sent to Aguinaldo, published it in both Spanish and Tagalog translations, which eventually made their way to Aguinaldo.
Even before Aguinaldo received the unaltered version and observed the changes in the copy that he had received from Otis, Aguinaldo was already upset that Otis was referred to as "Military Governor of the Philippines" in the unaltered version, which he had received from Otis (the unaltered version said "in the Philippines.").
Aguinaldo did not miss the significance of the alteration, which Otis had made without authorization from Washington.
On January 5, Aguinaldo issued a counterproclamation that summarized what he saw as American violations of the ethics of friendship, particularly regarding the events in Iloilo.
The proclamation concluded, "Such procedures, so foreign to the dictates of culture and the usages observed by civilized nations, gave me the right to act without observing the usual rules of intercourse.
Nevertheless, in order to be correct to the end, I sent to General Otis commissioners charged to solicit him to desist from his rash enterprise, but they were not listened to.
My government can not remain indifferent in view of such a violent and aggressive seizure of a portion of its territory by a nation which arrogated to itself the title champion of oppressed nations.
Thus it is that my government is disposed to open hostilities if the American troops attempt to take forcible possession of the Visayan Islands.
I denounce these acts before the world, in order that the conscience of mankind may pronounce its infallable verdict as to who are the true oppressors of nations and the tormentors of human kind.
"After
some copies of that proclamation had been distributed, Aguinaldo ordered the recall of undistributed copies and issued another proclamation, which was published the same day in El Heraldo de la Revolucion, the official newspaper of the Philippine Republic: "
As in General Otis's proclamation he alluded to some instructions edited by His Excellency the President of the United States, referring to the administration of the matters in the Philippine Islands, I in the name of God, the root and fountain of all justice, and that of all the right which has been visibly granted to me to direct my dear brothers in the difficult work of our regeneration, protest most solemnly against this intrusion of the United States Government on the sovereignty of these islands.

I equally protest in the name of the Filipino people against the said intrusion, because as they have granted their vote of confidence appointing me president of the nation, although I don't consider that I deserve such, therefore I consider it my duty to defend to death its liberty and independence.
"Otis, taking both proclamations as a call to arms, strengthened American observation posts and alerted his troops.
In the tense atmosphere, some 40,000 Filipinos fled Manila within a period of 15 days.
Meanwhile, Felipe Agoncillo, who had been commissioned by the Philippine Revolutionary Government as Minister Plenipotentiary to negotiate treaties with foreign governments and had attempted to be seated at the negotiations between the US and Spain in Paris, was now in Washington.
On January 6, he filed a request for an interview with the President to discuss affairs in the Philippines.
The next day, the government officials were surprised to learn that messages to Otis to deal mildly with the rebels and not to force a conflict had become known to Agoncillo and had been cabled by him to Aguinaldo.
At the same time, Aguinaldo's protest against General Otis signing himself "Military Governor of the Philippines" arrived.
On January 8, Agoncillo stated, "In my opinion the Filipino people, whom I represent, will never consent to become a colony dependency of the United States.
The soldiers of the Filipino army have pledged their lives that they will not lay down their arms until General Aguinaldo tells them to do so, and they will keep that pledge
, I feel confident.
"The
Filipino committees in London, Paris, and Madrid around that time telegraphed to President McKinley: "We protest against the disembarkation of American troops at Iloilo.
The treaty of peace still unratified, the American claim to sovereignty is premature.
Pray reconsider the resolution regarding Iloilo.
Filipinos wish for the friendship of America and abhor militarism and deceit.
"On
January 8, Aguinaldo received the following message from Teodoro Sandiko to the President of the Revolutionary Government, Malolos, from Sandico, Manila.
January 8, 1899, 9.40 p.m., "In consequence of the order of General Rios to his officers, as soon as the Filipino attack begins the Americans should be driven into the Intramuros district and the walled city should be set on fire.
Pipi.
"The
New York Times reported on January 8 that two Americans who had been guarding a waterboat in Iloilo had been attacked, one fatally, and that insurgents were threatening to destroy the business section of the city by fire and that on January 10, a peaceful solution to the Iloilo issues may result but that Aguinaldo had issued a proclamation threatening to drive the Americans from the islands.
By January 10, insurgents were ready to assume the offensive but desired, if possible, to provoke the Americans into firing the first shot.
They made no secret of their desire for conflict but increased their hostile demonstrations and pushed their lines forward into forbidden territory.
Their attitude was well illustrated by this extract from a telegram sent by Colonel Cailles to Aguinaldo on January 10, 1899:
"Most urgent.
An American interpreter has come to tell me to withdraw our forces in Maytubig fifty paces.
I shall not draw back a step, and in place of withdrawing, I shall advance a little farther.
He brings a letter from his general, in which he speaks to me as a friend.
I said that from the day I knew that Maquinley (McKinley) opposed our independence
I did not want any dealings with any American.
War, war, is what we want.
The Americans after this speech went off pale.
"Aguinaldo
approved the hostile attitude of Cailles since a reply in his handwriting stated, "I approve and applaud what you have done with the Americans, and zeal and valour always, also my beloved officers and soldiers there.
I believe that they are playing us until the arrival of their reinforcements, but I shall send an ultimatum and remain always on the alert.--E. A. Jan. 10, 1899."On January 31, 1899, the Minister of Interior of the revolutionary First Philippine Republic, Teodoro Sandiko, signed a decree stating that President Aguinaldo had directed that all idle lands be planted to provide food for the people in view of impending war with the Americans.

=== Outbreak of general hostilities ===
Worcester gave General Otis' account of the opening of active hostilities,

Other sources name the two specific US soldiers involved in the first exchange of fire as Privates William Grayson and Orville Miller of the Nebraska Volunteers.
After the war had ended, and he had analyzed captured insurgent papers, Major Major J. R. M. Taylor wrote, "An attack on the United States forces was planned which should annihilate the little army in Manila, and delegations were appointed to secure the interference of foreign powers.
The protecting cloak of pretense of friendliness to the United States was to be kept up until the last.
While commissioners were appointed to negotiate with General Otis, secret societies were organized in Manila pledged to obey orders of the most barbarous character to kill and burn.
The attack from without and the attack from within was to be on a set day and hour.
The strained situation could not last.
The spark was applied, either inadvertently or by design, on the 4th of February by an insurgent, willfully transgressing upon what, by their own admission, was within the agreed limits of the holding of the American troops.
Hostilities resulted and the war was an accomplished fact."}}
===
War ===
On February 4, Aguinaldo declared, "That peace and friendly relations with the Americans be broken and that the latter be treated as enemies, within the limits prescribed by the laws of war."
On June 2, 1899, the Malolos Congress enacted and ratified a declaration of war on the United States, which was publicly proclaimed on that same day by Pedro A. Paterno, the President of the Assembly.
As when they had fought the Spanish, the Filipino rebels did not do well in the field.
Aguinaldo and his provisional government escaped after the capture of Malolos on March 31, 1899, and they were driven into northern Luzon.
Peace feelers from members of Aguinaldo's cabinet failed in May when the American commander, General Ewell Otis, demanded an unconditional surrender.
In 1901, Aguinaldo was captured and swore allegiance to the United States, which marked an end to the war.

===
First Philippine Commission ===
McKinley had appointed a five-person group, headed by Dr. Jacob Gould Schurman, president of Cornell University, on January 20, 1899, to investigate conditions in the islands and to make recommendations.
The three civilian members of the Philippine Commission arrived in Manila on March 4, 1899, a month after the Battle of Manila, which had begun armed conflict between US and revolutionary Filipino forces.
The commission published a proclamation containing assurances that the US was "anxious to establish in the Philippine Islands an enlightened system of government under which the Philippine people may enjoy the largest measure of home rule and the amplest liberty."

After meetings in April with revolutionary representatives, the commission requested authorization from McKinley to offer a specific plan.
He authorized an offer of a government, consisting of "a Governor-General appointed by the President; cabinet appointed by the Governor-General; [and] a general advisory council elected by the people."
The Revolutionary Congress voted unanimously to cease fighting and to accept peace, and on May 8, the revolutionary cabinet, headed by Apolinario Mabini, was replaced by a new "peace" cabinet, headed by Pedro Paterno.
General Antonio Luna then arrested Paterno and most of his cabinet and returned Mabini and his cabinet to power.
The commission then concluded, "The Filipinos are wholly unprepared for independence...
there being no Philippine nation, but only a collection of different peoples.
"In
the report, which they issued to the president the next year, the commissioners acknowledged Filipino aspirations for independence but declared that the Philippines was not ready for it.
On November 2, 1899, the commission issued a preliminary report that stayted:
Specific recommendations included the establishment of civilian government as rapidly as possible (the American chief executive in the islands was then the military governor), including establishment of a bicameral legislature, autonomous governments on the provincial and municipal levels, and a system of free public elementary schools.

===
Second Philippine Commission ===
The Second Philippine Commission (the Taft Commission), appointed by McKinley on March 16, 1900 and headed by William Howard Taft, was granted legislative and limited executive powers.
On September 1, the Taft Commission began to exercise legislative functions.
Between September 1900 and August 1902, it issued 499 laws; established a judicial system, including a supreme court; drew up a legal code; and organized a civil service.
The 1901 municipal code provided for popularly elected presidents, vice presidents, and councilors to serve on municipal boards.
Members of the municipal boards were responsible for collecting taxes, maintaining municipal properties, undertaking necessary construction projects, and electing provincial governors.

===
Establishment of civil government ===
On March 3, 1901
the US Congress passed the Army Appropriation Act containing (along with the Platt Amendment on Cuba)
the Spooner Amendment, which provided the President with the legislative authority to establish a civil government in the Philippines.
Until then, the President had been administering the Philippines by virtue of his war powers.
On July 1, 1901, civil government was inaugurated, with Taft as the Civil Governor.
On February 3, 1903, the US Congress changed the title of Civil Governor to Governor-General.
A highly-centralized public school system was installed in 1901, using English as the medium of instruction.
Since that created a heavy shortage of teachers, the Philippine Commission authorized the Secretary of Public Instruction to bring to the Philippines 600 teachers from the US, the so-called Thomasites.
Free primary instruction to train the people for the duties of citizenship and avocation was enforced by the Taft Commission, according to instructions by McKinley.
Also, the Catholic Church was disestablished, and a considerable amount of church land was purchased and redistributed.
===
Official end to war ===
The Philippine Organic Act of July 1902 approved, ratified, and confirmed McKinley's executive order establishing the Philippine Commission and stipulated that a bicameral Philippine Legislature would be established, composed of an elected lower house, the Philippine Assembly, and an appointed upper house, the Philippine Commission.
The act also provided for extending the United States Bill of Rights to the Philippines.
On July 2, 1902, the Secretary of War telegraphed that the insurrection against the sovereign authority of the US had come to an end, with provincial civil governments established, and so the office of Military Governor was terminated.
On July 4, Theodore Roosevelt, who had succeeded to the presidency after the assassination of McKinley on September 5, 1901, proclaimed a full and complete pardon and amnesty to all persons in the Philippine archipelago who had participated in the conflict.
On April 9, 2002, Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo proclaimed that the Philippine–American War had ended on April 16, 1902 with the surrender of General Miguel Malvar, and she declared the centennial anniversary of that date as a national working holiday and as a special non-working holiday in the Province of Batangas and in the Cities of Batangas, Lipa and Tanaun.

===
Later hostilities ===
Some sources have suggested that the war unofficially continued for nearly a decade since bands of guerrillas, quasi-religious armed groups, and other resistance groups continued to roam the countryside and to clash with US Army or Philippine Constabulary patrols.
The US Army and the Philippine Constabulary continued hostilities against those resistance groups until 1913.
Some historians consider these unofficial extensions to be part of the war.

==
Comparisons with the First Philippine Republic ==


==
See also ==
First Philippine Republic – an All-Filipino nascent revolutionary government opposed to the United States Military Government in the Philippines.

History of the Philippines (1898–1946)


==
References ==


===
Citations ===
===
Bibliography ===
Agoncillo, Teodoro Andal (1990), "11.
The Revolution Second Phase", History of the Filipino People (Eighth ed.),
University of the Philippines, pp.
187–198
, ISBN 971-8711-06-6
Agoncillo, Teodoro Andal (1997), Malolos:
The Crisis of the Republic, University of the Philippines Press, ISBN 978-971-542-096-9
Blanchard, William H. (1996), "9.
Losing Stature in the Philippines", Neocolonialism American Style, 1960-2000, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0-313-30013-5
Blitz, Amy (2000), "Conquest and Coercion: Early U.S. Colonialism, 1899–1916", The Contested State:
American Foreign Policy and Regime Change in the Philippines, Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 0-8476-9935-8
Constantino, Renato (1975), The Philippines:
A Past Revisited, ISBN 971-8958-00-2
Elliott, Charles Burke (1917), The Philippines: To the End of the Commission Government, a Study in Tropical Democracy
Golay, Frank H. (1997), Face of empire:
United States-Philippine relations, 1898–1946, Ateneo de Manila University Press, ISBN 978-971-550-254-2.

Guevara, Sulpico, ed.
(
2005), The laws of the first Philippine Republic (the laws of Malolos) 1898–1899, Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Library (published 1972) (English translation by Sulpicio Guevara)
Halstead, Murat (1898), The Story of the Philippines and Our New Possessions, Including the Ladrones, Hawaii, Cuba and Porto Rico
Halstead, Murat (1918), The Story of the Philippines by Murat Halstead, Project Gutenberg
Jernegan, Prescott F (2009), The Philippine Citizen, BiblioBazaar, LLC, ISBN 978-1-115-97139-3
Kalaw, Maximo Manguiat (1927), The Development of Philippine Politics, Oriental commercial
Karnow, Stanley (1990), In Our Image, Century, ISBN 978-0-7126-3732-9
Lacsamana, Leodivico Cruz (2006), Philippine history and government, Phoenix Publishing House, ISBN 978-971-06-1894-1
Miller, Stuart Creighton (1984), Benevolent Assimilation:
The American Conquest of the Philippines, 1899-1903
(4th edition, reprint ed.),
Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-03081-5
Seekins, Donald M. (1993), "The First Phase of United States Rule, 1898–1935",  in Dolan, Ronald E. (ed.),
Philippines:
A Country Study (4th ed.),
Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress
Taylor, John R.M., ed.
(
1907), Compilation of Philippine Insurgent Records, Arms Research Library, originally from War Department, Bureau of Insular Affairs
Trask, David F. (1996),
The war with Spain in 1898, University of Nebraska Press, ISBN 978-0-8032-9429-5
Wolff, Leon (2006), Little brown brother: how the United States purchased and pacified the Philippine Islands at the century's turn, History Book Club (published 2005), ISBN 978-1-58288-209-3(Introduction, Decolonizing the History of the Philippine–
American War, by Paul A. Kramer dated December 8, 2005)
Worcester, Dean Conant (1914), The Philippines: Past and Present (vol.
1 of 2),
ISBN 1-4191-7715-X
Zaide, Sonia M. (1994), The Philippines:
A Unique Nation, All-Nations Publishing Co., ISBN 971-642-071-4
Lethal Weapon 3 is a 1992 American buddy cop action film directed by Richard Donner and written by Jeffrey Boam and Robert Mark Kamen.
The sequel to Lethal Weapon 2 (1989)
, it is the third installment in the Lethal Weapon film series and stars Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Rene Russo, and Stuart Wilson.
In Lethal Weapon 3, LAPD Sergeants Martin Riggs (Gibson) and Roger Murtaugh (Glover) pursue Jack Travis (Wilson), a former LAPD lieutenant turned ruthless arms dealer, during the six days prior to Murtaugh's retirement.
Riggs and Murtaugh are joined by Leo Getz (Pesci) as well as internal affairs Sergeant Lorna Cole (Russo).

The film was a box office success, grossing over $320 million worldwide.
It was the fifth-highest-grossing film of 1992 and the highest-grossing installment in the series overall.
The film was followed by Lethal Weapon 4 in 1998.

==
Plot ==
A week before his retirement,
L.A.P.D. Sergeant Roger Murtaugh (Glover) and his partner Martin Riggs (Gibson) are demoted to uniform duties after trying to defuse a bomb before the bomb squad arrived, causing the destruction of an otherwise empty office building.
While on street patrol they witness the theft of an armored car, and help to thwart the crime assisted by armored car driver Delores (Delores Hall).
One of the two thieves gets away, but the other is taken into police custody.
The suspect is found to be a known associate of Jack Travis (Wilson), a former LAPD lieutenant who is believed to be running an arms smuggling ring in Los Angeles.
The department is further concerned that the thieves were using armor-piercing bullets, informally referred to as "cop killers".
Riggs and Murtaugh are re-promoted and assigned to work with Sergeant Lorna Cole (Russo) from internal affairs to track down Travis.

Travis is currently negotiating with mobster Tyrone (Millar) regarding his arms deal.
The armored car thief that escaped is brought to Travis, who subsequently kills him in front of Tyrone for putting the police on his trail.
Travis then uses his old (but still valid) police credentials to enter the interrogation room and kill the suspect in custody before he can be interviewed.
Travis is unaware that closed-circuit cameras have been installed in the station, and Cole is able to affirm Travis' identity.
While the three are reviewing the footage, their good friend Leo Getz (Pesci) - who has been helping Murtaugh sell his house - arrives and immediately recognizes Travis from several prior business deals and his love of ice hockey.
Murtaugh, Riggs, and Getz narrowly miss capturing Travis at a hockey match that afternoon where Getz is shot in the arm and is hospitalized.
However, Getz manages to provide them with information of a warehouse Travis owns, which they suspect is where he has stored his arms shipments.

Riggs and Murtaugh contact Cole for backup before they raid the warehouse, and then stop to get something to eat while they wait for her.
As they wait for their food, they witness a drug deal which they step in to stop.
A gun fight breaks out, and Murtaugh kills one of those involved who had fired back at them, while the rest escape.
Murtaugh is shocked to find the dead man is Darryl, a close friend of his son Nick.
With Murtaugh emotionally distraught, Riggs goes with Cole to the warehouse, where they successfully overpower Travis' guards and secure his next arms shipment delivery.
That night, Riggs and Cole find they have feelings for each other and sleep together.
Riggs later finds Murtaugh drunk in his boat, still overwhelmed with guilt, and helps to counsel him in time for Darryl's funeral.
There, Darryl's father passionately insists that Murtaugh find the person responsible for giving Darryl the gun.

Cole finds that Darryl's gun, the armor-piercing bullets, and the arms they recovered were originally in police custody, meant to be destroyed, and were likely stolen by Travis; they assure that his credentials are completely revoked from the system.
They further tie the guns to Tyrone and interrogate him.
Tyrone quickly reveals what he knows of Travis' plans, including an auto garage where many of his henchmen work from.
Riggs, Murtaugh, and Cole are able to take several of the men into custody there.
Meanwhile, Travis finds he cannot use his credentials anymore, and has one of his men hack into the computer system to find another arms storage area.
He then forces Captain Murphy (Steve Kahan) under gunpoint to take him to this new facility so he can steal the guns using Murphy's credentials.
Cole finds the evidence of hacking and Murphy's absence, and the three, along with a rookie cop who looks up to Riggs and Murtaugh, go to intercept Travis.
They are able to rescue Murphy and stop Travis and his men before he can take the weapons, but the rookie is killed as they give chase, and Riggs and Murtaugh vow to stop Travis.

Getz provides information on a housing development under construction by a company owned by Travis.
Getz tries to join them but they shoot his tires out to stop him from coming.
Riggs and Murtaugh instead bring Cole along to infiltrate the site at night, and find themselves met by Travis and his men who have been waiting for them.
A large-scale gunfight breaks out, in which Riggs sets the construction site on fire and most of Travis' men are killed.
Cole appears to be shot by Travis and falls, inciting Riggs.
When Travis uses a bulldozer to chase down Riggs, using its blade as a bullet shield, Murtaugh tosses Daryl's gun, now loaded with the armor-piercing bullets, to Riggs, who then shoots and kills Travis through the blade.
Cole is found to be alive and safe, having worn two protective vests.
Riggs admits his love for her as she is taken away in a chopper.

The next day, Murtaugh's family are celebrating his retirement, when Murtaugh reveals to Getz that he has decided to not sell the house and stay with the force, preserving his partnership with Riggs.
As the film ends, Riggs announces to Murtaugh that he and Cole are in a relationship.

== Cast ==
Mel Gibson as Martin Riggs
Danny Glover as Roger Murtaugh
Joe Pesci as Leo Getz
Rene Russo as Lorna Cole
Stuart Wilson as Jack Travis
Steve Kahan as Captain Ed Murphy
Darlene Love as Trish Murtaugh
Ebonie Smith as Carrie Murtaugh
Nick Chinlund as Hatchett
Alan Scarfe as Herman Walters
Mary Ellen Trainor as Dr. Stephanie Woods
Delores Hall as Delores Jackson, the armoured car driver
Gregory Millar as Tyrone
Andrew Hill Newman as the jaywalker
Traci Wolfe as Rianne Murtaugh
Damon Hines as Nick Murtaugh
Jason Rainwater as Officer Edwards
(credited as Jason Meshover-Iorg)
Mark Pellegrino as Billy Phelps


==
Production ==
The movie was filmed from October 1991 to January 1992.

Director Richard Donner is an animal-rights and pro-choice activist, and placed many posters and stickers for these causes in the film.
Of note are the T-shirt worn by one of Murtaugh's daughters (the actress's idea), an 18-wheeler with an anti-fur slogan on the side, and a sticker on a locker in the police station.

===
Demolition scenes ===
In the film's first scene, Riggs accidentally sets off a bomb that destroys the ICSI Building.
The ICSI Building was actually the former City Hall building of Orlando, Florida, located at the intersection of Orange Avenue and South Street in Downtown Orlando.
Warner Bros. decided to use the destruction of the building in the film, and as a result paid $500,000 for the demolition.
From August to October 1991, the production crew fitted the old Orlando City Hall building featured in the opening scene with carefully placed explosives to create the visual effect of a bomb explosion.
Bill Frederick, then mayor of Orlando, Florida, was the policeman who sarcastically claps and said "Bravo!"
to Murtaugh and Riggs after the explosion.

The building was demolished so that it would collapse slightly forward (toward Orange Avenue), minimizing the chances of it damaging the new City Hall building, built directly behind it.
The space was cleared out and became a plaza for the new City Hall, with a fountain and a monument.

The film's climax scene, where an under-construction housing development is set ablaze, was filmed at an unfinished housing development in Lancaster, California.
The unfinished houses, which had been sitting abandoned and slated to be torn down, were coated in flame retardant and propane gas lines to ensure that the houses could withstand re-shoots.
The original homes were eventually demolished and was eventually redeveloped into another housing development.

During the closing credits, Riggs and Murtaugh drive up to an old hotel where another bomb has been placed.

Before they (their doubles) can exit the car, the bomb explodes and destroys the building.

The hotel was actually the former Soreno Hotel in downtown St. Petersburg, Florida.

The film's producers agreed to help with the cost of the 68-year-old building's implosion for the purposes of their film.

===
Writing ===
Jeffrey Boam's first two drafts of the script were different from the final film.
The character of Lorna for example was not a woman in original drafts, but the original character still had the same personality and was just as lethal and crazy as Riggs, making him his match.
Riggs also had an affair with Roger's daughter Rianne, and a few parts in the final film where Roger suspects that Riggs and Rianne are interested in each other are only parts left from the original drafts.

Director Richard Donner demanded some big changes on the script which included changing the original character of Lorna (who had a different name in earlier drafts) into a woman and turning her into Riggs's girlfriend.
He also re-worked the script to be less story-oriented and not focus on the main villains but instead on the relationship between Riggs and Murtaugh.
He also toned down action scenes from the script and brought back Leo Getz into the story.
All of his scenes were written in afterwards.
In the original script Leo had left L.A. for New York.
Boam had some disagreements with changes that Donner made but he was not against them.
Boam was fired after he wrote his first two drafts of the script.
One of the reasons for this was because Donner wasn't interested in the script and he disagreed with some parts of Boam's original draft.
After another writer, Robert Mark Kamen, was hired to re-write the script, Boam was called to return to work on it again.
The filmmakers realized that Kamen's re-writes were not working.
Boam asked to work alone on the script and ended up constantly changing it from October 1991 until January 1992 while filming was taking place.
These types of changes also occurred during the filming of Lethal Weapon 2.According to Kamen in a 2012 interview, many of his writing contributions ended up in the final film.
Kamen also wrote many parts of the previous film in the series, with the most significant portions being the South African villains.
Screenwriter Jeffrey Boam is credited twice in the 'screenplay by' credits.
This is because he did one draft by himself (granting him the first credit) and a second draft collaborating with Robert Mark Kamen (granting him the second credit).
In this rare scenario, Boam was hired to rewrite his own script with a second writer.
After receiving the unusual writing credits, the advertising department assumed it was a misprint and produced posters with the credits "Story by Jeffrey Boam, Screenplay by Jeffrey Boam and Robert Mark Kamen".
After a few of the posters had been sent out, the WGA contacted the department, telling them that the initial credits were the correct ones, and ordering the posters to be recalled and destroyed.

Carrie Fisher was an uncredited script doctor on the film.

===
Martial arts ===
Russo received martial arts training for a month before shooting from Cheryl Wheeler-Dixon, who had a karate background and was a former kickboxing champion, and Wheeler-Dixon was also her stunt double.
Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu instructor Rorion Gracie, who had taught Gibson and Gary Busey in the first movie of the series in 1987, also provided training to Russo and acted as stuntman for a fight scene.

==
Promotion ==
For promotion of the film, theater lobbies featured a 3-D cut out of the film poster of Riggs and Murtaugh posing with their guns and Leo Getz peeking from the background.
On the display, there was a motor which helped Leo's head bob up and down from behind them.

==
Release ==


===
Box office ===
The $35 million film was a big box-office success, earning $145 million.
Although slightly less than the $150 million domestic gross of the first sequel, it was nevertheless the second-most successful summer film of 1992 (after Batman Returns) and the fifth most profitable film of the year, as well as the highest-grossing in the film series worldwide with $320 million worldwide.

===
Critical reception ===
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 61%, with an average rating of 5.7/10, based on 48 reviews from critics.
The website's "Critics Consensus" for the film reads, "Murtaugh and Riggs remain an appealing partnership, but Lethal Weapon 3 struggles to give them a worthy new adventure as it cranks up the camp along with the mean-spiritedness".
Metacritic gives a weighted average rating of 40/100 from 26 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A-" on an A+ to F scale.
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film a positive review, awarding it 3 out of 4 stars.

===
Home media ===
Lethal Weapon 3 has been released on VHS and DVD numerous times.
The first DVD was released in 1997 and featured the film's theatrical version.
The 1997 DVD contains both the widescreen and the pan and scan editions.
The Director's Cut was released in 2000.
Since then, numerous sets have been released that contain all four films in the series (featuring the same DVDs).
The film was released on Blu-ray Disc in 2011.

==
Soundtrack ==
Lethal Weapon 3 (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) was released on June 9, 1992 on audio cassette and CD.
The soundtrack was performed and composed by Michael Kamen, Eric Clapton, and David Sanborn.
Its title songs, "
It's Probably Me", and "Runaway Train" were written and performed by Eric Clapton with the assistance of Sting and Elton John respectively.
In 2013 La-La Land Records issued the complete score on a two-disc set as part of Lethal Weapon Soundtrack Collection.

==
Track listing ==


===
Original album ===
"It's Probably Me" by Sting and Eric Clapton
"Runaway Train" by Elton John and Eric Clapton
"Grab the Cat"
"
Leo Getz Goes to the Hockey Game"
"Darryl Dies"
"Riggs and Rog"
"Roger's Boat"
"Armour Piercing Bullets"
"
God Judges Us by Our Scars"
"Lorna – A Quiet Evening by the Fire"


===
La-La Land album ===
Tracks with one asterisk are previously unreleased, tracks with two asterisks contain previously unreleased material.

Disc one"Trust
Me" –
3:34
*
"Afterglow" – 0:57
"Jaywalker" – 2:01
*
"Armoured Car Chase" – 4:33
*
"Leo Getz" – 3:20
*
*
"Concrete Death" – 1:59
*
*
"Rianne's Big Break" – 2:16
*
"Locker Room" –
0:43 *
"Firing Range" –
0:59 *
"Jack Kills Billy" – 3:15
*
"Hockey Game" – 0:58
*
"Dum-Dum Wound" –
1:07
*
"Shooting Darryl, Part 1" –
3:12 *
*
"Shooting Darryl, Part 2/Step Into My Office" – 2:17
*
*
"
Man's Best Friend/Lorna's First Fight" – 6:41
*
*, *
"Scars/Love Scene" –
3:45 *
"Roger's Boat" – 5:28
*
*
"Shaving" – 1:17
*
"Gun Montage/Lorna's Second Fight" – 3:33
*
"Captain Abducted/Captain and Travis" – 1:34
*
"Unauthorized Access" – 1:57
*
"Gun Battle" –
3:47
*
*
"Riggs Falls" – 2:11
*
"Drive to Housing Development/
On Three" – 3:34 *
"Fire/Fire Battle/
A Quiet Evening by the Fire" –
7:01
*
Disc twoOriginal album as above,
followed by:
Additional tracks

"Leo Getz" (alternate) –
2:38
*
"Armoured Car Chase" (no overlay) – 4:33
*
"Gun Battle" (alternate) –
5:26
*
"I Can't Retire" – 1:30
**


==
Video games ==
Several versions of a Lethal Weapon video game were released in conjunction with this sequel's release, appearing on the NES, SNES, Game Boy, Amiga, Atari ST, and Commodore 64 platforms.

Also released was a Lethal Weapon 3 pinball game.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lethal Weapon 3 at the American Film Institute Catalog
Lethal Weapon 3 at IMDb
Lethal Weapon 3 at AllMovie
Medieval technology is the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule.
After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.
The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder, the invention of vertical windmills, spectacles, mechanical clocks, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques (Gothic architecture, medieval castles), and agriculture in general (three-field crop rotation).

The development of water mills from their ancient origins was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone.
By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages had turnable mills, around 6,500 in England alone.
Water-power was also widely used in mining for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.

European technical advancements from the 12th to 14th centuries were either built on long-established techniques in medieval Europe, originating from Roman and Byzantine antecedents, or adapted from cross-cultural exchanges through trading networks with the Islamic world, China, and India.
Often, the revolutionary aspect lay not in the act of invention itself, but in its technological refinement and application to political and economic power.
Though gunpowder along with other weapons had been started by Chinese, it was the Europeans who developed and perfected its military potential, precipitating European expansion and eventual imperialism in the Modern Era.

Also significant in this respect were advances in maritime technology.
Advances in shipbuilding included the multi-masted ships with lateen sails, the sternpost-mounted rudder and the skeleton-first hull construction.
Along with new navigational techniques such as the dry compass, the Jacob's staff and the astrolabe, these allowed economic and military control of the seas adjacent to Europe and enabled the global navigational achievements of the dawning Age of Exploration.

At the turn to the Renaissance, Gutenberg’s invention of mechanical printing made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.
The technical drawings of late-medieval artist-engineers Guido da Vigevano and Villard de Honnecourt can be viewed as forerunners of later Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola or da Vinci.

==
Civil technologies ==
The following is a list of some important medieval technologies.
The approximate date or first mention of a technology in medieval Europe is given.
Technologies were often a matter of cultural exchange and date and place of first inventions are not listed here (see main links for a more complete history of each).
===
Agriculture ===
Carruca (6th to 9th centuries)
A type of heavy wheeled plough commonly found in Northern Europe.
The device consisted of four major parts.
The first part was a coulter at the bottom of the plough.
This knife was used to vertically cut into the top sod to allow for the plowshare to work.
The plowshare was the second pair of knives which cut the sod horizontally, detaching it from the ground below.
The third part was the moldboard, which curled the sod outward.
The fourth part of the device was the team of eight oxen guided by the farmer.
This type of plough eliminated the need for cross-plowing by turning over the furrow instead of merely pushing it outward.
This type of wheeled plough made seed placement more consistent throughout the farm as the blade could be locked in at a certain level relative to the wheels.
A disadvantage to this type of plough was its poor maneuverability.
Since this equipment was large and led by a small herd of oxen, turning the plough was difficult and time-consuming.
This caused many farmers to turn away from traditional square fields and adopt a longer, more rectangular field to ensure maximum efficiency.
Ard (plough) (5th century)
While ploughs have been used since ancient times, during the medieval period plough technology improved rapidly.

The medieval plough, constructed from wooden beams, could be yoked to either humans or a team of oxen and pulled through any type of terrain.

This allowed for faster clearing of forest lands for agriculture in parts of Northern Europe where the soil contained rocks and dense tree roots.
With more food being produced, more people were able to live in these areas.

Horse collar (6th to 9th centuries)Once oxen started to be replaced by horses on farms and in fields, the yoke became obsolete due to its shape not working well with a horses' posture.
The first design for a horse collar was a throat-and-girth-harness.
These types of harnesses were unreliable though due to them not being sufficiently set in place.
The loose straps were prone to slipping and shifting positions as the horse was working and often caused asphyxiation.
Around the eighth century, the introduction of the rigid collar eliminated the problem of choking.
The rigid collar was "placed over the horses head and rested on its shoulders.
This permitted unobstructed breathing and placed the weight of the plow or wagon where the horse could best support it.
"Horseshoes
(9th century)
While horses are already able to travel on all terrain without a protective covering on the hooves, horseshoes allowed horses to travel faster along the more difficult terrains.
The practice of shoeing horses was initially practiced in the Roman Empire but lost popularity throughout the Middle Ages until around the 11th century.
Although horses in the southern lands could easily work while on the softer soil, the rocky soil of the north proved to be damaging to the horses' hooves.
Since the north was the problematic area, this is where shoeing horses first became popular.
The introduction of gravel roadways was also cause for the popularity of horseshoeing.
The loads a shoed horse could take on these roads were significantly higher than one that was barefoot.
By the 14th century, not only did horses have shoes, but many farmers were shoeing oxen and donkeys in order to help prolong the life of their hooves.
The size and weight of the horseshoe changed significantly over the course of the Middle Ages.
In the 10th century, horseshoes were secured by six nails and weighed around one-quarter of a pound, but throughout the years, the shoes grew larger and by the 14th century, the shoes were being secured with eight nails and weighed nearly half a pound.
Crop rotation
Two-field system (8th century)
Crop rotation involved farmers to plant half of the field with a crop while the other half would be fallowed for the season.
This was also called the two-field system.
This system included the farmers' field being divided into two separate crops.
One field would grow a crop while the other was allowed to lie fallow and was used to feed livestock and regain lost nutrients.
Every year, the two fields would switch in order to ensure fields did not become nutrient deficient.
In the 11th century, this system was introduced into Sweden and spread to become the most popular form of farming.

The system of crop rotation is still used today by many farmers, who will grow corn one year in a field and will then grow beans or other legumes in the field the next year, this system is how farmers allow for nutrients to be replenished in the soil.
Three-field system (11th century)
While the two-field system was used by medieval farmers, there was also a different system that was being developed at the same time.
Around each village in medieval Europe there were three fields that could be used to grow food.
One part holds a spring crop, such as barley or oats, another part holds a winter crop, such as wheat or rye, and the third part is an off-field that is left alone to grow and is used to help feed livestock.
By rotating the three crops to a new part of the land after each year, the off-field regains some of the nutrients lost during the growing of the two crops.
This system increases agricultural productivity over the two-field system by only having one-third of the field not being used instead of one half.
Another advantage of crop rotation is that many scholars believe it helped increase yields by up to 50%.Wine press (12th century)
The act of making wine was people stepping on grapes inside of a box and then draining the fruit juice and allowing the fermentation process to begin.

During the medieval period the wine press had been constantly evolving into a more modern and efficient machine that would give wine makers more wine with less work.

This device was the first practical means of Pressing (wine) on a plane surface.

The wine press was made of a giant wooden basket that was bound together by wooden or metal rings that held the basket together.

At the top of the basket was a large disc that would depress the contents in the basket crushing the grapes and making the juice to be fermented.
The wine press was an expensive piece of machinery that only the wealthy could afford.
The method of Grape stomping was often used as a less expensive alternative.
While white wines required the use of a wine press in order to preserve the color of the wine by removing the juices quickly from the skin, red wine did not need to be pressed until the end of the juice removal process since the color did not matter.
Many red wine winemakers used their feet to smash the grapes then used a press to remove any juice that remained in the grape skins.
Qanat (water ducts) (5th century)

Ancient and medieval civilizations needed and used water to grow the human population as well as to partake in daily activities.

One of the ways that ancient and medieval people gained access to water was through qanats, which were a water duct system that would bring water from an underground source or river source to villages or cities.

A qanat is a tunnel that is just big enough that a single digger could travel through the tunnel and find the source of water as well as allow for water to travel through the duct system to farm land or villages for irrigation or drinking purposes.
These tunnels had a gradual slope which used gravity to pull the water from either an aquifer or water well.
This system was originally found in middle eastern areas and is still used today in places where surface water is hard to find.
Qanats were very helpful in not losing water while being transported as well.

The most famous water duct system was the Roman aqueduct system, and medieval inventors used the aqueduct system as a blueprint to make getting water to villages quicker and easier than diverting rivers.

After aqueducts and qanats many other water based technology was created and used in medieval periods including water mills, dams, wells and other such technology for easy access to water.

===
Architecture and construction ===
Pendentive architecture (6th century)
A specific spherical form in the upper corners to support a dome.
Although the first experimentation was made in the 3rd century, it wasn't until the 6th century in the Byzantine Empire that its full potential was achieved.

Artesian well (1126)
A thin rod with a hard iron cutting edge is placed in the bore hole and repeatedly struck with a hammer, underground water pressure forces the water up the hole without pumping.
Artesian wells are named after the town of Artois in France, where the first one was drilled by Carthusian monks in 1126.

Central heating through underfloor channels (9th century)
In the early medieval Alpine upland, a simpler central heating system where heat travelled through underfloor channels from the furnace room replaced the Roman hypocaust at some places.
In Reichenau Abbey a network of interconnected underfloor channels heated the 300 m2 large assembly room of the monks during the winter months.
The degree of efficiency of the system has been calculated at 90%.Rib vault (12th century)
An essential element for the rise of Gothic architecture, rib vaults allowed vaults to be built for the first time over rectangles of unequal lengths.
It also greatly facilitated scaffolding and largely replaced the older groin vault.

Chimney (12th century)
The first basic chimney appeared in a Swiss monastery in 820.
The earliest true chimney did not appear until the 12th century, with the fireplace appearing at the same time.
Segmental arch bridge (1345)
The Ponte Vecchio in Florence is considered medieval Europe's first stone segmental arch bridge since the end of classical civilizations.

Treadwheel crane (1220s)
The earliest reference to a treadwheel in archival literature is in France about 1225, followed by an illuminated depiction in a manuscript of probably also French origin dating to 1240.
Apart from tread-drums, windlasses and occasionally cranks were employed for powering cranes.
Stationary harbour crane (1244)
Stationary harbour cranes are considered a new development of the Middle Ages; its earliest use being documented for Utrecht in 1244.
The typical harbour crane was a pivoting structure equipped with double treadwheels.
There were two types: wooden gantry cranes pivoting on a central vertical axle and stone tower cranes which housed the windlass and treadwheels with only the jib arm and roof rotating.
These cranes were placed on docksides for the loading and unloading of cargo where they replaced or complemented older lifting methods like see-saws, winches and yards.
Slewing cranes which allowed a rotation of the load and were thus particularly suited for dockside work appeared as early as 1340.Floating crane

Beside the stationary cranes, floating cranes which could be flexibly deployed in the whole port basin came into use by the 14th century.
Mast crane
Some harbour cranes were specialised at mounting masts to newly built sailing ships, such as in Gdańsk, Cologne and Bremen.
Wheelbarrow (1170s)
The wheelbarrow proved useful in building construction, mining operations, and agriculture.
Literary evidence for the use of wheelbarrows appeared between 1170 and 1250 in north-western Europe.
The first depiction is in a drawing by Matthew Paris in the mid-13th century.

===
Art ===
Oil paint (by 1125)
As early as the 13th century, oil was used to add details to tempera paintings and paint wooden statues.
Flemish painter Jan van Eyck developed the use of a stable oil mixture for panel painting around 1410.

===
Clocks ===
Hourglass (1338)
Reasonably dependable, affordable and accurate measure of time.
Unlike water in a clepsydra, the rate of flow of sand is independent of the depth in the upper reservoir, and the instrument is not liable to freeze.
Hourglasses are a medieval innovation (first documented in Siena, Italy).

Mechanical clocks (13th to 14th centuries)
A European innovation, these weight-driven clocks were used primarily in clock towers.

===
Mechanics ===
Compound crank
The Italian physician Guido da Vigevano combines in his 1335 Texaurus, a collection of war machines intended for the recapture of the Holy Land, two simple cranks to form a compound crank for manually powering war carriages and paddle wheel boats.
The devices were fitted directly to the vehicle's axle respectively to the shafts turning the paddle wheels.

===
Metallurgy ===
Blast furnace (1150–1350)
Cast iron had been made in China since before the 4th century BC.

European cast iron first appears in Middle Europe (for instance Lapphyttan in Sweden, Dürstel in Switzerland and the Märkische Sauerland in Germany) around 1150, in some places according to recent research even before 1100.
The technique is considered to be an independent European development.

===
Milling ===
Ship mill (6th century)
The ship mill is a Byzantine invention, designed to mill grains using hydraulic power.
The technology eventually spread to the rest of Europe and was in use until ca.
1800.

Paper mill (13th century)
The first certain use of a water-powered paper mill, evidence for which is elusive in both Chinese and Muslim paper making, dates to 1282.Rolling mill (15th century)
Used to produce metal sheet of an even thickness.
First used on soft, malleable metals, such as lead, gold and tin.
Leonardo da Vinci described a rolling mill for wrought iron.

Tidal Mills (6th century)
The earliest tidal mills were excavated on the Irish coast where watermillers knew and employed the two main waterwheel types: a 6th-century tide mill at Killoteran near Waterford was powered by a vertical waterwheel, while the tide changes at Little Island were exploited by a twin-flume horizontal-wheeled mill (c. 630) and a vertical undershot waterwheel alongside it.
Another early example is the Nendrum Monastery mill from 787 which is estimated to have developed seven to eight horsepower at its peak.

Vertical windmills (1180s)
Invented in Europe as the pivotable post mill, the first surviving mention of one comes from Yorkshire in England in 1185.
They were efficient at grinding grain or draining water.
Stationary tower mills were also developed in the 13th century.

Water hammer
(12th century at the latest)
Used in metallurgy to forge the metal blooms from bloomeries and Catalan
forges, they replaced manual hammerwork.
The water hammer was eventually superseded by steam hammers in the 19th century.

===
Navigation ===
Dry compass (12th century)
The first European mention of the directional compass is in Alexander Neckam's On the Natures of Things, written in Paris around 1190.
It was either transmitted from China or the Arabs or an independent European innovation.
Dry compass were invented in the Mediterranean around 1300.Astronomical compass (1269)
The French scholar Pierre de Maricourt describes in his experimental study Epistola de magnete (1269) three different compass designs he has devised for the purpose of astronomical observation.

Stern-mounted rudders (1180s)
The first depiction of a pintle-and-gudgeon rudder on church carvings dates to around 1180.
They first appeared with cogs in the North and Baltic Seas and quickly spread to Mediterranean.
The iron hinge system was the first stern rudder permanently attached to the ship hull and made a vital contribution to the navigation achievements of the age of discovery and thereafter.

===
Printing, paper and reading ===
Movable type printing press (1440s)
Johannes Gutenberg's great innovation was not the printing itself, but instead of using carved plates as in woodblock printing, he used separate letters (types) from which the printing plates for pages were made up.
This meant the types were recyclable and a page cast could be made up far faster.

Paper (13th century)
Paper was invented in China and transmitted through Islamic Spain in the 13th century.
In Europe, the paper-making processes was mechanized by water-powered mills and paper presses (see paper mill).

Rotating bookmark (13th century)
A rotating disc and string device used to mark the page, column, and precise level in the text where a person left off reading in a text.

Materials used were often leather, velum, or paper.

Spectacles (1280s)
The first spectacles, invented in Florence, used convex lenses which were of help only to the far-sighted.
Concave lenses were not developed prior to the 15th century.

Watermark (1282)
This medieval innovation was used to mark paper products and to discourage counterfeiting.
It was first introduced in Bologna, Italy.
===
Science and learning ===
Theory of impetus (6th century)
A scientific theory that was introduced by John Philoponus who made criticism of Aristotelian principles of physics, and
it served as an inspiration to medieval scholars as well as to Galileo Galilei  who ten centuries later, during the Scientific Revolution, extensively cited Philoponus in his works while making the case as to why Aristotelian physics was flawed.
It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics.

The first extant treatise of magnetism (13th century)
The first extant treatise describing the properties of magnets was done by Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt when he wrote Epistola de magnete.

Arabic numerals (13th century)
The first recorded mention in Europe was in 976, and they were first widely published in 1202 by Fibonacci with his Liber Abaci.

University
The first medieval universities were founded between the 11th and 13th centuries leading to a rise in literacy and learning.
By 1500, the institution had spread throughout most of Europe and played a key role in the Scientific Revolution.
Today, the educational concept and institution has been globally adopted.
===
Textile industry and garments ===
Functional button (13th century)
German buttons appeared in 13th-century Germany as an indigenous innovation.
They soon became widespread with the rise of snug-fitting clothing.

Horizontal loom (11th century)
Horizontal looms operated by foot-treadles were faster and more efficient.

Silk (6th century)
Manufacture of silk began in Eastern Europe in the 6th century and in Western Europe in the 11th or 12th century.
Silk had been imported over the Silk Road since antiquity.
The technology of "silk throwing" was mastered in Tuscany in the 13th century.
The silk works used waterpower and some regard these as the first mechanized textile mills.

Spinning wheel (13th century)
Brought to Europe probably from India.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Chess (1450)
The earliest predecessors of the game originated in 6th-century AD India and spread via Persia and the Muslim world to Europe.
Here the game evolved into its current form in the 15th century.

Forest glass (c. 1000)
This type of glass uses wood ash and sand as the main raw materials and is characterised by a variety of greenish-yellow colours.

Grindstones (834)
Grindstones are a rough stone, usually sandstone, used to sharpen iron.
The first rotary grindstone (turned with a leveraged handle) occurs in the Utrecht Psalter, illustrated between 816 and 834.
According to Hägermann, the pen drawing is a copy of a late-antique manuscript.
A second crank which was mounted on the other end of the axle is depicted in the Luttrell Psalter from around 1340.Liquor (12th century)
Primitive forms of distillation were known to the Babylonians, as well as Indians in the first centuries AD.
Early evidence of distillation also comes from alchemists working in Alexandria, Roman Egypt, in the 1st century.
The medieval Arabs adopted the distillation process, which later spread to Europe.
Texts on the distillation of waters, wine, and other spirits were written in Salerno and Cologne in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Liquor consumption rose dramatically in Europe in and after the mid-14th century, when distilled liquors were commonly used as remedies for the Black Death.
These spirits would have had a much lower alcohol content (about 40% ABV) than the alchemists' pure distillations, and they were likely first thought of as medicinal elixirs.
Around 1400, methods to distill spirits from wheat, barley, and rye were discovered.
Thus began the "national" drinks of Europe, including  gin (England) and grappa (Italy).
In 1437, "burned water" (brandy) was mentioned in the records of the County of Katzenelnbogen in Germany.
Magnets (12th century)
Magnets were first referenced in the Roman d'Enéas, composed between 1155 and 1160.

Mirrors (1180)
The first mention of a "glass" mirror is in 1180 by Alexander Neckham who said "Take away the lead which is behind the glass
and there will be no image of the one looking in."

Illustrated surgical atlas (1345)
Guido da Vigevano (c. 1280 − 1349) was the first author to add illustrations to his anatomical descriptions.
His Anathomia provides pictures of neuroanatomical structures and techniques such as the dissection of the head by means of trephination, and depictions of the meninges, cerebrum, and spinal cord.
Quarantine (1377)
Initially a 40-day-period, the quarantine was introduced by the Republic of Ragusa as a measure of disease prevention related to the Black Death.
It was later adopted by Venice from where the practice spread all around in Europe.

Rat traps (1170s)
The first mention of a rat trap is in the medieval romance
Yvain, the Knight of the Lion by Chrétien de Troyes.

==
Military technologies ==


===
Armour ===
Quilted Armour (pre 5th - 14th Century)
There was a vast amount of armour technology available through the 5th to 16th centuries.

Most soldiers during this time wore padded or quilted armor.
This was the cheapest and most available armor for the majority of soldiers.
Quilted armour was usually just a jacket made of thick linen and wool meant to pad or soften the impact of blunt weapons and light blows.
Although, this technology predated the 5th century, it was still extremely prevalent because of the low cost and the weapon technology at the time made the bronze armor of the Greeks and Romans obsolete.
Quilted armour was also used in conjunction with other types of armour.
Usually worn over or under leather, mail, and later plate armour.
Cuir Bouilli (5th-10th Century)
Hardened leather armour also called Cuir Bouilli was a step up from quilted armour.
Made by boiling leather in either water, wax or oil to soften it so it can be shaped, it would then be allowed to dry and become very hard.
Large pieces of armour could be made such as breast plates, helmets, and leg guards, but many times smaller pieces would be sewn into the quilting of quilted armour or strips would be sewn together on the outside of a linen jacket.
This was not as affordable as the quilted armour but offered much better protection against edged slashing weapons.

Chain Mail (11th-16th Century)
The most common type during the 11th through the 16th centuries was the Hauberk, also known earlier than the 11th century as the Carolingian byrnie.
Made of interlinked rings of metal, it sometimes consisted of a coif that covered the head and a tunic that covered the torso, arms, and legs down to the knees.
Chain mail was very effective at protecting against light slashing blows but ineffective against stabbing or thrusting blows.
The great advantage was that it allowed a great freedom of movement and was relatively light with significant protection over quilted or hardened leather armour.
It was far more expensive than the hardened leather or quilted armour because of the massive amount of labor it required to create.
This made it unattainable for most soldiers and only the more wealthy soldiers could afford it.
Later, toward the end of the 13th century banded mail became popular.
Constructed of washer shaped rings of iron overlapped and woven together by straps of leather as opposed to the interlinked metal rings of chain mail, banded mail was much more affordable to manufacture.
The washers were so tightly woven together that it was very difficult penetrate and offered greater protection from arrow and bolt attacks.
Jazerant (11th century)
The Jazerant or Jazeraint was an adaptation of chain mail in which the chain mail would be sewn in between layers of linen or quilted armour.
Exceptional protection against light slashing weapons and slightly improved protection against small thrusting weapons, but little protection against large blunt weapons such as maces and axes.
This gave birth to reinforced chain mail and became more prevalent in the 12th and 13th century.
Reinforced armour was made up of chain mail with metal plates or hardened leather plates sewn in.
This greatly improved protection from stabbing and thrusting blows.

Scale Armour (12th century)
A type of Lamellar armour, was made up entirely of small, overlapping plates.
Either sewn together, usually with leather straps, or attached to a backing such as linen, or a quilted armor.
Scale armour does not require the labor to produce that chain mail does and therefore is more affordable.
It also affords much better protection against thrusting blows and pointed weapons.
Though, it is much heavier, more restrictive and impedes free movement.

Plate Armour (14th century)
Plate armour covered the entire body.
Although parts of the body were already covered in plate armour as early as 1250, such as the Poleyns for covering the knees and Couters - plates that protected the elbows, the first complete full suit without any textiles was seen around 1410-1430.
Components of medieval armour that made up a full suit consisted of a cuirass, a gorget, vambraces, gauntlets, cuisses, greaves, and sabatons held together by internal leather straps.
Improved weaponry such as crossbows and the long bow had greatly increased range and power.
This made penetration of the chain mail hauberk much easier and more common.
By the mid 1400s most plate was worn alone and without the need of a hauberk.
Advances in metal working such as the blast furnace and new techniques for carburizing made plate armour nearly impenetrable and the best armour protection available at the time.
Although plate armour was fairly heavy, because each suit was custom tailored to the wearer, it was very easy to move around in.
A full suit of plate armour was extremely expensive and mostly unattainable for the majority of soldiers.
Only very wealthy land owners and nobility could afford it.
The quality of plate armour increases as more armour makers became more proficient in metal working.
A suit of plate armour became a symbol of social status and the best made were personalized with embellishments and engravings.
Plate armour saw continued use in battle until the 17th century.

===
Cavalry ===
Arched saddle (11th century)
The arched saddle enabled mounted knights to wield lances underarm and prevent the charge from turning into an unintentional pole-vault.
This innovation gave birth to true shock cavalry, enabling fighters to charge on full gallop.

Spurs (11th century)
Spurs were invented by the Normans and appeared at the same time as the cantled saddle.
They enabled the horseman to control his horse with his feet, replacing the whip and leaving his arms free.
Rowel spurs familiar from cowboy films were already known in the 13th century.
Gilded spurs were the ultimate symbol of the knighthood - even today someone is said to "earn his spurs" by proving his or her worthiness.

Stirrup (6th century)
Stirrups were invented by steppe nomads in what is today Mongolia and northern China in the 4th century.
They were introduced in Byzantium in the 6th century and in the Carolingian Empire in the 8th.
They allowed a mounted knight to wield a sword and strike from a distance leading to a great advantage for mounted cavalry.

===
Gunpowder weapons ===
Cannon (1324)
Cannons are first recorded in Europe at the siege of Metz in 1324.
In 1350 Petrarch wrote "these instruments which discharge balls of metal with most tremendous noise and flashes of fire...
were a few years ago very rare and were viewed with greatest astonishment and admiration, but now they are become as common and familiar as  kinds of arms.
"Volley
gun
See Ribauldequin.

Corned gunpowder (late 14th century)
First practiced in Western Europe, corning the black powder allowed for more powerful and faster ignition of cannons.
It also facilitated the storage and transportation of black powder.
Corning constituted a crucial step in the evolution of gunpowder warfare.

very large-calibre cannon (late 14th century)
Extant examples include the wrought-iron Pumhart von Steyr, Dulle Griet and Mons Meg as well as the cast-bronze Faule Mette and Faule Grete (all from the 15th century).

===
Mechanical artillery ===
Counterweight trebuchet (12th century)
Powered solely by the force of gravity, these catapults revolutionized medieval siege warfare and construction of fortifications by hurling huge stones unprecedented distances.
Originating somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean basin, counterweight trebuchets were introduced in the Byzantine Empire around 1100 CE, and was later adopted by the Crusader states and as well by the other armies of Europe and Asia.
===
Missile weapons ===
Greek fire
(7th century)
An incendiary weapon which could even burn on water is also attributed to the Byzantines, where they installed it on their ships.
It played a crucial role in the Byzantine Empire's victory over the Umayyad Caliphate during the 717-718 Siege of Constantinople.

Grenade (8th century)
Rudimentary incendiary grenades appeared in the Byzantine Empire, as the Byzantine soldiers learned that Greek fire, a Byzantine invention of the previous century, could not only be thrown by flamethrowers at the enemy, but also in stone and ceramic jars.

Longbow with massed, disciplined archery (13th century)
Having a high rate of fire and penetration power, the longbow contributed to the eventual demise of the medieval knight class.
Used particularly by the English to great effect against the French cavalry during the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453).

Steel crossbow (late 14th century)
European innovation came with several different cocking aids to enhance draw power, making the weapons also the first hand-held mechanical crossbows.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Combined arms tactics (14th century)
The battle of Halidon Hill 1333 was the first battle where intentional and disciplined combined arms infantry tactics were employed.
The English men-at-arms dismounted aside the archers, combining thus the staying power of super-heavy infantry and striking power of their two-handed weapons with the missiles and mobility of the archers using longbows and shortbows.
Combining dismounted knights and men-at-arms with archers was the archetypal Western Medieval battle tactics until the battle of Flodden 1513 and final emergence of firearms.

==
Gallery ==
== Notes and references ==


==
Bibliography ==
Andrews, Francis B.
The Medieval Builder and His Methods.
New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1973.
Medieval construction technique, with a brief chapter on tools.

Blair, John, and Nigel Ramsay, editors.
English Medieval Industries: Craftsmen, Techniques, Products London:
Hambledon Press.
1991.
ISBN
1-85285-326-3
Burns, Robert I. (1996), "Paper comes to the West, 800−1400",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.)
,
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
413–422, ISBN
3-7861-1748-9
Crosby, Alfred.
The Measure of Reality : Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997
Jared Diamond, Guns, germs and steel.
A short history of everybody for the last 13'000 years, 1997.

Di Ieva, Antonio;  et al.
(
2007), "The Neuroanatomical Plates of Guido da Vigevano", Neurosurgical Focus, 23 (1): 1–4, doi:10.3171/FOC-07/07/E15
Gies, Frances and Joseph.
Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel:  Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages.
New York:
Harper Collins, 1994.
ISBN 0-06-092581-7
Gimpel, Jean.
The Medieval Machine:
The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages.
London: Pimlico, (2nd ed.
1992)
ISBN 0
-14-004514-7
Hägermann, Dieter; Schneider, Helmuth (1997), Propyläen Technikgeschichte.
Landbau und Handwerk, 750 v. Chr.
bis 1000 n. Chr (2nd ed.),
Berlin, ISBN 3-549-05632-X
Hall, Bert S. (1979), The Technological Illustrations of the So-Called "Anonymous of the Hussite Wars".
Codex Latinus Monacensis 197,
Part 1, Wiesbaden:
Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag, ISBN 3-920153-93-6
Holt, Richard (1988), The Mills of Medieval England, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, ISBN 978-0-631-15692-5
Long, Pamela O.,editor.
Science and Technology in Medieval Society.
in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol 441 New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1985 ISBN 0-89766-277-6
A series of papers on highly specific topics.

Lucas, Adam Robert (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds.
A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture, 46 (1): 1–30, doi:10.1353
/tech.2005.0026
Makdisi, George (1970), "Madrasa and University in the Middle Ages", Studia Islamica, 32 (32): 255–264, doi:10.2307/1595223, JSTOR 1595223
Matheus, Michael (1996), "Mittelalterliche Hafenkräne",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.),
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
345–348
, ISBN 3-7861-1748-9
Matthies, Andrea (1992), "Medieval Treadwheels.
Artists' Views of Building Construction", Technology and Culture, 33 (3): 510–547, doi:10.2307/3106635, JSTOR 3106635
McErlean, Thomas; Crothers, Norman (2007), Harnessing the Tides:
The Early Medieval Tide Mills at Nendrum Monastery, Strangford Lough, Belfast:
Stationery Office Books, ISBN 978-0-337-08877-3
Murphy, Donald (2005), Excavations of a Mill at Killoteran,
Co. Waterford as Part of the N-25 Waterford By-Pass Project (PDF), Estuarine/ Alluvial Archaeology in Ireland.
Towards Best Practice, University College Dublin and National Roads Authority, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-11-18
Rynne, Colin (2000), "Waterpower in Medieval Ireland",  in Squatriti, Paolo (ed.),
Working with Water in Medieval Europe, Technology and Change in History, 3, Leiden:
Brill, pp.
1–50
, ISBN 90-04-10680-4
Singer, Charles, editor.
History of Technology.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1954.
Volumes II and III cover the Middle Ages with great scope and detail.
This is the standard work.

Taylor, E. g. r. (1951), "The South-Pointing Needle", Imago Mundi, 8: 1–7, doi:10.1080/03085695108591973
Thompson, Susan (1978), "Paper Manufacturing and Early Books", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 314: 167–176,
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1978.tb47791.x
White, Jr., Lynn (1962), Medieval Technology and Social Change, Oxford:
At the Clarendon Press
White, Lynn, Jr., "The Study of Medieval Technology, 1924-1974:
Personal Reflections" Technology and Culture 16.4 (October 1975), pp.
519–530.
A chronology and basic bibliography of landmark studies.

Wikander, Örjan (1985), "Archaeological Evidence for Early Water-Mills.
An Interim Report", History of Technology, 10, pp.
151–179


==
See also ==
Earlier periods:
Ancient Greek technology
Ancient Roman technologyMedieval
period:
Medieval medicine of Western Europe
Medieval transport
Renaissance of the 12th century
Islamic Golden Age
List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinentGeneral
:

History of technology


==
External links ==
The Medieval Technology Pages
Technology in the Medieval Age
A military dictatorship is a dictatorship in which the military exerts complete or substantial control over political authority, and the dictator is often a high-ranked military officer.

The reverse situation is to have civilian control of the military.

== Creation and evolution ==
Most military dictatorships are formed after a coup d'état has overthrown the previous government.
There have been cases, however, where the civilian government has been formally maintained but the military exercises de facto control—the civilian government is either bypassed or forced to comply with the military's wishes.
For example, from 1916 until the end of World War I, the German Empire was governed as an effective military dictatorship, because its leading generals had gained such a level of control over Kaiser Wilhelm II that the Chancellor and other civilian ministers effectively served at their pleasure.
Alternatively, the Empire of Japan after 1931 never in any formal way drastically altered the constitutional structure of its government, but from that point, it is typically seen as a military dictatorship, since the Army and Navy had the effective legal right to veto the formation of undesirable governments (and also to compel the resignation of an existing government that had lost their favor), and since key cabinet posts traditionally held by civilians (especially the Premiership) were instead filled by active flag officers.

Military dictatorships may gradually restore significant components of civilian government while the senior military commander still maintains executive political power.
In Pakistan, ruling Generals Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq (1977–1988) and Pervez Musharraf (1999–2008) have held referendums to elect themselves President of Pakistan for additional terms forbidden by the constitution.

==
Justification ==
In the past, military juntas have justified their rule as a way of bringing political stability for the nation or rescuing it from the threat of "dangerous ideologies".
For example, the threat of communism, socialism, and Islamism was often used.
Military regimes tend to portray themselves as non-partisan, as a "neutral" party that can provide interim leadership in times of turmoil, and also tend to portray civilian politicians as corrupt and ineffective.
One of the almost universal characteristics of a military government is the institution of martial law or a permanent state of emergency.

==
Comparison with other forms of authoritarianism ==
Military dictatorships are not the only form of authoritarianism or even, especially in the twenty-first century, the most common one.

===
Comparison with monarchies ===
A military dictatorship is distinct from an absolute monarchy, although there are some similarities, especially concerning how the two are (or historically have been) established.
Virtually all absolute monarchs (and even most constitutional monarchs) are commanders-in-chief of their nations' militaries, wear military uniforms at least on a ceremonial basis and hold military ranks and/or titles.
Also, senior members of royal families, especially if they are male and/or heirs apparent or presumptive, are expected to perform military service prior to ascending the throne.
Moreover, almost all monarchies (both current and defunct) established themselves over the past centuries and millennia by force of arms.
A key difference between a monarchy and a military dictatorship is that once they are established and recognized by their subjects (a process that has often taken many generations)
a monarchy typically establishes some form of hereditary succession to legitimately transfer power from generation to generation, and while there historically have been many cases of disputed claims to a throne, attempting to seize power through sheer force of arms without some sort of credible hereditary claim is usually regarded as illegitimate and/or illegal by monarchists.
In constitutional monarchies the monarch is usually the commander-in-chief and is often formally the highest-ranking military officer but in practice is expected to defer to the advice of civilian ministers, especially when appointing flag officers who will exercise actual operational command, thus maintaining civilian control of the military.

On the other hand, modern military dictatorships typically eschew hereditary succession with long-lasting juntas often emphasizing the traditional methods of promotion within the officer ranks as the eventual path to civil power.
Military dictatorships which have attempted to establish themselves as monarchies or otherwise implement hereditary succession, whether or not by attempting to establish themselves as monarchies, have often collapsed very quickly.
In one example, Oliver Cromwell after deposing and executing King Charles
I of England refused all offers to take the English Crown, but nevertheless attempted to have power transferred after his death to his son Richard Cromwell; however, the younger Cromwell lacked the respect or support of the English military establishment, and was thus quickly forced to relinquish power.
In another, a few years after staging a coup and establishing himself as the French First Republic's dictator, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself French Emperor.
Although he subsequently married a Habsburg princess and sired an heir to his newly-established throne, Napoleon's claim to power was never fully accepted by French royalists who supported the deposed House of Bourbon, nor by other European monarchies.
Eventually, Napoleon's armies were defeated and he was forced to abdicate and go into exile.
Although Napoleon's nephew eventually re-established the Bonapartist monarchy for a time, his seizure of power might be better described in the context of a civilian dictatorship as described in the next section.

===
Comparison with civilian dictatorship ===
A military dictatorship is also different from civilian dictatorship for a number of reasons: their motivations for seizing power, the institutions through which they organize their rule and the ways in which they leave power.
Often viewing itself as saving the nation from the corrupt or myopic civilian politicians, a military dictatorship justifies its position as "neutral" arbiters on the basis of their membership within the armed forces, which in many countries are nominally expected to be apolitical institutions.
For example, many juntas adopt titles along the lines of "Committee of National Restoration", or "National Liberation Committee".
Military leaders often rule as a junta, selecting one of themselves as a head.

==
Current cases ==


==
Former cases ==


===
Africa ===
Algeria (1965–1976; 1992–1994; 2019)
 Benin (1963–1964; 1965–1968; 1969–1970; 1972–1975)
Burkina Faso (1966–1980; 1980-1982; 1982-1983; 1983-1987; 1987-2014)
Burundi (1966–1974; 1976–1979; 1987–1992)
 Central African Republic (1966–1979; 1981–1986; 2003–2005; 2013–2014)
 Chad (1975–1979; 1982–1990)
Ciskei (1990–1994)
Comoros (1999–2002)
Democratic Republic of the Congo (1965–1997)
 Republic of the Congo (1968–1969; 1977–1979)
 Côte d'Ivoire (1999–2000)
 Egypt (1953–1956; 1981-2011; 2011–2012; 2013-2015)
 Equatorial Guinea (1979–1992)
 Ethiopia (1974–1987)
The Gambia
(1994–1996)
 Ghana (1966–1969; 1972–1975; 1975–1979; 1981–1993)
Guinea (1984–1990; 2008–2010)
Guinea-Bissau (1980–1984; 1999; 2003; 2012)
 Lesotho (1986–1991; 1991-1993;
2014)
 Liberia (1980–1986, 1990–1997, 2003–2006)
 Libya (1969–1977)
 Madagascar (1972–1976)
Mali (1968–1992; 2012; 2020–present)
 Mauritania (1978–1979; 1979–1992; 2005–2007; 2008–2009)
 Niger (1974–1989; 1996; 1999; 2010–2011)
 Nigeria (1966; 1966–1975; 1975–1976; 1976-1979; 1983–1985; 1985–1993; 1993–1998; 1998–1999)
 Rwanda (1973–1994)
 São Tomé and Príncipe (1995; 2003)
 Sierra Leone (1967–1968; 1992–1996; 1997–1998)
 Somalia (1969–1976; 1980–1991)
 Sudan (1958–1964; 1969–1971; 1985–1986; 1989–1993;
2019–present)
Togo (1967–2005)
Transkei (1987–1994)
 Tunisia (1987–2011)
 Uganda (1971–1979; 1985–1986)
 Venda (1990–1994)
 Zimbabwe (2017–2018)


===
Americas ===
Argentina (1835-1852; 1930–1932; 1943–1946; 1955–1958; 1966–1973; 1976–1983)
 Bolivia (1839–1843; 1848; 1857–1861; 1861; 1864–1871; 1876–1879; 1899; 1920–1921; 1930–1931; 1936–1940; 1943–1946; 1951–1952; 1964–1982)
 Brazil (1889–1891; 1891–1894; 1930; 1964–1985)
 Chile (1924–1925; 1925; 1927–1931; 1932; 1973–1990)
 Colombia (1854; 1953–1958)
 Costa Rica (1868–1870; 1876–1882; 1917–1919)
 Cuba (1933; 1952–1959)
 Dominican Republic (1899; 1930–1961; 1963–1966)
 Ecuador (1876–1883; 1935–1938; 1947; 1963–1966; 1972–1979; 2000)
El Salvador (1885–1911; 1931–1979; 1979–1982)
 Guatemala (1931–1944; 1944–1945; 1954–1957; 1957–1966; 1970–1986)
Grenada (1983)
 Haiti (1950–1956; 1956–1957; 1986–1990; 1991–1994)
 Honduras (1933–1949; 1956–1957; 1963–1971; 1972–1982; 2009–2010)
 Mexico (1835–1846; 1876–1880; 1884–1911; 1913–1914)
 Nicaragua (1937–1979; 1979–1985)
 Panama (1903–1904; 1968–1989)
 Paraguay (1940–1948; 1954–1989)
 Peru (1842–1844; 1865–1867; 1872; 1879–1881; 1914–1915; 1930–1939; 1948–1956; 1962–1963; 1968–1980)
 Suriname (1980–1991)
 Uruguay (1865–1868; 1876–1879; 1933–1938; 1973–1985)
 Venezuela (1858–1859; 1859–1861; 1861–1863; 1908–1935; 1948–1958)


===
Asia ===
Afghanistan (1978)
 Cambodia (1970–1975)
 Indonesia (1967–1998)
 Iran (1953–1957; 1978–1979)
Iraq (1933–1935; 1936; 1937–1938; 1941; 1949–1950; 1952–1953; 1958–1963; 1963-1968
1968–1979)
Japan (1192–1867; 1931–1945
 North Korea (1170–1270)
 South Korea (1170–1270; 1961–1963; 1963-1972; 1981-1987)
 Laos (1959–1960)
 Lebanon (1988-1990)
Maldives (1988–1989)
Mongolia (1939–1952)
 Myanmar (1962–1988; 1988–2011; 2021–present)
 Pakistan (1958–1969; 1969–1971; 1977–1988; 1999–2008)
 Philippines (1898, 1972–1981)
Syria (1949; 1951–1954; 1961–1970, 1970-2000)
 Taiwan (1948–1987)
 Thailand (1933; 1933–1944; 1947–1957; 1959–1963; 1963–1973; 1977–1979; 2006–2008; 2014–2021)
 South Vietnam (1963–1967)
 North Yemen (1962–1967; 1974–1977; 1977–1978; 1978; 1978–1990)
Yemen (1990-2012)


===
Europe ===
Bulgaria (1923–1926; 1934–1935; 1944–1946)
 Cyprus (1974)
United Kingdom (1653–1659)
France (1799–1814; 1851–1858; 1870–1871)
 Georgia (1992)
 Germany (1916–1918)
Greece (1925–1926; 1936–1941; 1967–1974)
 Poland (1926–1935; 1981–1983)
 Portugal (1926–1933; 1974-1975)
 Romania (1941–1944)
Italy (1922–1943)
 Russia (1918–1920)
 San Marino (1957)
Spain (1923–1930; 1936–1975)
 Turkey (1913–1918; 1921–1927; 1960–1961; 1971-1972; 1980–1983; 1997-1999)
 Ukraine (1918)


===
Oceania ===
Fiji (1987–1999; 2006–2014)


==
See also ==
Civilian control of the military
Military rule (disambiguation)
Stratocracy
Films depicting Latin American military dictatorships
Military junta
List of political leaders who held active military ranks in office


==
References ==
Non-lethal weapons, also called less-lethal weapons, less-than-lethal weapons, non-deadly weapons, compliance weapons, or pain-inducing weapons are weapons intended to be less likely to kill a living target than conventional weapons such as knives and firearms.
It is often understood that unintended or incidental casualties are risked wherever force is applied, but non-lethal weapons try to minimise the risk of casualties (e.g. serious/permanent injuries or death) as much as possible.
Non-lethal weapons are used in policing and combat situations to limit the escalation of conflict where employment of lethal force is prohibited or undesirable, where rules of engagement require minimum casualties, or where policy restricts the use of conventional force.
These weapons occasionally cause serious injuries or death; the term "less-lethal" has been preferred by some organizations as it describes the risks of death more accurately than the term "non-lethal", which some have argued is a misnomer.
Non-lethal weapons may be used by conventional military in a range of missions across the force continuum.
They may also be used by military police, by United Nations forces, and by occupation forces for peacekeeping and stability operations.

Non-lethal weapons may also be used to channelize a battlefield, control the movement of civilian populations, or to limit civilian access to restricted areas (as they were utilized by the USMC's 1st Marine Expeditionary Force in Somalia in 1995).
Similar weapons, tactics, techniques and procedures are employed by police forces domestically in riot control, prisoner control, crowd control, refugee control, and self-defense, where the terminology of "Less-than-Lethal" is often used.

==
History ==


===
Military ===
In the past, military and police faced with undesirable escalation of conflict had few acceptable options.
Military personnel guarding embassies often found themselves restricted to carrying unloaded weapons.
National guards or policing forces charged with quelling riots were able to use only batons or similar club-like weapons, or bayonet or saber charges, or fire live ammunition at crowds.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Non-lethality Policy Review Group at U.S. Global Strategy Council in Washington and other independent think tanks around the world called for a concerted effort to develop weapons that were more life-conserving, environmentally friendly, and fiscally responsible than weapons available at that time.
The U.S. Congress and other governments agreed and began an organized development of non-lethal weapons to provide a range of options between talking and shooting.

Recognizing the need to limit the escalation of force, research and development of a range of non-lethal weapons has since been undertaken internationally by governments and weapons manufacturers to fill the need for such weapons.
Some non-lethal weapons may provide more effective riot control than firearms, truncheons or bayonets with less risk of loss of life or serious injury.
Before the general availability of early military non-lethal weapons in the mid 1990s, war-fighters had few or no casualty-limiting options for the employment of scalable force and were continually at risk whenever lethal force was prohibited during sensitive missions.

In 2001 the United States Marine Corps revealed its development of a less-than-lethal energy weapon called the Active Denial System, a focused high frequency microwave device said to be capable of heating all living matter in the target area rapidly and continuously for the duration of the beam, causing transient intolerable pain but no lasting damage.
The skin temperature of a person subjected to this weapon can jump to approximately 130 °F (54 °C) in as little as 2 seconds depending on the skin's starting temperature.
The system is nonlethal (the penetration of the beam into human skin is only a few millimeters).In 2004, author Jon Ronson cited an unclassified military report titled "Non-Lethal Weapons: Terms and References" 21 acoustic weapons were listed, in various stages of development, including the Infrasound ("Very low-frequency sound which can travel long distances and easily penetrate most buildings and vehicles ...
biophysical effects are projected to be: nausea, loss of bowels, disorientation, vomiting, potential internal organ damage or death may occur.
Superior to ultrasound...)
", however no such effects had been achieved as of 2002.In 2010, the Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate (JNLWD)
Non-Lethal Weapons (NLW)
Reference Book was created.
The weapons in this book are currently in development.

===
Police ===
Until the development of non-lethal weapons, police officers around the world had few if any non-lethal options for riot control.
Common tactics used by police that were intended to be non-lethal or less lethal included a slowly advancing wall of men with batons, officers on horses trained to deal with policing situations, or a charge into a riot using the flats of sabers.
Other reasonably successful approaches included shotguns with lower-powered cartridges, "salt shells", using bean-bag rounds and ricocheting the shot off of the ground.
In the mid-20th century, with the integration of fire-control systems into major cities, police found that high-pressure fire hoses could be effective in dispersing a crowd (the use of water cannons and fire trucks has remained an effective nonlethal tactic to disperse riots).
Trained police dogs were also commonly used to scare and disperse rioters and apprehend individuals.
In the 1980s the development of the high-tensile plastics Kevlar and Lexan revolutionized personal armor and shields, and led to new tactics for riot squads and other special-purpose teams.
Officers could now stand up against violent rioters throwing dangerous projectiles without having to resort to lethal methods to quickly disperse the danger.

Coupled with the introduction of effective non-lethal chemical agents such as tear gas and offensive odor canisters, and non-lethal impact rounds such as rubber bullets and "bean bag" flexible baton rounds, riot tactics were modified to rely less on violent response to attacking rioters than on a return to the slowly advancing wall, with supporting officers firing non-lethal ordnance into the crowd to discourage advance.

Police officers on patrol were traditionally armed with a baton or pistol or both, and non-lethal methods of subduing an attacker centered on hand-fighting techniques such as jujutsu and baton use.
In the 1980s and 1990s officers began deploying non-lethal personal sidearms such as pepper sprays, and eventually electroshock weapons such as Tasers, which were developed for use by police and also found a market in self-defense by private citizens.
However, these weapons were developed for non-lethal resolution of a one-on-one conflict.

During the 1990s and early 2000s (decade) interest in various other forms of less-than-lethal weapons for military and police use rose.
Amongst other factors, the use of less-than-lethal weapons may be legal under international law and treaty in situations where weapons such as aerosol sprays or gases defined as chemical are not.
Less-than-lethal weapons are also useful in keeping the peace in the aftermath of violent conflict.

Between the years of 1987–1990 after a three-year field study by the FBI's Firearm's Training Unit; In 1990 the use of Oleoresin Capsicum was first issued and used by the FBI as the first official law enforcement agency.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s (decade)
police began to adopt a new pepper spray delivery system based on the equipment used in paintballs.
A specialized paintball, called a "pepperball", is filled with liquid or powdered capsaicin, the active ingredient in pepper spray, and is propelled by compressed gas using a paintball marker similar to those used for the sport but operating at higher pressure.
The impact of the capsule is immediately painful (a pepperball's shell is thicker than a standard paintball and is fired at higher velocity), and it breaks open on impact, dispersing the capsaicin with similar effect to aerosol-delivered pepper spray.

However, to be most effective, pepper spray must contact the eyes, nose, or mouth of the target; pepper spray on clothing or tougher skin has a much reduced effect.

== Effects ==
Non-lethal weapons have a design intent to provide an effect to reliably elicit a degree of incapacitation but without the typically lethal or permanent lasting effects of conventional weapons.

This design intent has often made them a weapon of choice for use by law enforcement during civil protests, etc.

Effect modalities vary by the technology being employed:  kinetic projectiles function by blunt impact which actuate pain receptors to elicit a behavioral change, lights affect visual perception, acoustics affect hearing, etc.

Notwithstanding their design intent, non-lethal weapons can still cause harm.
This is particularly true with certain technologies that interact with appropriately vulnerable regions; an example is kinetic munitions on the head, neck, eyes, abdominal and urogenital regions of the body.

As a result, some analysts describe "non-lethal" as a misnomer and recommend defining them as "less-lethal", whereas other sources identify "non-lethal" as representing a goal of minimization of producing fatalities or permanent injuries while not literally requiring minimization to a zero probability thereof.

Because the design intent is to avoid/minimize permanence, the effects invariably have been transient in nature.

Some effects may be momentary while others may persist for some finite period of time.

==
Mechanics ==
Non-lethal weapons are intended to minimize injury or death.
While people are occasionally seriously injured or killed by these weapons, fatalities are relatively infrequent.

Causes of death from non-lethal weapons are varied and occasionally uncertain.
Misplaced or ricocheting shots, pre-existing medical conditions, inadequate user training, repetitive applications and intentional misuse have been implicated in different cases where death has occurred.

As different parts of the body differ in vulnerability, and because people vary in weight and fitness, any weapon powerful enough to incapacitate may be capable of killing under certain circumstances.

Thus "non-lethal force" does have some risk of causing death: in this context "non-lethal" means only "not intended to kill".

Several groups maintain there is great room for improvement in non-lethal weapons and procedures for their use.
Claims for the relative safety of such weapons are usually contingent on their being used "properly".
For example, the rubber bullets developed during the 1960s were supposed to be fired at the ground and hit the target only after ricochet, and other non-lethal bullets are designed to be fired at the lower body; they can be lethal if fired directly at the head.

== Ammunition ==
Non-lethal rounds are firearm rounds which are designed to incapacitate, but not kill, a target.
The rounds rely on the transfer of kinetic energy and blunt force trauma to accomplish this incapacitation.
Rubber bullets, rubber buckshot, soft polymer rounds, wax bullets, plastic bullets, beanbag rounds, sponge grenades, ring airfoil projectiles (both kinetic and tear gas projectiles) and rubber bullets with electroshock effect (e.g. Taser XREP rounds) are less lethal than conventional metal bullets, and are also propelled at lower speed by using less propellant.
"
Bean bag" type bullets are sometimes referred to as flexible baton rounds.
More recently, high-velocity paintball guns are also used to launch less-lethal rounds, including the FN 303 launcher and PepperBall commercial products.
There is also the Variable Velocity Weapon Concept, for which a propulsion energy source may not yet have been clearly established and/or finalized.
In any case, all of these technologies apply the same basic mechanism, which is to launch a mass at the target that interacts kinetically.

==
Explosives ==
Hand grenades come in several less-lethal varieties, such as "flashbang" (stun) grenades, "sting" grenades with rubber shrapnel, and grenades designed to release chemical irritants (described below).

In 1972 stun grenades were used to capture the hijacked Sabena Flight 571, allowing the Israeli forces headed by Ehud Barak and including Benjamin Netanyahu to storm the plane and take it over within 10 minutes while capturing two terrorists and killing Ali Taha, the leader of the terrorist group and his aide, while rescuing all passengers (three were wounded, and one died of her injuries several days later).

A stun grenade was apparently used by members of the IHH against the IDF soldiers during the Gaza flotilla raid at the beginning of the IDF storming of the Mavi Marmara.
In June 2010 in Kenya, a stun grenade was used to draw attention, and then a real grenade along with an explosive package were used, killing many people.
In April during the 2010 Kyrgyzstani uprising police attempted to use stun grenades to stop a demonstration but the crowd overwhelmed the police.
In March stun grenades were used by Belarusian police in Minsk against demonstrators, and in September they were used by Greek police in Athens.
In these latter two cases the demonstrations were dispersed with no injuries.

In February 2011 stun grenades were seen used by Egyptian police against rioters.

==
Gases and sprays ==


===
Water ===
Water cannons are commonly used in crowd and riot control, for dispersal or to prevent movement on a particular position.
These water cannons are intended to disperse crowds with little risk of harm, but the pressure can still cause eye injuries or even death.
Water-filled rounds for small arms are in experimental stages.
Electrified water cannon was in development but was abandoned.

===
Scent-based weapons ===
Malodorants produce strong odours that cause people to leave the affected area.

In 2008, the Israeli Defence Forces began using Skunk for crowd control.
It is a form of mist sprayed from a water cannon, which leaves a terrible odor of rot or sewage on whatever it touches, and does not wash off easily.

===
Pepper spray ===
The active ingredient in pepper spray is oleoresin capsicum (OC), an acrid irritant chemical derived from cayenne pepper plants.
A 1998 estimate by the Internet Association of Chiefs of Police suggested at least 113 pepper spray-related fatalities had occurred in the United States, all with aggravating factors such as intoxication, pre-existing health problems, or from the police use of airway-restrictive immobilizing holds that can cause positional asphyxia.
The Southern California chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union recommends against maximal prone restraint techniques following pepper spray application, and they caution that anyone sprayed should be monitored to ensure effective breathing.

===
Tear gas ===
The use of chemical weapons such as tear gas (CS) and pepper spray (OC) has come under increasing scrutiny and criticism due to studies showing serious long term side effects.
Many police forces are no longer exposing their members to the chemicals during training.

Journalist Rubén Salazar was killed in Los Angeles in 1970 by an errant CS gas canister during the Chicano riots.
Other serious injuries and fatalities have occurred from either tear gas itself or the projectiles it is delivered in, including the critical injury of veteran Scott Olsen from a tear gas canister during the 2011 Occupy Oakland protests.

===
Psychochemical ===
Psychochemical weapons are psychoactive drugs, such as BZ, LSD, Kolokol-1, EA-3167, and 3-Methylamphetamine designed to have a disorienting effect when used during combat or interrogation.

===
Sleep gas ===
During the 2002 Moscow theater hostage crisis, Russian special forces used an unidentified gas (thought to be 3-methylfentanyl or another fentanyl variant dissolved in halothane gas) in an attempt to induce sleep in both hostages and terrorists.
Many of the hostages and terrorists (including all of the suicide bombers) were anesthetized, but some terrorists donned gas masks and thus were able to avoid the effects of the gas.
Because the agent used was a potent Fentanyl derivative (a synthetic opioid), it causes respiratory depression and ultimately respiratory failure if administered in high enough dosages.
The central nervous system effects, such as anesthesia and respiratory depression could have been reversed by an opioid antagonist such as naloxone, which is stocked by hospitals and most ambulances.
However, because the Russian authorities did not release any information regarding what type of agent was used, medical professionals were unaware that an opioid had been used during the rescue attempt and thus were unable to administer the antidote which could have saved most hostages.
Approximately 700 hostages were rescued, while 130 died from exposure to the gas.
All the terrorists were ultimately killed by Russian forces through some combination of gas exposure and gunfire.
===
Other chemical agents ===
Blister agents, including CR gas, are less often used riot control agents.
Other irritants include CS gas and nonivamide (PAVA).

==
Sticky foam ==
Sticky foam was tried by the U.S. Marine Corps in the peacekeeping Operation United Shield in 1995 with some success, but as a result various complications in its field use were also discovered.

==
Area denial ==
Area denial weapons work by either incapacitating or deterring the enemy.

=== Anti-vehicle ===

Vehicle stoppers include a wide range of methods and devices meant to disable a vessel or vehicle to prevent attack by an oncoming vessel or vehicle or to stop that vessel or vehicle for evaluation.
Vessel and vehicle stoppers may include kinetic, chemical, or electromagnetic means.

====
Caltrops ====
Caltrops are known to have been in use since Roman times and may have been used earlier: the concept was familiar to the 4th century BC Greeks, who used rocks, brush, nets and trees placed in the path of enemy conveyances on land or ensnarement devices hidden under water to achieve the same result: stop the enemy or suspected hostile in his tracks for examination or to prevent or limit incursions.
Contemporary caltrops look something like large jacks from the childhood game.
Placed in the path of oncoming wheeled or tracked vehicles, they are meant to foul wheels, destroy tires and tracks, and incapacitate vehicles.

===
Anti-personnel ===


====
Caltrops ====
Simple rows or clusters of sharpened sticks (also known as punji sticks), and the use of small caltrops have been a feature of anti-infantry warfare for centuries.
However, due to the difficulty of mass-producing them in the pre-modern age, they were rarely used except in the defense of limited areas or chokepoints, especially during sieges, where they were used to help seal breaches.
Increasing ease of production still did not prevent these methods from slowly falling out of favor from the late Middle Ages onward.
Caltrops are still sometimes used in modern conflicts, such as during the Korean War, where Chinese troops, often wearing only light shoes, were particularly vulnerable.
In modern times, special caltrops are also sometimes used against wheeled vehicles with pneumatic tires.
Some South American urban guerrillas as the Tupamaros and Montoneros called them "miguelitos" and used these as a tactic to avoid pursuit after ambushes.

==
Riot gun ==
In current usage a riot gun or less-lethal launcher is a type of firearm that is used to fire "non-lethal" or "less-lethal" ammunition for the purpose of suppressing riots.
Less-lethal launchers may be special purpose firearms designed for riot control use, or standard firearms, usually shotguns and grenade launchers, adapted to riot control use with appropriate ammunition.
The ammunition is most commonly found in 12 gauge (.729 inches) shotguns and 37mm and 40 mm (1.46 and 1.57 inches) grenade launchers.

In the United States, the term riot gun more commonly refers to a riot shotgun.

==
Electroshock weapons ==
Electroshock weapons are incapacitant weapons used for subduing a person by administering electric shock aimed at disrupting superficial muscle functions.
One type is a conductive energy device (CED), an electroshock gun popularly known by the brand name "Taser", which fires projectiles that administer the shock through a thin, flexible wire.
Other electroshock weapons such as stun guns, stun batons, and electroshock belts administer an electric shock by direct contact.

== Directed energy weapons ==
Directed energy weapons are weapons that emit energy in an aimed direction without the means of a projectile.
They are non-lethal and can immobilize people as well as machines (e.g. vehicles).
Directed energy weapons include electromagnetic weapons, (including laser weapons) and microwave weapons, particle beam weapons, sonic weapons and plasma weapons.

===
Ultraviolet laser ===
HSV Technologies,
Inc. (Stood for the last names of the original founders, Herr, Schlesinger and Vernon; this is NOT the same company as Holden Special Vehicles), formerly of San Diego, California, USA, then Port Orchard, WA, designed a non-lethal device which was profiled in the 2002 TIME magazine article "Beyond the Rubber Bullet".
It is an electrolaser using ultraviolet laser beams of 193 nm, and promises to immobilize living targets at a distance without contact.
There is plan for an engine-disabling variation for use against the electronic ignitions of cars using a 248 nm laser.
The lead inventor, Eric Herr, died in 2008 and the company appears to have been dissolved, with their website defunct as of September 2017.

===
Pulsed energy projectile ===
Pulsed energy projectile or PEP is a technology of non-lethal directed energy weaponry currently under development by the US military.
It involves the emission of an invisible laser pulse which, upon contact with the target, ablates the surface and creates a small amount of exploding plasma.
This produces a pressure wave that stuns the target and knocks them off their feet, and electromagnetic radiation that affects nerve cells causing a painful sensation.
The technology can also be used as a lethal weapon, and indeed an early name was pulsed impulsive kill laser.

The pulsed energy projectile is intended for riot control and is said to work over distances of up to 2 km.
It weighs about 230 kg and will probably be mounted on vehicles.
The weight could become lighter as laser production technology improves.

The system was developed by Mission Research Corporation (now owned by Orbital ATK).
It uses a chemical deuterium fluoride laser device producing infrared laser pulses.

The plasma (produced by the early part of the pulse) explodes because its electrons absorb the energy of the later part of the pulse.

In 2003, a US military review reported that the electromagnetic radiation produced by PEPs had been shown to cause pain and temporary paralysis in animal experiments.

United States
Special Operations Command FY 2010 plans included starting developmental work on a Counter UAV Pulsed Energy Projectile.

===
Active Denial System (ADS) ===
The Active Denial System (ADS) weapon system is a dish that projects electromagnetic radiation just powerful enough to penetrate human skin and make the nervous system think the victim is on fire, although no physical damage is done.
Future combat vehicles such as the American GCV Infantry Fighting Vehicle will incorporate non-lethal weapons.

The Active Denial System is a non-lethal, directed-energy weapon developed by the U.S. military, designed for area denial, perimeter security and crowd control.
Informally, the weapon has also been referred to as a heat ray, since it works by heating the surface of targets, such as the skin of targeted human subjects.

In 2011, the ADS was redesigned to make it smaller, more reliable, and able to be used on the move.
ADS II is being designed to operate from moving aircraft, as well as moving ground vehicles.
The redesign does not address problems in different environmental conditions.
Air Force Special Operations Command is experimenting with mounting an ADS on the AC-130J Ghostrider gunship to target threatening crowds or individuals on the ground.
This is to give the gunship a non-lethal option so the crew has more engagement options.
Due to the increasing number of engagements in populated areas, the Air Force is aiming to field a system within 5–10 years to have enough aircraft available with non-lethal systems.
The aircraft will apparently use the ADS II version.

===
Dazzler ===
A Dazzler is a directed-energy weapon intended to temporarily blind or disorient its target with intense directed radiation.
Targets can include sensors or human vision.
Dazzlers emit infrared or invisible light against various electronic sensors, and visible light against humans, when they are intended to cause no long-term damage to eyes.
The emitters are usually lasers, making what is termed a laser dazzler.
Most of the contemporary systems are man-portable, and operate in either the red (a laser diode) or green (a diode-pumped solid-state laser, DPSS) areas of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Initially developed for military use, non-military products are becoming available for use in law enforcement and security.
Weapons designed to cause permanent blindness are banned by the 1995 United Nations Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons.
The dazzler is a non-lethal weapon intended to cause temporary blindness or disorientation and therefore falls outside this protocol.

The personnel halting and stimulation response rifle (PHASR) is a prototype non-lethal laser dazzler developed by the Air Force Research Laboratory's Directed Energy Directorate, U.S. Department of Defense.
Its purpose is to temporarily disorient and blind a target.
Blinding laser weapons have been tested in the past, but were banned under the 1995 UN Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons, which the United States acceded to on 21 January 2009.
The PHASR rifle, a low-intensity laser, is not prohibited under this regulation, as the blinding effect is intended to be temporary.

It also uses a two-wavelength laser.
The PHASR was tested at Kirtland Air Force Base, part of the Air Force Research Laboratory Directed Energy Directorate in New Mexico.

====
Blinding laser weapons ====
Several nations developed blinding laser weapons and they were allegedly used during War in Donbass by Russia.

====
Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) ====
The Long Range Acoustic Device (LRAD) is an acoustic hailing device developed by LRAD Corporation to send messages and warning tones over longer distances or at higher volume than normal loudspeakers.
LRAD systems are used for long-range communications in a variety of applications including as a means of non-lethal, non-kinetic crowd control.

Though they have been called "sonic weapons", LRADs are not inherently for military use.

The round black device on top of the New York City police Hummer is an LRAD.

According to the manufacturer's specifications, the systems weigh from 15 to 320 pounds (6.8 to 145.1 kg) and can emit sound in a 30°- 60° beam at 2.5 kHz.
The manufacturer also produces systems for public address and mass notification use that broadcast 360°.
=== Safety and legal status ===
In the United States, the University of Texas-Austin Institute for Advanced Technology (IAT) conducts basic research to advance electrodynamics and hypervelocity physics related to electromagnetic weapons.
Although generally considered 'non-lethal weapons', electromagnetic weapons do pose health threats to humans.

In fact, "non-lethal weapons can sometimes be deadly.
"United
States Department of Defense policy explicitly states that non-lethal weapons "shall not be required to have a zero probability of producing fatalities or permanent injuries."

Although a Human Effects Advisory Panel was established in 1998 to provide independent assessment on human effects, data, and models for the use of 'non-lethal weapons' on the general population, the TECOM Technology Symposium in 1997 concluded on non-lethal weapons: "Determining the target effects on personnel is the greatest challenge to the testing community," primarily because  "the potential of injury and death severely limits human tests."

However, "directed energy weapons that target the central nervous system and cause neurophysiological disorders" may violate the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons of 1980.
And weapons that go beyond non-lethal intentions and cause "superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering" could violate the Protocol
I to the Geneva Conventions of 1977.
"
Safety and evaluation of the physical and psychological effects of the long-term or repetitive uses of the pain-inducing non-lethal weapons on humans have not been well understood or studied in any great details.
Any such studies require explicit consent of all participants so as not to violate the UN Convention against torture and other cruelties.

==
Misuse ==
Pepper spray is one non-lethal weapon alleged to have been misused by American police.
In two incidents in California in 1997, police swabbed pepper spray directly into the eyes of protesters.
Amnesty International condemned these actions, and claimed that they were likely a violation of the 1984 United Nations Convention Against Torture.

==
Terrorism concerns ==
Loren Thompson, chief operating officer of the Lexington Institute in Virginia states that: "The relevant (electromagnetic weapon) technology is well within the grasp of some countries and transnational terrorist groups", and further states that U.S. hardware is susceptible to microwave and other directed-energy weapons.
Suitable materials and tools to create electromagnetic weapons are commonly available.

"The threat of electromagnetic bomb proliferation is very real."

==
See also ==
== Notes ==


==
External links ==
Council on Foreign Relations Independent Task Force Report on Nonlethal Weapons
usmilitary.about.com
(Non-lethal weapons)
Weapons of Mass Protection, Air Force Journal article on Nonlethal Weapons.

The Sunshine Project, 'Non-Lethal' Incapacitating (Bio)Chemical Weapons (website)
Centre for Conflict Resolution, Department of Peace Studies, Bradford Non-Lethal Weapons Research Project (BNLWRP), Research Report No.
8
Time - Beyond the rubber bullet
Less-Lethal.org -
Non Lethal and Less Lethal Law Enforcement Technologies.
Hosted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP).

US Deptment of Defense Non-Lethal Weapons Program.
The following is a tabulation of United States military casualties of war.

==
Overview
==
Note: "Total casualties" includes wounded, combat and non-combat deaths but not missing in action. "
Deaths – other" includes all non-combat deaths including those from bombing, massacres, disease, suicide, and murder.

== Wars ranked by U.S. combat deaths ==


==
Wars ranked by total number of U.S. military deaths ==
"Deaths per day" is the total number of Americans killed in military service, divided by the number of days between the dates of the commencement and end of hostilities.

"Deaths per population" is the total number of deaths in military service, divided by the U.S. population of the year indicated.

== Notes ==
a. ^
Revolutionary War:
All figures from the Revolutionary War are rounded estimates.
Commonly cited casualty figures provided by the Department of Defense are 4,435 killed and 6,188 wounded, although the original government report that generated these numbers warned that the totals were incomplete and far too low.
In 1974, historian Howard Peckham and a team of researchers came up with a total of 6,824 killed in action and 8,445 wounded.
Because of incomplete records, Peckham estimated that this new total number of killed in action was still about 1,000 too low.
Military historian John Shy subsequently estimated the total killed in action at 8,000, and argued that the number of wounded was probably far higher, about 25,000.
The "other" deaths are primarily from disease, including prisoners who died on British prison ships.

b. ^
Other Actions Against Pirates:
Includes actions fought in the West Indies, the Greek Isles, off of Louisiana, China and Vietnam.

Other deaths resulted from disease and accidents.

c. ^
Civil War:
All Union casualty figures, and Confederate killed in action, from The Oxford Companion to American Military History except where noted (NPS figures).
estimate of total Confederate dead from James M. McPherson, Battle Cry of Freedom (Oxford University Press, 1988), 854.
Newer estimates place the total death toll at 650,000 to 850,000.
148 of the Union
dead were U.S.
Marines.ca.
^
Civil War April 2, 2012
Doctor David Hacker after extensive research offered new casualty rates higher by 20%; his work has been accepted by the academic community and is represented  here.

d. ^
World War
I figures include expeditions in North Russia and Siberia.
See also World War
I casualties
da.^
World War II Note: as of March 31, 1946 there were an estimated 286,959 dead of whom 246,492 were identified; of 40,467 who were unidentified 18,641 were located {10,986 reposed in military cemeteries and 7,655 in isolated graves} and 21,826 were reported not located.
As of April 6, 1946 there were 539 American Military Cemeteries which contained 241,500 dead.
Note the American Battle Monuments Commission database for the World War II reports that in 18 ABMC Cemeteries total of 93,238 buried and 78,979 missing and that "The World War II database on this web site contains the names of those buried at our cemeteries, or listed as Missing in Action, buried or lost at sea.
It does not contain the names of the 233,174 Americans returned to the United States for burial..."
Similarly, the ABMC Records do not cover inter-war deaths such as the Port Chicago disaster in which 320 died.
As of June 2018 total of US World War II casualties listed as MIA is 72,823e.
^
Korean War:
Note:
gives Dead as 33,746 and Wounded as 103, 284 and MIA as 8,177.
The American Battle Monuments Commission database for the Korean War reports that "The Department of Defense reports that 54,246 American service men and women lost their lives during the Korean War.
This includes all losses worldwide.
Since the Korean War Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C. honors all U.S. Military who lost their lives during the War, we have tried to obtain the names of those who died in other areas besides Korea during the period June 27, 1950 to July 27, 1954, one year after the Korean Armistice...".
{
For a breakdown of Worldwide casualties of 54,246 see The Korean War educator at  gives figures as In-theatre/non theater}
After their retreat in 1950, dead Marines and soldiers were buried at a temporary gravesite near Hungnam, North Korea.
During "Operation Glory" which occurred from July to November 1954 the dead of each side were exchanged; remains of 4,167 US soldiers/Marines were exchanged for 13,528 North Korean/Chinese dead.
After "Operation Glory" 416 Korean War "unknowns" were buried in the Punchbowl Cemetery.
According to a DPMO white paper.
1,394 names were also transmitted during "Operation Glory" from the Chinese and North Koreans, of whom 858 names proved to be correct; of the 4,167 returned remains were found to be 4,219 individuals of whom 2,944 were found to be Americans of whom all but 416 were identified by name.
Of 239 Korean War unaccounted for: 186 not associated with Punchbowl unknowns (176 were identified and of the remaining 10 cases 4 were non-Americans of Asiatic descent; one was British; 3 were identified and 2 cases unconfirmed); Of 10 Korean War "Punchbowl Unknowns" 6 were identified.
The W.A. Johnson listing of 496 POWs – including 25 civilians – who died in North Korea can be found here and thereListed as MIA:
7,683ea.
^
Cold War – Korea and Vietnam and
Middle East-additional US Casualties:

North Korea {Cold War} 1959: 1968–69; 1976; 1984 killed 41;
Wounded 5; 82 captured/released.

USS Liberty incident 1967 killed 34;
Wounded 173 by Israeli armed forces
Vietnam War prior to 1964-US Casualties were Laos – 2 killed in 1954; and Vietnam 1946–1954 – 2 killed see;f.
^
Iraq War.
See also Casualties of the Iraq War.
Sources:
.g.
^  Afghanistan.
Casualties include those that occurred in Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Guantanamo Bay (Cuba), Jordan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Philippines, Seychelles, Sudan, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Yemen.

== See also ==
Military history of the United States
World War II casualties


==
References ==


==
External links ==
American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists and Statistics Congressional Research Service
Louisiana State University's statistical summary of major American wars
Washington Post database of all U.S. service-member casualties
CNN list of U.S. Casualties in Iraq since 2003.

Complete list of U.S. Casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003.

Iraq Casualties
Navy and Marine death tolls
Iraq and Afghanistan Casualty Count
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to science fiction:
Science fiction – a genre of fiction dealing with the impact of imagined innovations in science or technology, often in a futuristic setting.
or depicting space exploration.
Exploring the consequences of such innovations is the traditional purpose of science fiction, making it a "literature of ideas".

==
What is science fiction?
==
Definitions of science fiction:
Science fiction includes such a wide range of themes and subgenres that it is notoriously difficult to define.
Accordingly, there have been many definitions offered.
Science fiction is a type of:

Fiction – form of narrative which deals, in part or in whole, with events that are not factual, but rather, imaginary and invented by its author(s).
Although fiction often describes a major branch of literary work, it is also applied to theatrical, cinematic, and musical work.

Genre fiction – fictional works (novels, short stories)
written with the intent of fitting into a specific literary genre in order to appeal to readers and fans already familiar with that genre.
Also known as popular fiction.

Speculative fiction
Genre – science fiction is a genre of fiction.

== Genres of science fiction ==
Science fiction genre – while science fiction is a genre of fiction, a science fiction genre is a subgenre within science fiction.
Science fiction may be divided along any number of overlapping axes.
Gary K. Wolfe's Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy identifies over 30 subdivisions of science fiction, not including science fantasy (which is a mixed genre).

===
Science ===
Genres concerning the emphasis, accuracy, and type of science described include:

Hard science fiction—a particular emphasis on scientific detail and/or accuracy.

Mundane science fiction—a subgenre of hard sci-fi which sets stories on Earth or the Solar System using current or plausible technology.

Soft science fiction—focus on human characters and their relations and feelings, often exploring psychology or sociology, while de-emphasizing the details of technological hardware and physical laws.
In some cases, science and technology are depicted without much concern for accuracy.

===
Characteristics ===
Themes related to science, technology, space and the future, as well as characteristic plots or settings include:

Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic science fiction
Biopunk — centered around  biotechnology and genetic engineering in general, biopunk uses some both (post)cyberpunk elements and post-modernist prose to describe a typically dystopian world of biohackers, man-made viruses, mutations, designer babies, artificial life forms, bio-genetic engineered human-animal hybrids and bio-genetically manipulated humans.

Cyberpunk — uses elements from the hard-boiled detective novel, film noir, Japanese anime, and post-modernist prose to describe the nihilistic, underground side of a cybernetic society
Climate fiction — emphasizes effects of anthropogenic climate change and global warming at the end of the Holocene era
Dying Earth science fiction
Military science fiction
Steampunk —
denotes works set in (or strongly inspired by) an era when steam power was still widely used — usually the 19th century, and often set in Victorian England — though with otherwise high technology or other science fiction elements
Time travel
Space colonization
Space opera — emphasizes romantic adventure, exotic settings, and larger-than-life characters
Social science fiction — concerned less with technology and more with sociological speculation about human society
Mundane science fiction


===
Movements ===
Genres concerning politics, philosophy, and identity movements include:

Christian science fiction
Feminist science fiction
Gay/lesbian science fiction
Libertarian science fiction


===
Eras ===
Genres concerning the historical era of creation and publication include:

Scientific romance — an archaic name for what is now known as the science fiction genre, mostly associated with the early science fiction of the United Kingdom.

Pulp science fiction
Golden Age of Science Fiction — a period of the 1940s during which the science fiction genre gained wide public attention and many classic science fiction stories were published.

New Wave science fiction — characterised by a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content.

Cyberpunk — noted for its focus on "high tech, low life" and taking its name from the combination of cybernetics and punk.

===
Combinations ===
Genres that combine two different fiction genres or use a different fiction genre's mood or style include: 

Alternate history science fiction—fiction set in a world in which history has diverged from history as it is generally known
Comic science fiction
Science fiction erotica
Adventure science fiction—science fiction adventure is similar to many genres
Gothic science fiction—a subgenre of science fiction that involves gothic conventions
New Wave science fiction—characterized by a high degree of experimentation, both in form and in content
Science fantasy—a mixed genre of story which contains some science fiction and some fantasy elements
Science fiction opera—a mixture of opera and science fiction involving empathic themes
Science fiction romance—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and romance genres
Science fiction mystery—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and mystery genres, encompassing Occult detective fiction and science fiction detectives
Science fiction Western—fiction which has elements of both the science fiction and Western genres
Space Western—a subgenre of science fiction that transposes themes of American Western books and film to a backdrop of futuristic space frontiers.

Spy-fi a subgenre of spy fiction that includes some science fiction.

==
Related genres ==
Fantasy
Science fantasy
Mystery fiction
Horror
fiction
Slipstream fiction
Utopian and dystopian fiction
Superhero fiction
==
Science fiction by country ==
Australian science fiction
Bengali science fiction
Canadian science fiction
Chilean science fiction
Chinese science fiction
Croatian science fiction
Czech science fiction
Estonian science fiction
French science fiction
Japanese science fiction
Norwegian science fiction
Polish science fiction
Romanian science fiction
Russian science fiction
Serbian science fiction
Spanish science fiction


==
History of science fiction ==
History of science fiction films
==
Elements of science fiction ==


===
Character elements in science fiction ===
List of stock characters in science fiction
Extraterrestrials in fiction


===
Plot elements in science fiction ===


====
Plot devices in science fiction ====
Hyperspace


===
Setting elements in science fiction ===
The setting is the environment in which the story takes place.

Elements of setting may include culture (and its technologies), period (including the future), place (geography/astronomy), nature (physical laws, etc.),
and hour.

Setting elements characteristic of science fiction include:


====
Place ====
Parallel universes
Planets in science fiction
Hyperspace
Slipstream
Earth in science
fiction


====
Cultural setting elements ====
Political ideas in science fiction
Utopian and dystopian fiction
World government in science fiction
World government in fiction
Religious ideas in science fiction
List of religious ideas in science fiction
Religion in speculative fiction
Xenology


====
Sex and gender in science fiction ====
Gender in science fiction
Sex in science fiction
Pregnancy in science fiction
LGBT themes in speculative fiction


=====
Technology in science fiction =====
Computer technology
Artificial intelligence in fiction
List of fictional computers
Mind
uploading in fiction
Transportation
Flying car (aircraft)
Space dock
Weapons in science fiction
Resizing
Simulated reality in fiction
Space warfare in fiction
Weapons in science fiction


===
Themes in science fiction ===
First contact


===
Style elements in science fiction ===
==
Works of science fiction ==


===
Science fiction art ===
List of science fiction and fantasy artists
Science fiction comics
===
Science fiction games ===


====
Science fiction computer games ====


====
Science fiction role-playing games ====


===
Science fiction literature ===
Science fiction comics
Speculative poetry
====
Science fiction novels ===
=
List of science fiction novels


====
Science fiction
short stories ====
List of science fiction short stories


=====
Venues for science fiction
short stories =====
Science fiction magazine
Science fiction fanzine


===
Science fiction video ===
Science fiction film
Science fiction on television
List of science fiction television programs
List of science fiction sitcoms
U.S. television science fiction
British television science fiction
===
Science fiction radio ===
Science fiction radio programs
==
Information sources ==
Baen Free Library
Internet Speculative Fiction DataBase
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America
The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction
==
Science fiction in academia ==
Science fiction studies
New Wave science fiction
Science in science fiction
Materials science in science
fiction
Science fiction and fantasy journals
Science fiction libraries and museums


==
Science-fiction subculture ==
Science fiction conventions
List of science fiction conventions
List of fan conventions by date of founding
Science fiction fandom
Science fiction fanzine
Science fiction organizations
==
Science-fiction awards ==
The science fiction genre has a number of recognition awards for authors, editors, and illustrators.

Awards are usually granted annually.

===
International awards ===
Major awards given in chronological order:

since 1953:
Hugo Award for general science fiction
since 1965:
Nebula Award for general science fiction
since 1966:
Edward E. Smith Memorial Award (the Skylark)
since 1970:
BSFA Award for British science fiction
since 1970:
Seiun Award for Japanese science fiction
since 1971: Locus Award for science fiction, fantasy, and new authors (separate awards)
since 1972:
Saturn Award for film and television science fiction
since 1973:
John W. Campbell Memorial Award for Best Science Fiction Novel
since 1978:
Rhysling Award for best science fiction poetry, given by the Science Fiction Poetry Association
since 1982:
Philip K. Dick Award
since 1987:
Arthur C. Clarke Award
since 1987: Theodore Sturgeon Memorial Award for best short science fiction
since 1996:
Méliès d'Or for science fiction, fantasy and horror films
since 2003:
Robert A. Heinlein Award
since 2006: Parsec Award
since 2016: Dragon Awards
since 2017:
Nommo Awards


===
Nationality-specific awards ===
AustralianAurealis
Award—Australian
Chandler Award—for contributions to Australian Science fiction
Ditmar Award—for SF by AustraliansBritishKitschies—for speculative fiction novels published in the UKCanadianConstellation Awards—for the best SF/fantasy film or television works released in Canada
Prix Aurora Awards—for Canadian science fiction
Sunburst Award— Juried award for Canadian science fictionChineseThe Galaxy Awards (银河奖)—given by magazine Science Fiction World for Chinese SF&FCroatianSFERA Award—given by SFera, a Croatian SF societyDutchPaul Harland Prize—for Dutch SFEstonianStalker Award—for the best Estonian SF novel, given out on Estcon by Eesti Ulmeühing, the Estonian SF society.
FinnishTähtivaeltaja Award—for the best SF novel released in FinlandFrenchGrand Prix de l'Imaginaire—France since 1974
Prix Jules-Verne—France 1927–1933 and 1958–1963
Prix Tour-Apollo Award—France 1972-1990GermanKurd-Laßwitz-Preis—German SF awardIsraeliGeffen Award—Israel since 1999ItalianPremio Urania—for Italian SFJapaneseNihon SF Taisho Award—Japan since 1980New
ZealanderSir Julius Vogel Award—for SF by New ZealandersPacific NorthwesternEndeavour Award—for SF by Pacific Northwest
authorPolishJanusz A. Zajdel Award—award of Polish fandom
Nautilus Award—Polish awardRomanianSRSFF Award—
RomâniaRussianBig Roscon award for outstanding contribution to science fictionTurkishTBD Science Fiction Story Award—
Turkey


===
Themed awards ===
(Chronological)
Prometheus Award—best libertarian SF—since 1979
Lambda Literary Award—since 1988
Tiptree Award—since 1991
Golden Duck Awards—best children's SF—1992-2017
Sidewise Award for Alternate History—since 1995
Gaylactic Spectrum Awards—since 1999
Emperor Norton Award—San Francisco—2003-2011
Science Fiction & Fantasy Translation
Awards—2011-2014


===
New artists /
first works
awards ===
Compton Crook Award—for best first novel
Jack Gaughan Award—for best emerging artist
John W. Campbell Award—for best new writer
Writers of the Future—contest for new authors


===
Career awards ===
Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master Award—associated with the Nebula


==
People influential in science fiction ==


===
Creators of science fiction ===


====
Science fiction artists ===
=
List of science fiction and fantasy artists


====
Science fiction filmmakers ====


====
Creators of science fiction literature ====
List of science fiction authors
Women science fiction authors
List of science fiction editors


===
Science fiction scholars ===
Brian Aldiss
Isaac Asimov—Asimov on Science Fiction
Brian Attebery
Everett F. Bleiler
John W. Campbell
John Clute—co-editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (with Peter Nicholls)
Samuel R. Delany
Hugo Gernsback—founder of the pioneering science fiction magazine Amazing Stories, and the person who the Hugo Awards are named after.

David Hartwell
Larry McCaffery
Judith Merril
Sam Moskowitz
Peter Nicholls—co-editor of The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (with John Clute)
Alexei Panshin
David Pringle—editor of Foundation and Interzone; author of Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels
Andrew Sawyer
Dorothy Scarborough
Brian Stableford
Darko Suvin
Gary K. Wolfe


==
Franchises ==
There are a number of science fiction media franchises of this type, typically encompassing media such as cinema films, TV shows, toys, and even theme parks related to the content.
The highest-grossing science fiction franchise is Star Wars.

Space science fiction franchises:
Alien (6 films since 1979 and 2 Alien vs Predator films since 2004)
Babylon 5 (2 television series, 7 TV movies since 1993)
Battlestar Galactica (5 television series and two TV movies since 1979)
Doctor
Who (TV series since 1963, 2 Dr.
Who films since 1965, and 1 1996 television film, five spinoff TV shows (K-9 and Company, The Sarah Jane Adventures, Torchwood, K-9 and Class), video games and hundreds of books)
Dune (23 novels since 1965, 1 film in 1984, 3 comics since 1984, 2 TV series since 2000)
Godzilla (36 films since 1954 and 3 TV series since 1978)
Halo (since 2001, started from video game)
Independence Day (2 films since 1996)
Legend of the Galactic Heroes (2 novel series since 1983 and 3 anime OVA series since 1988)
Macross (4 anime TV series since 1982, 6 anime films since 1984, 3 manga series since 1994)
Mass Effect (since 2007, started from video game)
Men in Black (4 films since 1997 and animated TV series)
Mobile Suit Gundam (21 anime TV series since 1979, 7 anime films since 1988, successful model kits since 1980)
Neon Genesis Evangelion (1 anime TV series since 1995 and 5 anime films since 1997)
Planet of the Apes (9 films since 1968)
Predator (4 films since 1987 and 2 Alien vs Predator films since 2004)
Robotech (1 anime TV series and 5 anime films since 1985)
Space Battleship Yamato (5 anime TV series since 1974 and 7 anime films since 1977)
Space Odyssey (2 short stories since 1954, 2 films since 1968, 4 novels since 1968, 1 1972 book)
Star Trek (7 live-action TV series since 1966, 2 animated TV series, 6 Original Series films since 1979, 4 Next Generation films since 1994 and 3 reboot films since 2009)
Star Wars (9 episodic "Saga" films since 1977, 1 1978 TV film, 2 Ewok films since 1985, 1 2008
The Clone Wars film, 2 "Anthology" films since 2016, 3 canon animated TV series since 2008, 1 canon live-action TV series since 2019, 3 Legends TV series since 1985)
Stargate (4 TV series and three theater film since 1994)
The Expanse (8 novels and 1 television series since 2011)
Transformers (28 TV series since 1984, 4 animated films since 1986, 5 live action films since 2007, started from toy line)
Ultra Series (34 TV series since 1966 and 29 films since 1967)


== See also ==
List of science fiction themes
Outline of fiction
Outline of fantasy
Timeline of science fiction


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Science Fiction (Bookshelf) at Project Gutenberg
SF Hub—resources for science-fiction research, created by the University of Liverpool Library
Science fiction fanzines (current and historical) online
Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America—their "Suggested Reading" page
Science Fiction Museum & Hall of Fame
Science Fiction Research Association
Science Fiction at the Internet Archive
(in Russian)
Ковтун Е. Н. Художественный
вымысел в
литературе 20 века.
—
Высшая школа, 2008. —
1500 экз.
—
ISBN 978-5-06-005661-7.

(in Russian) Жанры — рубрика
журнала «
Мир фантастики»
(in Russian)
Вячеслав Бабышев Внешние и
внутренние жанры фантастики //
Уральский следопыт.
—
2014.
—
№ 11 (689).
—
С. 81-84.

(in Russian)
Жанры фантастики на Фантлабе.

(in Russian)
Классификация фантастики на сайте «Фэнта Зиландия».
A right-wing authoritarian military dictatorship ruled Chile for seventeen years, between September 11, 1973 and March 11, 1990.
The dictatorship was established after the democratically-elected socialist government of Salvador Allende was overthrown in a US-backed coup d'état on 11 September 1973.
During this time, the country was ruled by a military junta headed by General Augusto Pinochet.
The military utilized the breakdown of democracy and the economic crisis that took place during Allende's presidency to justify its seizure of power.
The dictatorship presented its mission as a "national reconstruction.
"
The coup was the result of multiple forces, including pressure from conservative and women's groups, certain political parties, union strikes and other domestic unrest, as well as international factors.
According to an article written by lifelong CIA operative Jack Devine, although it was widely reported that the CIA was directly involved in orchestrating and carrying out the coup, subsequently released sources suggest a much reduced role of the US government.
The regime was characterized by the systematic suppression of political parties and the persecution of dissidents to an extent unprecedented in the history of Chile.
Overall, the regime left over 3,000 dead or missing, tortured tens of thousands of prisoners, and drove an estimated 200,000 Chileans into exile.
The dictatorship's effects on Chilean political and economic life continue to be felt.
Two years after its ascension neoliberal economic reforms were implemented, in sharp contrast to Allende's leftist policies, advised by a team of free-market economists educated in US universities known as the Chicago Boys.
Later, in 1980, the regime replaced the Chilean Constitution of 1925 with a new constitution.
This established a series of provisions that would eventually lead to the 1988 Chilean national plebiscite on October 5 of that year.

In that referendum, the Chilean people denied Pinochet a new mandate, opening the way for the reestablishment of democracy in 1990.
Consequently, democratic presidential elections were held the following year.
The military dictatorship ended in 1990 with the election of Christian-Democrat candidate Patricio Aylwin.
However, the military remained out of civilian control for several years after the junta itself had lost power.

== Rise to power ==
There has been a large amount of debate over the extent of US government involvement in destabilising the Allende government.
Recently declassified documents show evidence of communication between the Chilean military and US officials, suggesting covert US involvement in assisting the military's rise to power.
Some key figures in the Nixon administration, such as Henry Kissinger, used the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) to mount a major destabilization campaign.
As the CIA revealed in 2000, "In the 1960s and the early 1970s, as part of the US Government policy to try to influence events in Chile, the CIA undertook specific covert action projects in Chile ... to discredit Marxist-leaning political leaders, especially Dr. Salvador Allende, and to strengthen and encourage their civilian and military opponents to prevent them from assuming power.
"
The CIA worked with right-wing Chilean politicians, military personnel, and journalists to undermine socialism in Chile.
One reason for this was financial, as many US businesses had investments in Chile, and Allende's socialist policies included the nationalization of Chile's major industries.
Another reason was the propagandized fear of the spread of communism, which was particularly important in the context of the Cold War.
The rationale was that US feared that Allende would promote the spreading of Soviet influence in their ‘backyard’.
However, the fact that Allende's peaceful path was toward Socialism—not Communism—and because of the vested interests of the U.S. copper industry in Chile, the rationale had more to do with U.S. financial interests.
As early as 1963, the U.S. via the CIA and U.S. multinationals such as ITT intervened in Chilean politics using a variety of tactics and millions of dollars to interfere with elections, ultimately helping plan the coup against Allende.
On 15 April 1973, workers from the El Teniente mining camp had ceased working, demanding higher wages.
The strike lasted 76 days and cost the government severely in lost revenues.
One of the strikers, Luis Bravo Morales, was shot dead in Rancagua city.
On June 29, the Blindados No.
2 tank regiment under the command of Colonel Roberto Souper, attacked La Moneda, Chile's presidential palace.
Instigated by the anti-Marxist militia Patria y Libertad ("country and freedom"), the armoured cavalry soldiers hoped other units would be inspired to join them.
Instead, armed units led by generals Carlos Prats and Augusto Pinochet quickly put down the coup attempt.
In late July, 40,000 truckers, squeezed by price controls and rising costs, tied up transportation in a nationwide strike that lasted 37 days, costing the government US$6 million a day.
Two weeks before the coup, public dissatisfaction with rising prices and food shortages led to protests like the one at the Plaza de la Constitución which had been dispersed with tear gas.
Allende also clashed with Chile's largest circulation newspaper El Mercurio.
Tax-evasion charges were trumped up against the newspaper and its director arrested.
The Allende government found it impossible to control inflation, which grew to more than 300 percent by September, further dividing Chileans over the Allende government and its policies.

Upper-
and middle-class right-wing women also played an important role in destabilising the Allende government.
They co-ordinated two prominent opposition groups called El Poder Feminino ("female power"), and Solidaridad, Orden y Libertad ("solidarity, order, and freedom").
These women who opposed Allende felt as though their fundamental values of family and motherhood were being threatened by Marxism.
Furthermore, the economic chaos that Allende's regime was seeing meant that there were struggles to buy food and thus look after their families.
Allende's regime therefore threatened the most important aspect of a woman's role.
These women used many tactics to destabilise the Allende regime.
They carried out the ‘March of the Empty Pots and Pans’ in December 1971, and emasculated the military.
These women criticised the military for being ‘cowards’ for not getting rid of Allende, arguing that they were not carrying out their role of protecting Chilean women.

On August 22, 1973, the Chamber of Deputies passed, by a vote of 81 to 47, a resolution calling for President Allende to respect the constitution.
The measure failed to obtain the two-thirds majority in the Senate constitutionally required to convict the president of abuse of power, but the resolution still represented a challenge to Allende's legitimacy.
The military were staunch supporters of the constitution and therefore believed that Allende had lost legitimacy as Chile's leader.
As a result, reacting to widespread public demand for intervention, the military began planning for a military coup which would ultimately take place on September 11, 1973.
Contrary to popular belief, Pinochet was not the mastermind behind the coup.
It was, in fact, naval officers who first decided that military intervention was necessary to remove President Allende from power.
Army generals were unsure of Pinochet's allegiances, as he had given no prior indication of disloyalty to Allende, and thus was only informed of these plans on the evening of 8 September, just three days before the coup took place.
On 11 September 1973, the military launched a coup, with troops surrounding La Moneda Palace.
Allende died that day of suspected suicide.

The military installed themselves in power as a Military Government Junta, composed of the heads of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Carabineros (police).
Once the Junta was in power, General Augusto Pinochet soon consolidated his control over the government.
Since he was the commander-in-chief of the oldest branch of the military forces (the Army), he was made the titular head of the junta, and soon after President of Chile.
Once the junta had taken over, the United States immediately recognized the new regime and helped it consolidate power.

==
Dictatorship violence ==


===
Suppression of political activity ===
On September 13, the junta dissolved the Congress and outlawed or suspended all political activities in addition to suspending the 1925 constitution.
All political activity was declared "in recess".
The Government Junta immediately banned the socialist, Marxist and other leftist parties that had constituted former President Allende's Popular Unity coalition and began a systemic campaign of imprisonment, torture, harassment and/or murder against the perceived opposition.
Eduardo Frei, Allende's predecessor as president, initially supported the coup along with his Christian Democratic colleagues.
However, they later assumed the role of a loyal opposition to the military rulers.
Though they soon lost most of their influence they were subjected to the same treatment that the UP members had been before them.
During 1976–77, this repression even reached independent and Christian Democrat labour leaders who had supported the coup, several were exiled.
Christian Democrats like Radomiro Tomic were jailed or forced into exile.

Retired military personnel were named rectors of universities and they carried out vast purges of suspected left-wing sympathisers.
With such strong repression, the Catholic church became the only public voice allowed within Chile.
By 1974, the Commission of Peace had established a large network to provide information to numerous organisations regarding human rights abuses in Chile.
As a result of this, Manuel Contreras, Director of DINA, threatened Cardinal Silva Henriquez that his safety could be at risk if the Church continued to interfere which in turn resulted in death threats and intimidation from agents of the regime.
A key provision of the new constitution of 1980 aimed at eliminating leftist factions, “outlawed the propagation of doctrines that attack the family or put forward a concept of society based on the class struggle”.
Pinochet maintained strict command over the armed forces thus he could depend on them to censor the media, arrest opposition leaders and repress demonstrations.
This was accompanied by a complete shutting down of civil society with curfews, prohibition of public assembly, press blackouts, draconian censorship and universities were purged.

===
Human rights violations ===
The military rule was characterized by systematic suppression of all political dissidence.
Scholars later described this as a "politicide" (or "political genocide").
Steve J. Stern spoke of a politicide to describe "a systematic project to destroy an entire way of doing and understanding politics and governance.
"Estimates of figures for victims of state violence vary.
Rudolph Rummel cited early figures of up to 30,000 people killed.
However, these high estimates have not held to later scrutiny.

In 1996, human rights activists announced they had presented another 899 cases of people who had disappeared or been killed during the dictatorship, taking the total of known victims to 3,197, of whom 2,095 were reported killed and 1,102 missing.
Following the return to democracy with the Concertacion government, the Rettig Commission, a multipartisan effort by the Aylwin administration to discover the truth about the human-rights violations, listed a number of torture and detention centers (such as Colonia Dignidad, the ship Esmeralda or Víctor Jara Stadium), and found that at least 3,200 people were killed or disappeared by the regime.
Later, the 2004 Valech Report confirmed the figure of 3,200 deaths but reduced the estimated number of disappearances.
It tells of some 28,000 arrests in which the majority of those detained were incarcerated and in a great many cases tortured.
In 2011, the Chilean government officially recognized 36,948 survivors of torture and political imprisonment, as well as 3,095 people killed or disappeared at the hands of the military government.
The worst violence occurred within the first three months of the coup, with the number of suspected leftists killed or "disappeared" (desaparecidos) reaching several thousand.
In the days immediately following the coup, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs informed Henry Kissinger that the National Stadium was being used to hold 5,000 prisoners.
Between the day of the coup and November 1973, as many as 40,000 political prisoners were held there and as late as 1975, the CIA was still reporting that up to 3,811 were imprisoned there.
1,850 of them were killed, another 1,300 are still missing to this day.
Some of the most famous cases of desaparecidos are Charles Horman, a U.S. citizen who was killed during the coup itself, Chilean songwriter Víctor Jara, and the October 1973 Caravan of Death (Caravana de la Muerte) wherein at least 70 people were killed.

Leftist guerrilla groups and their sympathizers were also hit hard during the military regime.
The MIR commander, Andrés Pascal Allende, has stated that the Marxist guerrillas lost 1,500–2,000 fighters that were either killed or had simply disappeared.
Among the people that were killed or had disappeared during the military regime were at least 663 MIR guerrillas.
The Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front stated that 49 FPMR guerrillas were killed and hundreds tortured.

According to the Latin American Institute on Mental Health and Human Rights, 200,000 people were affected by "extreme trauma"; this figure includes individuals executed, tortured, forcibly exiled, or having their immediate relatives put under detention.
316 women have reported to having been subjected to rape by soldiers and agents of the dictatorship, however the number is believed to be much larger due to the preference of many women to avoid talking about this.
Twenty pregnant women have declared to have suffered abortion due to torture.
In the words of Alejandra Matus detained women were doubly punished, first for being "leftists" and second for not conforming to their ideal of women usually being called "perra" (lit.
"
bitch").

In addition to the violence experienced within Chile, many people fled from the regime, while others have been forcibly exiled, with some 30,000 Chileans being deported from the country.
particularly to Argentina, however, Operation Condor, which linked South American dictatorships together against political opponents, meant that even these exiles could be subject to violence.
Some 20,000–40,000 Chilean exiles were holders of passports stamped with the letter "L" (which stood for lista nacional), identifying them as persona non grata and had to seek permission before entering the country.
According to a study in Latin American Perspectives, at least 200,000 Chileans (about 2% of Chile's 1973 population) were forced into exile.
Additionally, hundreds of thousands left the country in the wake of the economic crises that followed the military coup during the 1970s and 1980s.
In 2003, an article published by the International Committee of the Fourth International claimed that "Of a population of barely 11 million, more than 4,000 were executed or 'disappeared,' hundreds of thousands were detained and tortured, and almost a million fled the country.
"There were also internal exiles who due to a lack of resources could not escape abroad.
In the 1980s a few left-wing sympathisers hid in Puerto Gala and Puerto Gaviota, Patagonian fishing communities with a reputation of lawlessness.
There they were joined by delinquents who feared torture or death by the authorities.
Several scholars including Paul Zwier, Peter Winn and human rights organizations have characterized the dictatorship as a police state exhibiting "repression of public liberties, the elimination of political exchange, limiting freedom of speech, abolishing the right to strike, freezing wages."
===
Fake combats ===
Starting in the late 1970s the regime began to use a tactic of faking combats, usually known by its Spanish name:
"falsos enfrentamientos".
This meant that dissidents who were murdered outright had their deaths reported in media as if they had occurred in a mutual exchange of gunfire.
This was done with support of journalists who "reported" the supposed events; in some cases, the fake combats were also staged.
The faked combat tactic ameliorated criticism of the regime implicitly putting culpability on the victim.
It is thought that the killing of the MIR leader Miguel Enríquez in 1974 could be an early case of a faked combat.
The faked combats reinforced the dictatorship narrative on the existence of an "internal war" which it used to justify its existence.
A particular fake combat event, lasting from September 8 to 9 1983, occurred when forces of the CNI lobbed grenades into a house, detonating the structure and killing the two men and a woman who were in the building.
The agents would later state, with help from the Chilean press, that the people in the house had fired on them previously from their cars and had escaped to the house.
The official story became that the three suspects had caused the explosion themselves by trying to burn and destroy incriminating evidence.
Such actions had the effect of justifying the existence of heavily armed forces in Chile.
And by extension, justified the dictatorship's conduct against such "violent" offenders.

==
Politics and power within the dictatorship ==


===
Pinochet–Leigh conflict ===
During the 1970s, junta members Gustavo Leigh and Augusto Pinochet clashed on several occasions, dating back from the beginning of the 1973 Chilean coup d'état.
Leigh criticized Pinochet for having joined the coup very late and then subsequently pretending to keep all power for himself.
In December 1974, Leigh opposed the proposal to name Pinochet president of Chile.
Leigh recalls from that moment that, "Pinochet was furious: he hit the board, broke the glass, injured his hand a little and bled.
Then, Merino and Mendoza told me I should sign, because if not the junta would split.
I signed.".
Leigh's primary concern was Pinochet's consolidation of the legislative and executive branches of government under the new government, in particular, Pinochet's decision to enact a plebiscite without formally alerting the other junta members.
Leigh, although a fervent supporter of the regime and hater of Marxist ideology, had already taken steps to separate the executive and legislative branches.
Pinochet was said to have been angered by Leigh's continued founding of a structure to divide the executive and legislative branches, eventually leading to Pinochet consolidating his power and Leigh being removed from the regime.
Leigh tried to fight his dismissal from the military and government junta but on July 24, 1978 his office was blocked by paratroopers.
In accordance with legal rights established by the junta government, its members could not be dismissed without evidence of impairment, hence Pinochet and his ally junta members had declared Leigh to be unfit.
Airforce General Fernando Matthei replaced Leigh as junta member.
Another dictatorship member critical of Pinochet, Arturo Yovane, was removed from his post as minister of mining in 1974 and appointed ambassador at the new Chilean embassy in Tehran.

===
Civilian collaborators ===
Over time the dictatorship incorporated civilians into the government.
Many of the Chicago boys joined the government, and Pinochet was largely sympathetic to them.
This sympathy, scholar Peter Winn explains, was indebted to the fact that the Chicago boys were technocrats and thus fitted Pinochet's self-image of being "above politics".
Pinochet was impressed by their assertiveness as well as by their links to the financial world of the United States.
Another group of civilians that collaborated extensively with the regime were the Gremialists, whose movement started in 1966 in the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile.
The founder of the Gremialist movement, lawyer Jaime Guzmán, never assumed any official position in the military dictatorship but he remained one of the closest collaborators with Pinochet, playing an important ideological role.
He participated in the design of important speeches of Pinochet, and provided frequent political and doctrinal advice and consultancy.
According to scholar Carlos Huneeus
the Gremialists and the Chicago Boys shared a long-term power strategy and were linked to each other in many ways.

In Chile, it has been very hard for the outside world to fully understand the role that everyday civilians played in keeping Pinochet's government afloat.
Partly because there has been scant research into the topic, partly because those who did help the regime from 1973 to 1990 have been unwilling to explore their own part.
One of the exemptions being an Univision interview with Osvaldo Romo Mena, a civilian torturer in 1995, recounting his actions.
Osvaldo Romo died while incarcerated for the murder of three political opponents.
For the most part, civilian collaborators with Pinochet have not broken the code of silence held by the military of the 1970s to 1990s.

===
Constitution of 1980 ===
Establishing a new constitution was a core issue for the dictatorship since it provided a mean of legitimization.
For this purpose the junta selected notable civilians willing to join the draft commission.
Dissidents to the dictatorship were not represented in the commission.
Chile's new constitution was approved in a national plebiscite held on September 11, 1980.

The constitution was approved by 67% of voters under a process which has been described as "highly irregular and undemocratic."
Critics of the 1980 Constitution argue that the constitution was created not to build a democracy, but to consolidate power within the central government while limiting the amount of sovereignty allowed to the people with little political presence.
The constitution came into force on March 11, 1981.

===
Removal of César Mendoza ===
In 1985, due to the Caso Degollados scandal ("case of the slit throats"), General César Mendoza resigned and was replaced by General Rodolfo Stange.
===
Youth policy ===
One of the first measures of the dictatorship was to set up a Secretaría Nacional de la Juventud (SNJ, National Youth Office).
This was done on October 28, 1973, even before the Declaration of Principles of the junta made in March 1974.
This was a way of mobilizing sympathetic elements of the civil society in support for the dictatorship.
SNJ was created by advise of Jaime Guzmán, being an example of the dictatorship adopting a Gremialist thought.
Some right-wing student union leaders like Andrés Allamand were skeptical to these attempts as they were moulded from above and gathered disparate figures such as Miguel Kast, Antonio Vodanovic and Jaime Guzmán.
Allamand and other young right-wingers also resented the dominance of the gremialist in SNJ, considering it a closed gremialist club.
From 1975 to 1980 the SNJ arranged a series of ritualized acts in cerro Chacarillas reminiscent of Francoist Spain.
The policy towards the sympathetic youth contrasted with the murder, surveillance and forced disappearances the dissident youth faced from the regime.
Most of the documents of the SNJ were reportedly destroyed by the dictatorship in 1988.
===
Women during the dictatorship ===
In 1962 under the presidency of Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Montalva, the women's section expanded pre-existing neighbourhood 'mothers' centres' (which initially helped women to purchase their own sewing machines) to help garner support for their social reforms amongst the poorer sections.
By the end of the 1960s, there were 8,000 centres involving 400,000 members.
Under Allende they were reorganised under the rubric National Confederation of Mothers' Centres
(Confederación Nacional de Centros de Madres, COCEMA) and leadership of his wife, Hortensia Bussi, to encourage community initiatives and implement their policies directed at women.

==
Opposition ==


===
Attacks on military personnel ===
One of the first armed groups to oppose the dictatorship was the MIR, Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria.
Immediately after the coup MIR-aligned elements in Neltume, southern Chile, unsuccesfully assaulted the local Carabino station.
Subsequently, MIR conducted several operations against the Pinochet government until the late 1980s.
MIR assassinated the head of the Army Intelligence school, Lieutenant Roger Vergara, with machine gun fire in the late 1970s.
The MIR also executed an attack on the base of the Chilean Secret Police (Central Nacional de Informaciones, CNI), as well as several attempts on the lives of carabineros officials and a judge of the Supreme Court in Chile.
Throughout the beginning years of the dictatorship the MIR was low-profile, but in August 1981 the MIR successfully killed the military leader of Santiago, General Carol Urzua Ibanez.
Attacks on Chilean military official increased in the early 1980s, with the MIR killing several security forces personnel on a variety of occasions through extensive use of planted bombs in police stations or machine gun useRepresenting a major shift in attitudes, the CPCh founded the FPMR on 14 December 1983, to engage in a violent armed struggle against the junta.
Most notably the organisation attempted to assassinate Pinochet on the 7 September 1986 under 'Operation XX Century' but were unsuccessful.
The group also assassinated the author of the 1980 Constitution, Jaime Guzmán on 1 April 1991.
They continued to operate throughout the 1990s, being designated as a terrorist organisation the U.S. Department of State and MI6, until supposedly ceasing to operate in 1999.

===
Church opposition to human rights violations ===
The Catholic Church, which at first expressed its gratitude to the armed forces for saving the country from the horrors of a "Marxist dictatorship" became, under the leadership of Cardinal Raúl Silva Henríquez, the most outspoken critic of the regime's social and economic policies.
The Catholic Church was symbolically and institutionally powerful within Chile.
Domestically, it was the second most powerful institution, behind Pinochet's government.
While the Church remained politically neutral, its opposition to the regime came in the form of human rights advocacy and through the social movements that it gave a platform to.
It achieved this through the establishment of the Cooperative Committee for Peace in Chile (COPACHI) and Vicariate of Solidarity.
COPACHI was founded by Cardinal Raul Silve Henriquez, Archbishop of Santiago, as an immediate response to the repression of the Pinochet regime.
It was apolitical in a spirit of collaboration rather than conflict with the government.
Pinochet developed suspicion of COPACHI, leading to its dissolution in late 1975.
In response Silva founded the Vicariate in its place.
Historian Hugo Fruhling's work highlights the multifaceted nature of Vicaria.
Through developments and education programs in the shantytown area of Santiago, the Vicaria had mobilised around 44,000 people to join campaigns by 1979.
The Church published a newsletter called Solidarity published in Chile and abroad, and supplied the public with information through radio stations.
Vicaria pursued a legal strategy of defending human rights, not a political strategy to re-democratise Chile.

===
Jornadas de Protesta Nacional ===
The Days of National Protest (Jornadas de Protesta Nacional) were days of civil demonstrations that periodically took place in Chile in the 1980s against the military junta.
They were characterized by street demonstrations in the downtown avenues of the city in the mornings, strikes during the day, and barricades and clashes in the periphery of the city throughout the night.
The protests were faced with increased government repression from 1984, with the biggest and last protest summoned in July 1986.
The protests changed the mentality of many Chileans, strengthening opposition organizations and movements in the 1988 plebiscite.

==
Economy and free market reforms ==
After the military took over the government in 1973, a period of dramatic economic changes began.
The Chilean economy was still faltering in the months following the coup.
As the military junta itself was not particularly skilled in remedying the persistent economic difficulties, it appointed a group of Chilean economists who had been educated in the United States at the University of Chicago.
Given financial and ideological support from Pinochet, the U.S., and international financial institutions, the Chicago Boys advocated laissez-faire, free-market, neoliberal, and fiscally conservative policies, in stark contrast to the extensive nationalization and centrally-planned economic programs supported by Allende.
Chile was drastically transformed from an economy isolated from the rest of the world, with strong government intervention, into a liberalized, world-integrated economy, where market forces were left free to guide most of the economy's decisions.
From an economic point of view, the era can be divided into two periods.
The first, from 1975 to 1982, corresponds to the period when most of the reforms were implemented.
The period ended with the international debt crisis and the collapse of the Chilean economy.
At that point, unemployment was extremely high, above 20 percent, and a large proportion of the banking sector had become bankrupt.
The following period was characterized by new reforms and economic recovery.
Some economists argue that the recovery was due to an about-face turnaround of Pinochet's free market policy, since he nationalized many of the same industries that were nationalized under Allende and fired the Chicago Boys from their government posts.

===
1975–81 ===
Chile's main industry, copper mining, remained in government hands, with the 1980 Constitution declaring them "inalienable," but new mineral deposits were open to private investment.
Capitalist involvement was increased, the Chilean pension system and healthcare were privatized, and Superior Education was also placed in private hands.
One of the junta's economic moves was fixing the exchange rate in the early 1980s, leading to a boom in imports and a collapse of domestic industrial production; this together with a world recession caused a serious economic crisis in 1982, where GDP plummeted by 14%, and unemployment reached 33%.
At the same time, a series of massive protests were organized, trying to cause the fall of the regime, which were efficiently repressed.

===
1982–83 ===
In 1982-1983 Chile witnessed a severe economic crises with a surge in unemployment and a meltdown of the financial sector.
16 out of 50 financial institutions faced bankruptcy.
In 1982 the two biggest banks were nationalized to prevent an even worse credit crunch.
In 1983 another five banks were nationalized and two banks had to be put under government supervision.
The central bank took over foreign debts.
Critics ridiculed the economic policy of the Chicago Boys as "Chicago way to socialism".
===
1984–90 ===
After the economic crisis, Hernán Büchi became Minister of Finance from 1985 to 1989, introducing a return to a free market economic policy.
He allowed the peso to float and reinstated restrictions on the movement of capital in and out of the country.
He deleted some bank regulations, and simplified and reduced the corporate tax.
Chile went ahead with privatizations, including public utilities and the re-privatization of companies that had briefly returned to government control during the 1982–83 crisis.
From 1984 to 1990, Chile's gross domestic product grew by an annual average of 5.9%, the fastest on the continent.
Chile developed a good export economy, including the export of fruits and vegetables to the northern hemisphere when they were out of season, and commanded high export prices.

===
Evaluation ===
Initially the economic reforms were internationally praised.
Milton Friedman wrote in his Newsweek column on 25 January 1982 about the Miracle of Chile.
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher credited Pinochet with bringing about a thriving, free-enterprise economy, while at the same time downplaying the junta's human rights record, condemning an "organised international Left who are bent on revenge."

With the economic crises of 1982 the "monetarist experiment" was widely regarded a failure.
The pragmatic economic policy after the crises of 1982 is appreciated for bringing constant economic growth.
It is questionable whether the radical reforms of the Chicago Boys contributed to post-1983 growth.
According to Ricardo Ffrench-Davis, economist and consultant of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, the 1982 crises as well as the success of the pragmatic economic policy after 1982 proves that the 1975–1981 radical economic policy of the Chicago Boys actually harmed the Chilean economy.

===
Social consequences ===
The economic policies espoused by the Chicago Boys and implemented by the junta initially caused several economic indicators to decline for Chile's lower classes.
Between 1970 and 1989, there were large cuts to incomes and social services.

Wages decreased by 8%.
Family allowances in 1989 were 28% of what they had been in 1970 and the budgets for education, health and housing had dropped by over 20% on average.
The massive increases in military spending and cuts in funding to public services coincided with falling wages and steady rises in unemployment, which averaged 26% during the worldwide economic slump of 1982–85 and eventually peaked at 30%.

In 1990, the LOCE act on education initiated the dismantlement of public education.
According to Communist Party of Chile member and economist Manuel Riesco Larraín:
Overall, the impact of neoliberal policies has reduced the total proportion of students in both public and private institutions in relation to the entire population, from 30 per cent in 1974 down to 25 per cent in 1990, and up only to 27 per cent today.
If falling birth rates have made it possible today to attain full coverage at primary and secondary levels, the country has fallen seriously behind at tertiary level, where coverage, although now growing, is still only 32 per cent of the age group.
The figure was twice as much in neighbouring Argentina and Uruguay, and even higher in developed countries—
South Korea attaining a record 98 per cent coverage.
Significantly, tertiary education for the upper-income fifth of the Chilean population, many of whom study in the new private universities, also reaches above 70 per cent.

The junta relied on the middle class, the oligarchy, domestic business, foreign corporations, and foreign loans to maintain itself.

Under Pinochet, funding of military and internal defence spending rose 120% from 1974 to 1979.

Due to the reduction in public spending, tens of thousands of employees were fired from other state-sector jobs.

The oligarchy recovered most of its lost industrial and agricultural holdings, for the junta sold to private buyers most of the industries expropriated by Allende's Popular Unity government.

Financial conglomerates became major beneficiaries of the liberalized economy and the flood of foreign bank loans.
Large foreign banks reinstated the credit cycle, as the Junta saw that the basic state obligations, such as resuming payment of principal and interest installments, were honored.
International lending organizations such as the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the Inter-American Development Bank lent vast sums anew.

Many foreign multinational corporations such as International Telephone and Telegraph (ITT), Dow Chemical, and Firestone, all expropriated by Allende, returned to Chile.

==
Foreign relations ==
Having risen to power on an anti-Marxist agenda, Pinochet found common cause with the military dictatorships of Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and later, Argentina.
The six countries eventually formulated a plan known as Operation Condor, in which the security forces of participating states would target active left-wing militants, guerrillas fighters, and their alleged sympathizers in the allied countries.
Pinochet's government received tacit approval and material support from the United States.
The exact nature and extent of this support is disputed.
(
See U.S. role in 1973 Coup, U.S. intervention in Chile and Operation Condor for more details.)
It is known, however, that the American Secretary of State at the time, Henry Kissinger, practiced a policy of supporting coups in nations which the United States viewed as leaning toward Communism.
The new junta quickly broke diplomatic relations with Cuba and North Korea, which had been established under the Allende government.
Shortly after the junta came to power, several communist countries, including the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, East Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia, severed diplomatic relations with Chile however, Romania and the People's Republic of China both continued to maintain diplomatic relations with Chile.
Pinochet has nurtured his relationship with China.
The government broke diplomatic relations with Cambodia in January 1974 and renewed ties with South Korea in October 1973 and with South Vietnam in March 1974.
Pinochet attended the funeral of General Francisco Franco, dictator of Spain from 1936–75, in late 1975.

In 1980, Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos had invited the entire Junta (consisting at this point of Pinochet, Merino, Matthei, and Mendoza) to visit the country as part of a planned tour of Southeast Asia in an attempt to help improve their image and bolster military and economic relations with the Philippines, Japan, South Korea, and Hong Kong.
Due to intense U.S. Pressure at the last minute (while Pinochet's plane was halfway en route over the Pacific), Marcos cancelled the visit and denied Pinochet landing rights in the country.
Pinochet and the junta were further caught off guard and humiliated when they were forced to land in Fiji to refuel for the planned return to Santiago, only to be met with airport staff who refused to assist the plane in any way
(the Fijian military was called in instead), invasive and prolonged customs searches, exorbitant fuel and aviation service charges, and hundreds of angry protesters who pelted his plane with eggs and tomatoes.
The usually stoic and calm Pinochet became enraged, firing his Foreign Minister Hernan Cubillos, several diplomats, and expelling the Philippine Ambassador.

Relations between the two countries were restored only in 1986 when Corazon Aquino assumed the presidency of the Philippines after Marcos was ousted in a non-violent revolution, the People Power Revolution.
===
Argentina ===
President of Argentina Juan Perón condemned the 1973 coup as a "fatality for the continent" stating that Pinochet represented interests "well known" to him.
He praised Allende for his "valiant attitude" and took note of the role of the United States in instigating the coup by recalling his familiarity with coup-making processes.
On 14 May 1974 Perón received Pinochet at the Morón Airbase.
Pinochet was heading to meet Alfredo Stroessner in Paraguay
so the encounter at Argentina was technically a stop over.
Pinochet and Perón are both reported to have felt uncomfortable during the meeting.
Perón expressed his wishes to settle the Beagle conflict and Pinochet his concerns about Chilean exiles in Argentina near the frontier with Chile.
Perón would have conceded on moving these exiles from the frontiers to eastern Argentina, but he warned "Perón takes his time, but accomplishes" (Perón tarda, pero cumple).
Perón justified his meeting with Pinochet stating that it was important to keep good relations with Chile under all circumstances and with whoever might be in government.
Perón died in July 1974 and was succeeded by his wife Isabel Martínez de Perón who was overthrown in 1976 by the Argentine military who installed themselves as a new dictatorship in Argentina.

Chile was on the brink of being invaded by Argentina, as the Argentina junta initiated Operation Soberania on 22 December 1978 because of the strategic Picton, Lennox and Nueva islands at the southern tip of South America on the Beagle Canal.
A full-scale war was prevented only by the call off of the operation by Argentina due to military and political reasons.
But the relations remained tense as Argentina invaded the Falklands (Operation Rosario).
Chile along with Colombia, were the only countries in South America to criticize the use of force by Argentina in its war with the UK over the Falkland Islands.
Chile actually helped the United Kingdom during the war.
The two countries (Chile and Argentina) finally agreed to papal mediation over the Beagle canal that finally ended in the Treaty of Peace and Friendship of 1984 between Chile and Argentina (Tratado de Paz y Amistad).
Chilean sovereignty over the islands and Argentinian east of the surrounding sea is now undisputed.

===
United States ===
The U.S. government had been interfering in Chilean politics since 1961, and it spent millions trying to prevent Allende from coming to power, and subsequently undermined his presidency through financing opposition.
Declassified C.I.A documents reveal U.S. knowledge and alleged involvement in the coup.
They provided material support to the military regime after the coup, although criticizing it in public.
A document released by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 2000, titled "CIA Activities in Chile", revealed that the CIA actively supported the military junta during and after the overthrow of Allende and that it made many of Pinochet's officers into paid contacts of the CIA or U.S. military, even though some were known to be involved in human rights abuses.

The U.S. continued to give the junta substantial economic support between the years 1973–79, despite concerns from more liberal Congressmen, as seen from the results of the Church Committee.
U.S. public stance did condemn the human rights violations, however declassifies documents reveal such violations were not an obstacle for members of the Nixon and Ford administrations.
Henry Kissinger visited Santiago in 1976 for the annual conference of the Organisation of American States.
During his visit he privately met with Pinochet and reassured the leader of internal support from the U.S. administration.

The U.S. went beyond verbal condemnation in 1976, after the murder of Orlando Letelier in Washington D.C., when it placed an embargo on arms sales to Chile that remained in effect until the restoration of democracy in 1989.
This more aggressive stance coincided with the election of Jimmy Carter who shifted the focus of U.S. foreign policy towards human rights.

===
United Kingdom ===
Britain's initial reaction to the overthrowing of Allende was one of caution.
The Conservative government recognised the legitimacy of the new government, but didn't offer any other declarations of support.
Under the Labour government of 1974-79, Britain's relations with Chile were cordial, if not close.
While Britain regularly condemned the junta at the United Nations for its human rights abuses, bilateral relations between the two were not affected to the same degree.
Britain formally withdrew its Santiago ambassador in 1974, however reinstated the position in 1980 under the Margaret Thatcher government.
Chile was neutral during the Falkland War, but its Westinghouse long-range radar deployed at Punta Arenas, in southern Chile, gave the British task force early warning of Argentinian air attacks, which allowed British ships and troops in the war zone to take defensive action.
Margaret Thatcher said that the day the radar was taken out of service for overdue maintenance was the day Argentinian fighter-bombers bombed the troopships Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram, leaving approximately 50 dead and 150 wounded.
According to Chilean Junta and former Air Force commander Fernando Matthei, Chilean support included military intelligence gathering, radar surveillance, British aircraft operating with Chilean colours and the safe return of British special forces, among other things.
In April and May 1982, a squadron of mothballed RAF Hawker Hunter fighter bombers departed for Chile, arriving on 22 May and allowing the Chilean Air Force to reform the No.
9 "Las Panteras Negras" Squadron.
A further consignment of three frontier surveillance and shipping reconnaissance Canberras left for Chile in October.
Some authors suggest that Argentina might have won the war had she been allowed to employ the VIth and VIIIth Mountain Brigades, which remained guarding the Andes mountain chain.
Pinochet subsequently visited Margaret Thatcher for tea on more than one occasion.
Pinochet's controversial relationship with Thatcher led Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair to mock Thatcher's Conservatives as "the party of Pinochet" in 1999.

===
France ===
Although France received many Chilean political refugees, it also secretly collaborated with Pinochet.
French journalist Marie-Monique Robin has shown how Valéry Giscard d'Estaing's government secretly collaborated with Videla's junta in Argentina and with Augusto Pinochet's regime in Chile.
Green deputies Noël Mamère, Martine Billard and Yves Cochet on September 10, 2003 requested a Parliamentary Commission on the "role of France in the support of military regimes in Latin America from 1973 to 1984" before the Foreign Affairs Commission of the National Assembly, presided by Edouard Balladur.
Apart from Le Monde, newspapers remained silent about this request.
However, deputy Roland Blum, in charge of the commission, refused to hear Marie-Monique Robin, and published in December 2003 a 12 pages report qualified by Robin as the summum of bad faith.
It claimed that no agreement had been signed, despite the agreement found by Robin in the Quai d'Orsay.
When then Minister of Foreign Affairs Dominique de Villepin traveled to Chile in February 2004, he claimed that no cooperation between France and the military regimes had occurred.

===
Peru ===
Reportedly one of Juan Velasco Alvarado's main goal was to militarily reconquer the lands lost by Peru to Chile in the War of the Pacific.
It is estimated that from 1970 to 1975 Peru spent up to US$2 Billion (roughly US$20 Billion in 2010's valuation) on Soviet armament.
According to various sources Velasco's government bought between 600 and 1200 T-55 Main Battle Tanks, APCs, 60 to 90 Sukhoi 22 warplanes, 500,000 assault rifles, and even considered the purchase of a British carrier Centaur-class light fleet carrier HMS Bulwark.
The enormous amount of weaponry purchased by Peru caused a meeting between former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Pinochet in 1976.
Velasco's military plan was to launch a massive sea, air, and land invasion against Chile.
In 1999, General Pinochet claimed that if Peru had attacked Chile during 1973 or even 1978, Peruvian forces could have penetrated deep south into Chilean territory, possibly military taking the Chilean city of Copiapó located half way to Santiago.
The Chilean Armed Forces considered launching a preventive war to defend itself.
Though, Pinochet's Chilean Air Force General Fernando Matthei opposed a preventive war and responded that "I can guarantee that the Peruvians would destroy the Chilean Air Force in the first five minutes of the war".
Some analysts believe the fear of attack by Chilean and US officials as largely unjustified but logical for them to experience, considering the Pinochet dictatorship had come into power with a coup against democratically elected president Salvador Allende.
According to sources, the alleged invasion scheme could be seen from the Chilean's government perspective as a plan for some kind of leftist counterattack.
While acknowledging the Peruvian plans were revisionistic
scholar Kalevi J. Holsti claim more important issues behind were the "ideological incompatibility" between the regimes of Velasco Alvarado and Pinochet and that Peru would have been concerned about Pinochet's geopolitical views on Chile's need of naval hegemony in the Southeastern Pacific.

Chileans should stop with the bullshit or tomorrow I shall eat breakfast in Santiago.
===
Spain ===
Francoist Spain had enjoyed warm relations with Chile while Allende was in power.
Pinochet admired and was very much influenced by Francisco Franco, but Franco's successors had a cold attitude towards Pinochet as they did not want to be linked to him.
When Pinochet traveled to the funeral of Francisco Franco in 1975 the President of France Valéry Giscard d'Estaing pressured the Spanish government to refuse Pinochet to be at the crowning of Juan Carlos I of Spain by letting Spanish authorities know that Giscard would not be there if Pinochet was present.
Juan Carlos I personally called Pinochet to let him know he was not welcome at his crowning.

===
Foreign aid ===
The previous drop in foreign aid during the Allende years was immediately reversed following Pinochet's ascension; Chile received US$322.8 million in loans and credits in the year following the coup.
There was considerable international condemnation of the military regime's human rights record, a matter that the United States expressed concern over as well after Orlando Letelier's 1976 assassination in Washington DC.(Kennedy Amendment, later International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976).

===
Cuban involvement ===
After the Chilean military coup in 1973, Fidel Castro promised Chilean revolutionaries far-reaching aid.
Initially Cuban support for resistance consisted of clandestine distribution of funds to Chile, human rights campaigns at the UN to isolate the Chilean dictatorship, and efforts to undermine US-Chilean bilateral relations.
Eventually Cuba's policy changed to arming and training insurgents.
Once their training was completed, Cuba helped the guerrillas return to Chile, providing false passports and false identification documents.
Cuba's official newspaper, Granma, boasted in February 1981 that the "Chilean Resistance" had successfully conducted more than 100 "armed actions" throughout Chile in 1980.
By late 1980, at least 100 highly trained MIR guerrillas had reentered Chile and the MIR began building a base for future guerrilla operations in Neltume, a mountainous forest region in southern Chile.
In a massive operation spearheaded by Chilean Army Para-Commandos, security forces involving some 2,000 troops, were forced to deploy in the Neltume mountains from June to November 1981, where they destroyed two MIR bases, seizing large caches of munitions and killing a number of MIR commandos.

In 1986, Chilean security forces discovered 80 tons of munitions, including more than three thousand M-16 rifles and more than two million rounds of ammunition, at the tiny fishing harbor of Carrizal Bajo, smuggled ashore from Cuban fishing trawlers off the coast of Chile.
The operation was overseen by Cuban naval intelligence, and also involved the Soviet Union.
Cuban Special Forces had also instructed the FPMR guerrillas that ambushed Augusto Pinochet's motorcade on 8 September 1986, killing five bodyguards and wounding 10.
==
Cultural life ==
Influenced by Antonio Gramsci's work on cultural hegemony, proposing that the ruling class can maintain power by controlling cultural institutions, Pinochet clamped down on cultural dissidence.
This brought Chilean cultural life into what sociologist Soledad Bianchi has called a "cultural blackout".
The government censored non-sympathetic individuals while taking control of mass media.

===
Music scene ===
The military dictatorship sought to isolate Chilean radio listerners from the outside world by changing radio frequencies to middle wavelengths.
This together with the shutdown of radio stations sympathetic the former Allende administration impacted music in Chile.
The music catalog was censored with the aid of listas negras (black lists)
but little is known on how these were composed and updated.
The formerly thriving Nueva canción scene suffered from the exile or imprisonment of many bands and individuals.
A key musician, Víctor Jara, was tortured and killed by elements of the military.
According to Eduardo Carrasco of Quilapayún in the first week after the coup, the military organized a meeting with folk musicians where they announced that the traditional instruments charango and quena were banned.
The curfew imposed by the dictatorship forced the remaining Nueva Canción scene, now rebranded as Canto Nuevo, into "semiclandestine peñas, while alternative groove disseminated in juvenile fiestas".
A scarcity of records and the censorship imposed on part of the music catalog made a "cassette culture" emmerge among the affected audiences.
The profiferation of pirate cassettes was enabled by tape recorders, and in some cases this activity turned commercial as evidenced by the pirate cassette brand Cumbre y Cuatro.
The music of Silvio Rodríguez became first known in Chile this way.
Cassettes aside, some music enthusiasts were able to supply themselves with rare or suppressed records with help of relatives in exile abroad.
Elements of military distrusted Mexican music which was widespread in the rural areas of south-central Chile.
There are testimonies of militaries calling Mexican music "communist".
Militaries dislike of Mexican music may be linked to the Allende administration's close links with Mexico, the "Mexican revolutionary discourse" and the over-all low prestige of Mexican music in Chile.
The dictatorship did however never suppressed Mexican music as a whole but came distinguish different strands, some of which were actually promoted.
Cueca and Mexican music coexisted with similar levels of popularity in the Chilean countryside in the 1970s.
Being distinctly Chilean the cueca was selected by the military dictatorship as a music to be promoted.
The cueca was named the national dance of Chile due to its substantial presence throughout the history of the country and announced as such through a public decree in the Official Journal (Diario Oficial) on November 6, 1979.
Cueca specialist Emilio Ignacio Santana argues that the dictatorship's appropriation and promotion of cueca harmed the genre.
The dictatorship's endorsement of the genre meant according to Santana that the rich landlord huaso became the icon of the cueca and not the rural labourer.
The 1980s saw an invasion of Argentine rock bands into Chile.
These included Charly García, the Enanitos Verdes, G.I.T. and Soda Stereo among others.

Contemporary Chilean rock group Los Prisioneros complained against the ease with which Argentine Soda Stereo made appearances on Chilean TV or in Chilean magazines and the ease they could obtain musical equipment for concerts in Chile.
Soda Stereo was invited to Viña del Mar International Song Festival while Los Prisioneros were ignored despite their popular status.
This situation was because Los Prisioneros were censored by media under the influence of the military dictatorship.
Los Prisioneros' marginalization by the media was further aggravated by their call to vote against the dictatorship on the plebiscite of 1988.

===
Theater and literature ===
Experimental theatre groups from Universidad de Chile and Pontifical Catholic University of Chile were restricted by the military regime to performing only theatre classics.
Some established groups like Grupo Ictus were tolerated while new formations like Grupo Aleph were repressed.
This last group had its members jailed and forced into exile after performing a parody on the 1973 Chilean coup d'état.
In the 1980s a grassroots street theatre movement emerged.
The dictatorship promoted the figure of Nobel laureate Gabriela Mistral who was presented as a symbol of "summission to the authority" and "social order".

==
Plebiscite and the return to democracy ==


===
1988 plebiscite ===
Following the approval of the 1980 Constitution, a plebiscite was scheduled for October 5, 1988, to vote on a new eight-year presidential term for Pinochet.

The Constitution, which took effect on 11 March 1981, established a "transition period," during which Pinochet would continue to exercise executive power and the junta's legislative power, for the next eight years.
Before that period ended, a candidate for president was to be proposed by the Commanders-in-Chief of the Armed Forces and Carabinero Chief General for the following period of eight years.
The candidate then was to be ratified by registered voters in a national plebiscite.
On 30 August 1988 Pinochet was declared to be the candidate.
The Constitutional Court of Chile ruled that the plebiscite should be carried out as stipulated by Article 64 in the Constitution.
That included an "Electoral Space" during which all positions, in this case, two, Sí (yes), and No, would have two free slots of equal and uninterrupted TV time, simultaneously broadcast by all TV channels, with no political advertising outside those spots.
The allotment was scheduled in two off-prime time slots: one before the afternoon news and the other before the late-night news, from 22:45 to 23:15 each night (the evening news was from 20:30 to 21:30, and primetime from 21:30 to 22:30).
The opposition No campaign, headed by Ricardo Lagos, produced colorful, upbeat programs, telling the Chilean people to vote against the extension of the presidential term.
Lagos, in a TV interview, pointed his index finger towards the camera and directly called on Pinochet to account for all the "disappeared" persons.
The Sí campaign did not argue for the advantages of extension, but was instead negative, claiming that voting "no" was equivalent to voting for a return to the chaos of the UP government.

Pinochet lost the 1988 referendum, where 56% of the votes rejected the extension of the presidential term, against 44% for "Sí", and, following the constitutional provisions, he stayed as president for one more year.

The presidential election was held in December 1989, at the same time as congressional elections that were due to take place.
Pinochet left the presidency on March 11, 1990 and transferred power to his political opponent Patricio Aylwin, the new democratically-elected president.
Due to the same transitional provisions of the constitution, Pinochet remained as Commander-in-Chief of the Army, until March 1998.

=== 1989 general elections ===
From the 1989 elections onwards, the military had officially left the political sphere in Chile.
Pinochet did not endorse any candidate publicly.
Former Pinochet economic minister Hernán Büchi ran for president as the candidate of the two right-wing parties RN and UDI.
He had little political experience and was relatively young and credited with Chile's good economic performance in the second half of the 1980s.
The right-wing parties faced several problems in the elections: there was considerable infighting between RN and UDI
, Büchi had only very reluctantly accepted to run for president and right-wing politicians struggled to define their position towards the Pinochet regime.
In addition to this right-wing populist Francisco Javier Errázuriz Talavera ran independently for president and made several election promises Büchi could not match.
The centre-left coalition Concertación was more united and coherent.
Its candidate Patricio Aylwin, a Christian Democrat, behaved as if he had won and refused a second television debate with Büchi.
Büchi attacked Aylwin on a remark he had made concerning that inflation rate of 20% was not much and he also accused Aylwin of making secret agreements with the Communist Party of Chile, a party that was not part of Concertación.
Aylwin spoke with authority about the need to clarify human rights violations but did not confront the dictatorship for it; in contrast, Büchi, as a former regime minister, lacked any credibility when dealing with human right violations.
Büchi and Errázuriz lost to Patricio Aylwin in the election.
The electoral system meant that the largely Pinochet-sympathetic right was overrepresented in parliament in such a way that it could block any reform to the constitution.
This over-representation was crucial for UDI in obtaining places in parliament and securing its political future.
The far-left and the far-right performed poorly in the election.

===
Presidential election results ===


==
Legacy ==
Following the restoration of Chilean democracy and the successive administrations that followed Pinochet, the Chilean economy has increasingly prospered.
Unemployment stands at 7% as of 2007, with poverty estimated at 18.2% for the same year, both relatively low for the region.
However, in 2019 the Chilean government faced public scrutiny for its economic policies.
In particular, for the long-term effects of Pinochet's neoliberal policies.
Mass protests broke out throughout Santiago, due to increasing prices of the metro ticket.
For many Chileans this highlighted the disproportionate distribution of wealth amongst Chile.

The "Chilean Variation" has been seen as a potential model for nations that fail to achieve significant economic growth.
The latest is Russia, for whom David Christian warned in 1991 that "dictatorial government presiding over a transition to capitalism seems one of the more plausible scenarios, even if it does so at a high cost in human rights violations.
"A survey published by pollster CERC on the eve of the 40th anniversary commemorations of the coup gave some idea of how Chileans perceived the dictatorship.
According to the poll, 55% of Chileans regarded the 17 years of dictatorship as either bad or very bad, while 9% said they were good or very good.
In 2013, the newspaper El Mercurio asked Chileans if the state had done enough to compensate victims of the dictatorship for the atrocities they suffered; 30% said yes, 36% said no, and the rest were undecided.
In order to keep the memories of the victims and the disappeared alive, memorial sites have been constructed throughout Chile, as a symbol of the country's past.
Some notable examples include Villa Grimaldi, Londres 38, Paine Memorial and the Museum of Memory and Human Rights.
These memorials were built by family members of the victims, the government and ex-prisoners of the dictatorship.
These have become popular tourist destinations and have provided a visual narrative of the atrocities of the dictatorship.
These memorials have aided in Chile's reconciliation process, however, there is still debate amongst Chile as to whether these memorials do enough to bring the country together.

The relative economic success of the Pinochet dictatorship has brought about some political support for the former dictatorship.
In 1998, then-Brazilian congressman and retired military officer Jair Bolsonaro praised Pinochet, saying his regime "should have killed more people".
Every year on the anniversary of the coup, Chile becomes more polarized and protests can be seen throughout the country.
Leftist supporters use this day to honour the victims of the dictatorship and highlight the atrocities for which the perpetrators still haven't been brought to justice.

The indictment and arrest of Pinochet occurred on 10 October 1998 in London.
He returned to Chile in March 2000 but was not charged with the crimes against him.
On his 91st birthday on 25 November 2006, in a public statement to supporters, Pinochet for the first time claimed to accept "political responsibility" for what happened in Chile under his regime, though he still defended the 1973 coup against Salvador Allende.
In a statement read by his wife Lucia Hiriart, he said, Today, near the end of my days, I want to say that I harbour no rancour against anybody, that I love my fatherland above all.
...
I take political responsibility for everything that was done.
Despite this statement, Pinochet always refused to be confronted to Chilean justice, claiming that he was senile.
He died two weeks later while indicted on human rights and corruption charges, but without having been sentenced.

== Notes ==


==
References ==
Bawden, JR.
(
2016).
The Pinochet Generation:
The Chilean Military in the Twentieth Century, Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press.

Christian, D. (1992).
"
Perestroika and World History", Australian Slavonic and East European studies, 6(1), pp.
1–28.

Falcoff, M. (2003).
"
Cuba: The Morning After", p. 26.
AEI Press, 2003.

Petras, J., & Vieux, S. (1990).
"
The Chilean 'Economic Miracle':
An Empirical Critique", Critical Sociology, 17, pp.
57–72.

Roberts, K.M. (1995).
"
From the Barricades to the Ballot Box: Redemocratization and Political Realignment in the Chilean Left", Politics & Society, 23, pp.
495–519.

Schatan, J. (1990).
"
The Deceitful Nature of Socio-Economic Indicators".
Development, 3–4, pp.
69–75.

Sznajder, M. (1996).
"
Dilemmas of economic and political modernisation in Chile: A jaguar that wants to be a puma", Third World Quarterly, 17, pp.
725–736.

Valdes, J.G. (1995).
Pinochet's economists:
The Chicago School in Chile, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Steve Anderson Body of Chile's Former President Frei
May Be Exumed, The Santiago Times, April 5, 2005


==
External links ==
Literature and Torture in Pinochet's Chile
Criminals of the military dictatorship : Augusto Pinochet
Military or belligerent occupation, often simply occupation, is provisional control by a ruling power over a territory, without a claim of formal sovereignty.
The territory is then known as the occupied territory and the ruling power the occupant.
Occupation is distinguished from annexation by its intended temporary nature (i.e. no claim for permanent sovereignty), by its military nature, and by citizenship rights of the controlling power not being conferred upon the subjugated population.
While an occupant may set up a formal military government in the occupied territory to facilitate its administration, it is not a necessary precondition for occupation.
The rules of occupation are delineated in various international agreements, primarily the Hague Convention of 1907, the Geneva Conventions of 1949, as well as established state practice.
The relevant international conventions, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) Commentaries, and other treaties by military scholars provide guidelines on such topics as rights and duties of the occupying power, protection of civilians, treatment of prisoners of war, coordination of relief efforts, issuance of travel documents, property rights of the populace, handling of cultural and art objects, management of refugees, and other concerns which are very important both before and after the cessation of hostilities.
A country that establishes an occupation and violates internationally agreed upon norms runs the risk of censure, criticism, or condemnation.
In the current era, the practices of occupations have largely become a part of customary international law, and form a part of the laws of war.

== Occupation and the laws of war ==
From the second half of the 18th century onwards, international law has come to distinguish between the occupation of a country and territorial acquisition by invasion and annexation, the difference between the two being originally expounded upon by Emerich de Vattel in The Law of Nations (1758).
The clear distinction has been recognized among the principles of international law since the end of the Napoleonic wars in the 19th century.
These customary laws of occupation which evolved as part of the laws of war gave some protection to the population under the occupation of a belligerent power.
The Hague Convention of 1907 codified these customary laws, specifically within "Laws and Customs of War on Land" (Hague IV); October 18, 1907: "Section III Military Authority over the territory of the hostile State".
The first two articles of that section state:
Art.
42.

Territory is considered occupied when it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army.

The occupation extends only to the territory where such authority has been established and can be exercised.
Art.
43.

The authority of the legitimate power having in fact passed into the hands of the occupant, the latter shall take all the measures in his power to restore, and ensure, as far as possible, public order and safety, while respecting, unless absolutely prevented, the laws in force in the country.
In 1949 these laws governing occupation of an enemy state's territory were further extended by the adoption of the Fourth Geneva Convention (GCIV).
Much of GCIV is relevant to protected persons in occupied territories and Section III:
Occupied territories is a specific section covering the issue.

Article 6 restricts the length of time that most of GCIV applies:

The present Convention shall apply from the outset of any conflict or occupation mentioned in Article 2.

In the territory of Parties to the conflict, the application of the present Convention shall cease on the general close of military operations.

In the case of occupied territory, the application of the present Convention shall cease one year after the general close of military operations; however, the Occupying Power shall be bound, for the duration of the occupation, to the extent that such Power exercises the functions of government in such territory, by the provisions of the following Articles of the present Convention: 1 to 12, 27, 29 to 34, 47, 49, 51, 52, 53, 59, 61 to 77, 143.GCIV emphasised an important change in international law.
The United Nations Charter (June 26, 1945) had prohibited war of aggression (See articles 1.1, 2.3, 2.4) and GCIV Article 47, the first paragraph in Section III: Occupied territories, restricted the territorial gains which could be made through war by stating:

Protected persons who are in occupied territory shall not be deprived, in any case or in any manner whatsoever, of the benefits of the present Convention by any change introduced, as the result of the occupation of a territory, into the institutions or government of the said territory, nor by any agreement concluded between the authorities of the occupied territories and the Occupying Power, nor by any annexation by the latter of the whole or part of the occupied territory.
Article 49 prohibits the forced mass movement of people out of or into occupied state's territory:
Individual or mass forcible transfers, as well as deportations of protected persons from occupied territory to the territory of the Occupying Power or to that of any other country, occupied or not, are prohibited, regardless of their motive. ...
The Occupying Power shall not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies.
Protocol I (1977):
"Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts" has additional articles which cover occupation but many countries including the U.S. are not signatory to this additional protocol.

In the situation of a territorial cession as the result of war, the specification of a "receiving country" in the peace treaty merely means that the country in question is authorized by the international community to establish civil government in the territory.

The military government of the principal occupying power will continue past the point in time when the peace treaty comes into force, until it is legally supplanted.

"Military government continues until legally supplanted" is the rule, as stated in Military Government and Martial Law, by William E. Birkhimer, 3rd edition 1914.

===
Beginning of the occupation ===
Article 42 of the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare specifies that a "[t]erritory is considered occupied when it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army.
"
The form of administration by which an occupying power exercises government authority over occupied territory is called military government.
Neither the Hague Conventions nor the Geneva Conventions specifically define or distinguish an act of "invasion".
Article 2 of the Geneva Conventions expanded on this to include situations in which no armed resistance is encountered.
There does not have to be a formal announcement of the beginning of a military government, nor is there any requirement of a specific number of people to be in place, for an occupation to commence.
Birkhimer writes:

No proclamation of part of the victorious commander is necessary to the lawful inauguration and enforcement of military government.
That government results from the fact that the former sovereignty is ousted, and the opposing army now has control.
Yet the issuing such proclamation is useful as publishing to all living in the district occupied those rules of conduct which will govern the conqueror in the exercise of his authority.
Wellington, indeed, as previously mentioned, said that the commander is bound to lay down distinctly the rules according to which his will is to be carried out.
But the laws of war do not imperatively require this, and in very many instances it is not done.
When it is not, the mere fact that the country is militarily occupied by the enemy is deemed sufficient notification to all concerned that the regular has been supplanted by a military government.
(
pp.
25-26)


===
The occupying power ===
The terminology of "the occupying power" as spoken of in the laws of war is most properly rendered as "the principal occupying power", or alternatively as "the occupying power".
This is because the law of agency is always available (When the administrative authority for the occupation of particular areas is delegated to other troops, a "principal -- agent" relationship is in effect).Because the law of agency is a very general pattern, primarily applicable in this case as the means of regulating the relationships between the said "powers", but
a question however in which considerations of logistics are sometimes to be taken in consideration, that definition is  not always applicable outside of those contexts which can be analysed by analogy as related to warlording, even though it does relate more generally to all possible types of military coalitions.

In most contexts determined by the application of the defined and modern laws of war, delegation to agencies generally tends to relating to civilian organizations.
Juridical considerations like the above remain in the other cases merely consensual between the said powers.
For example, in 1948 the U.S. Military Tribunal in Nuremberg states: In belligerent occupation the occupying power does not hold enemy territory by virtue of any legal right.
On the contrary, it merely exercises a precarious and temporary actual control.
This can be seen from Article 42 of the Hague Regulations which grants certain well limited rights to a military occupant only in enemy territory which is 'actually placed' under his control.
The conqueror is the principal occupying power.

===
End of occupation ===
Rule:
Occupation continues until legally supplanted.

According to Eyal Benvenisti, occupation can end in a number of ways, such as: "loss of effective control, namely when the occupant is no longer capable of exercising its authority; through the genuine consent of the sovereign (the ousted government or an indigenous one) by the signing of a peace agreement; or by transferring authority to an indigenous government endorsed by the occupied population through referendum and which has received international recognition".
This is explained as follows.

For the situation where no territorial cession is involved, the occupation ends with the coming into force of the peace settlement.

Example: (1) Japan after WWII.
Japan regained its sovereignty with the coming into force of the San Francisco Peace Treaty on April 28, 1952.
In other words, a civil government for Japan was in place and functioning as of this date.
In the situation of a territorial cession, there must be a formal peace treaty.

However, the occupation does not end with the coming into force of the peace treaty.

Example: (1) Puerto Rico after the Spanish–American War.
Military government continued in Puerto Rico past the coming into force of the Treaty of Paris of 1898 on April 11, 1899, and only ended on May 1, 1900 with the beginning of Puerto Rico's civil government.

Example
: (2) Cuba after the Spanish–American War.
Military government continued in Cuba past the coming into force of the Treaty of Paris of 1898 on April 11, 1899, and only ended on May 20, 1902 with the beginning of the Republic of Cuba's civil government.
Hence, at the most basic level, the terminology of "legally supplanted" is interpreted to mean "legally supplanted by a civil government fully recognized by the national (or "federal") government of the principal occupying power".

==
Examples of occupations ==
In most wars some territory is placed under the authority of the hostile army.
Most occupations end with the cessation of hostilities.
In some cases the occupied territory is returned and in others the land remains under the control of the occupying power but usually not as militarily occupied territory.
Sometimes the status of presences is disputed by a party to the situation.
The largest extending territories under military occupation came into existence as the outcome of World War I and World War II:
Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (OETA), encompassing much of the Middle East during 1917-1920 - separated to French (OETA North) and British (OETA South) domains;
Allied-occupied Germany (1945–49) in the aftermath of World War II
Occupation is usually a temporary phase, preceding either the handing back of the territory, or its annexation.
A significant number of post-1945 occupations have lasted more than two decades such as the occupations of Namibia by South Africa and of East Timor by Indonesia as well as the ongoing occupations of Northern Cyprus by Turkey and of Western Sahara by Morocco.
One of the world's longest ongoing occupation is Israel's occupation of the West Bank, including East Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip (1967–present).
Other prolonging belligerent occupations that have been alleged include the occupation by the United Kingdom of the Falkland Islands/Malvinas (1833–present) which Argentina claims this as sovereign territory, of Tibet by PR China (1950), and of the Hawaii by the United States (1893).
The War Report makes no determination as to whether belligerent occupation is occurring in these cases.
The cases of occupation, which took place in the second half of the 20th century are:

Egyptian occupation of Gaza, 1949/59–1967
Indian occupation of Goa, followed by its annexation (1961)
Indonesian occupation of the West New Guinea, followed by its annexation (1963)
Israeli occupation of the Western Golan Heights (1967–81), followed by its annexation (1981)
Turkish occupation of Northern Cyprus (1974–present)
Somali occupation of Ogaden in Ethiopia (1977–1978)
Indonesian occupation of East Timor, followed by the annexation (1975–1999)
Moroccan occupation of Western Sahara, followed most areas by its annexation (1975)
Armenian-occupied territories surrounding Nagorno-Karabakh between the First Nagorno-Karabakh War and the 2020 war (1994–2020)
U.S. occupation of Cuba's Guantánamo Bay
(1959–present)The most recent cases of occupation, which took place in the 21st century are the:

Gash-Barka Region taken over in 2000 during the Eritrean–Ethiopian War
Iraq occupied by US during the Iraq War of 2003–2011
Parts of Somalia occupied during the War in Somalia (2006–09)
The Russian occupation of Georgia since 1992/2008
(See: Gori and Poti occupied by Russia during the Russo-Georgian War)
Occupation parts of Donbass region and Crimea in Ukraine by Russia since 2014, followed by its Crimea annexation in 2014
(See: Russian military intervention in Ukraine, War in Donbass)
Turkish occupation of northern Syria in support of the Syrian opposition since 2016
United Arab Emirates takeover of Socotra in 2018 during the Yemeni Civil War


==
See also ==
Banana wars
Allied-occupied Germany
Ex parte Milligan
German-occupied Europe
Rule of Law in Armed Conflicts Project


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==
Occupied territory - the legal issues, legal provisions regarding occupation of territory by hostile power and implications for people protected by IHL.

David Kretzmer, Occupation of Justice: The Supreme Court of Israel and the Occupied Territories, State University of New York Press, April, 2002, trade paperback, 262 pages, ISBN 0-7914-5338-3; hardcover, July, 2002, ISBN 0-7914-5337-5
Sander D. Dikker Hupkes, What Constitutes Occupation?
Israel as the occupying power in the Gaza Strip after the Disengagement, Leiden: Jongbloed 2008, 110 pages, ISBN 978-90-70062-45-3  Openacces
Belligerent Occupation
The Law of Belligerent Occupation Michal N. Schmitt (regarding occupation of Iraq)
Law of Belligerent Occupation, Judge Advocate General's School, United States Army
Military Government and Martial Law, by William E. Birkhimer, third edition, revised (1914), Kansas City, Missouri, Franklin Hudson Publishing Co.
FM 27-10 "The Law of Land Warfare," DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY, WASHINGTON 25, D.C., 18 July 1956.
(
This manual supersedes FM 27–10, 1 October 1940, including C 1, 15 November 1944.
Changes required on 15 July 1976, have been incorporated within this document.)
Chapter 6, OCCUPATION
[2]
Bellal, A. (editor).
(
2015)
The war report: Armed conflict in 2014.
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

==
External links ==
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to social science:
Social science – branch of science concerned with society and human behaviors.
==
Definition ==
Social science can be described as all of the following:

Branch of science – systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.

Major category of academic disciplines – an academic discipline is focused study in one academic field or profession.
A discipline incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with academic areas of study or areas of professional practice.
For example, the branches of science are commonly referred to as the scientific disciplines.
For instance, gravitation is strongly associated with the discipline of physics, and is considered to be part of that disciplinary knowledge.

==
Branches of social science ==
Anthropology - study of humans, past and present, that draws and builds upon knowledge from the social sciences and biological sciences, as well as the humanities and the natural sciences.

Anthropology of religion – study of religious institutions in relation to other social institutions, and the comparison of religious beliefs and practices across cultures
Applied anthropology –
application of the method and theory of anthropology to the analysis and solution of practical problems.

Archaeology – study of cultures via material remains and environmental data (Outline of archaeology)
Cultural anthropology – branch of anthropology focused on the study of cultural variation among humans, collecting data about the effect of global economic and political processes on local cultural realities.

Ethnobiology – scientific study of dynamic relationships between peoples, biota, and environments, from the distant past to the immediate present.

Ethnobotany – is the study of a region's plants and their practical uses through the traditional knowledge of a local culture and people.

Ethnography – systematic study of people and cultures.

Ethnology – branch of anthropology that compares and analyzes the origins, distribution, technology, religion, language, and social structure of the ethnic, racial, and/or national divisions of humanity.

Ethnopoetics – method of recording text versions of oral poetry or narrative performances (i.e., verbal lore) that uses poetic lines, verses, and stanzas (instead of prose paragraphs) to capture the formal, poetic performance elements which would otherwise be lost in the written texts.

Evolutionary anthropology –
interdisciplinary study of the evolution of human physiology and human behaviour and the relation between hominids and non-hominid primates.

Experimental archaeology – Experimental archaeology employs a number of different methods, techniques, analyses, and approaches in order to generate and test hypotheses, based upon archaeological source material, like ancient structures or artifacts.

Historical archaeology – form of archaeology dealing with topics that are already attested in written records.

Linguistic anthropology – is the interdisciplinary study of how language influences social life.

Medical anthropology – interdisciplinary field which studies "human health and disease, health care systems, and biocultural adaptation".

Physical anthropology – study of the physical development of the human species.

Psychological anthropology – interdisciplinary subfield of anthropology that studies the interaction of cultural and mental processes.

Zooarchaeology – study of faunal remains.

Anthrozoology – study of human-animal interaction.

The arts – refers to the theory and physical expression of creativity found in human culture and societies.

Culinary arts – are the cuisine arts of food preparation, cooking, and presentation of food, usually in the form of meals.

Language
Literature – refers to writing considered to be an art form or any single writing deemed to have artistic or intellectual value, often due to deploying language in ways that differ from ordinary usage.

Performing arts – refers to forms of art in which artists use their voices, bodies or inanimate object to convey artistic expression.

Visual arts – are art forms such as painting, drawing, printmaking, sculpture, ceramics, photography, video, filmmaking, design, crafts, and architecture.

Business studies – academic area that consists of many sub-areas pertaining to the social relationships that comprise the human economic systems.

Accountancy – the measurement, processing and communication of financial information about economic entities.

Finance – a field dealing with the study of investments.

Commerce
Management – the administration of an organization, whether it be a business, a not-for-profit organization, or government body.

Human resource management – a function in organizations designed to maximize employee performance in service of an employer's strategic objectives.

Marketing – the study and management of exchange relationships.

Organizational studies – the examination of how individuals construct organizational structures, processes, and practices and how these, in turn, shape social relations and create institutions that ultimately influence people.

Economics – details of this area and its own sub-areas are provided in this taxonomy below.

Economics – analyzes the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.
It aims to explain how economies work and how economic agents interact.

Macroeconomics – branch of economics dealing with the performance, structure, behavior, and decision-making of the whole economy
Microeconomics – branch of economics that studies the behavior of individual households and firms in making decisions on the allocation of limited resources
Behavioural economics – Behavioral economics and the related field, behavioral finance, study the effects of social, cognitive and emotional factors on the economic decisions of individuals and institutions and the consequences for market prices, returns and the resource allocation.

Bioeconomics – applies the laws of thermodynamics to economic theory
Comparative economics – comparative study of different systems of economic organization, such as capitalism, socialism, feudalism and the mixed economy.

Socialist economics – economic theories and practices of hypothetical and existing socialist economic systems.

Development economics – branch of economics which deals with economic aspects of the development process in low-income countries.

Ecological economics – an interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary field that aims to address the interdependence and coevolution of human economies and natural ecosystems.

Economic geography – study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of economic activities across the world.

Economic history – study of economies or economic phenomena in the past.

Economic sociology – studies both the social effects and the social causes of various economic phenomena.

Energy economics – broad scientific subject area which includes topics related to supply and use of energy in societies
Entrepreneurial Economics – study of the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship within the economy.

Environmental economics – subfield of economics concerned with environmental issues.

Evolutionary economics – part of mainstream economics as well as heterodox school of economic thought that is inspired by evolutionary biology.

Financial economics – branch of economics concerned with "the allocation and deployment of economic resources, both spatially and across time, in an uncertain environment".

Heterodox economics – approaches or to schools of economic thought that are considered outside of "mainstream economics" and sometimes contrasted by expositors with neoclassical economics.

Green economics – one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks
Feminist economics – diverse area of economic inquiry that highlights the androcentric biases of traditional economics through critical examinations of economic methodology, epistemology, history and empirical study.

Islamic economics – body of Islamic studies literature that "identifies and promotes an economic order that conforms to Islamic scripture and traditions,"
and in the economic world an interest-free Islamic banking system, grounded in Sharia's condemnation of interest (riba).

Industrial organization – field of economics that builds on the theory of the firm in examining the structure of, and boundaries between, firms and markets.

International economics – study of the effects upon economic activity of international differences in productive resources and consumer preferences and the institutions that affect them.

Institutional economics – study of the role of the evolutionary process and the role of institutions in shaping economic behaviour.

Labor economics – seeks to understand the functioning and dynamics of the markets for labour.

Law and Economics – application of economic methods to analysis of law.

Managerial economics – "application of economic concepts and economic analysis to the problems of formulating rational managerial decisions"
Monetary economics – branch of economics that historically prefigured and remains integrally linked to macroeconomics.

Neoclassical economics – focuses on goods, outputs, and income distributions in markets through supply and demand.

Public finance – study of the role of the government in the economy.

Public economics – study of a government policy through the lens of economic efficiency and equity.

Real estate economics – application of economic techniques to real estate markets.

Resource economics – study of supply, demand, and allocation of the Earth's natural resources.

Welfare economics – branch of economics that uses microeconomic techniques to evaluate economic well-being, especially relative to competitive general equilibrium within an economy as to economic efficiency and the resulting income distribution associated with it.

Political economy – study of the production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.

Socioeconomics – considers behavioral interactions of individuals and groups through social capital and social "markets" (not excluding for example, sorting by marriage) and the formation of social norms.

Transport economics – branch of economics that deals with the allocation of resources within the transport sector and has strong linkages with civil engineering.

Economic methodology – study of methods, especially the scientific method, in relation to economics, including principles underlying economic reasoning.

Computational economics – research discipline at the interface between computer science and economic and management science.

Econometrics – application of mathematics and statistical methods to economic data
Mathematical economics – application of mathematical methods to represent economic theories and analyze problems posed in economics.

Economic statistics – topic in applied statistics that concerns the collection, processing, compilation, dissemination, and analysis of economic data.

Time series – sequence of data points, measured typically at successive time instants spaced at uniform time intervals.

Experimental economics – application of experimental methods to study economic questions.

Cognitive Science –
interdisciplinary scientific study of the mind and its processes.
It examines what cognition is, what it does and how it works.

Cultural studies – academic field grounded in critical theory and literary criticism.

Demography – statistical study of human populations and sub-populations.

Development studies – multidisciplinary branch of social science which addresses issues of concern to developing countries.
Education –  in the general sense is any act or experience that has a formative effect on the mind, character, or physical ability of an individual.
In its technical sense, education is the process by which society deliberately transmits its accumulated knowledge, skills, and values from one generation to another.

Environmental studies – interdisciplinary academic field which systematically studies human interaction with the environment.

Folkloristics – the study of tradition as a social force within complex societies.

Gender and sexuality studies – field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis.

Geography – study of the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth.

Physical geography – branch of the social sciences that studies physical features on the Earth's surface, water, the atmosphere and biodiversity on the Earth.

Geomorphology – branch of physical geography that studies the Earth and its landforms.

Hydrology – study of water on the Earth's surface and in its atmosphere.

Glaciology – study of ice sheets and glaciers on the Earth's surface.

Biogeography – study of distribution of living organisms on the Earth.

Climatology – the study of climate.

Meteorology – the study of weather.

Soil geography – the study of soil.

Oceanography – the study of oceans.

Coastal geography – study of coasts.

Landscape ecology – study of effects of ecological process on the Earth.

Palaeogeography – studies distribution of continents and oceans over time.

Environmental geography – studies the interaction between humans and the physical environment.

Cartography – study and practice of making maps or globes.

Human geography – branch of the social sciences that studies the world, its people, communities, and cultures with an emphasis on relations of and across space and place.

Critical geography – takes a critical theory (Frankfurt School) approach to the study and analysis of geography.

Cultural geography – study of cultural products and norms and their variations across and relations to spaces and places.

Feminist geography – approach in human geography which applies the theories, methods and critiques of feminism to the study of the human environment, society and geographical space.

Economic geography – study of the location, distribution and spatial organization of economic activities across the world.

Development geography – branch of geography with reference to the standard of living and quality of life of its human inhabitants.

Historical geography – study of the human, physical, fictional, theoretical, and "real" geographies of the past.

Time geography –
Political geography & geopolitics – field of human geography that is concerned with the study of both the spatially uneven outcomes of political processes and the ways in which political processes are themselves affected by spatial structures.

Marxist geography – strand of critical geography that uses the theories and philosophy of Marxism to examine the spatial relations of human geography.

Military geography – sub-field of geography that is used by, not only the military, but also academics and politicians to understand the geopolitical sphere through the militaristic lens.

Strategic geography – concerned with the control of, or access to, spatial areas that affect the security and prosperity of nations.

Population geography – study of the ways in which spatial variations in the distribution, composition, migration, and growth of populations are related to the nature of places.

Social geography – branch of human geography that is most closely related to social theory in general and sociology in particular, dealing with the relation of social phenomena and its spatial components.

Behavioral geography – approach to human geography that examines human behavior using a disaggregate approach.

Children's geographies – area of study within human geography and Childhood Studies which involves researching the places and spaces of children's lives.

Health geography – application of geographical information, perspectives, and methods to the study of health, disease, and health care.

Tourism geography – study of travel and tourism, as an industry and as a social and cultural activity.

Urban geography – study of areas which have a high concentration of buildings and infrastructure.

Environmental geography – branch of geography that describes the spatial aspects of interactions between humans and the natural world.

Regional geography – study of world regions.

Gerontology – study of the social, psychological and biological aspects of aging.

History – discovery, collection, organization, and presentation of information about past events.
History can also mean the period of time after writing was invented.

This category includes many sub-domains of history such as, art history, diplomatic history, history of science, economic history, environmental history, military history, political history, urban history, women's history and many others.

Industrial relations – multidisciplinary field that studies the employment relationship.

Information science –  interdisciplinary field primarily concerned with the analysis, collection, classification, manipulation, storage, retrieval and dissemination of information.

International studies – study of the major political, economic, social, cultural and sacral issues that dominate the international agenda
Law – set of rules and principles (laws) by which a society is governed, through enforcement by governmental authorities.

Legal management – social sciences discipline that is designed for students interested in the study of State and its elements, Law, Law Practice, Legal Research and Jurisprudence, legal Philosophy, Criminal Justice, Governance, Government structure, Political history and theories, Business Organization and Management, Entrepreneurship, Public Administration and Human Resource Development.

Paralegal studies – social sciences discipline that is designed for students interested in the study of State and its elements, Law, Law Practice, Legal Research and Jurisprudence, legal Philosophy, Criminal Justice, Governance, Government structure, Political history and theories, Business Organization and Management, Entrepreneurship, Public Administration and Human Resource Development.

Library science – study of issues related to libraries and the information fields.

Linguistics – scientific study of natural language.

Anthropological linguistics – study of the relations between language and culture and the relations between human biology, cognition and language.

Applied linguistics – interdisciplinary field of study that identifies, investigates, and offers solutions to language-related real-life problems.

Biolinguistics – study of the biology and evolution of language.

Clinical linguistics and speech and language pathology – sub-discipline of linguistics which involves the application of linguistic theory to the field of Speech-Language Pathology.

Cognitive linguistics – branch of linguistics that interprets language in terms of the concepts, sometimes universal, sometimes specific to a particular tongue, which underlie its forms.

Comparative linguistics – branch of historical linguistics that is concerned with comparing languages to establish their historical relatedness.

Computational linguistics – interdisciplinary field dealing with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective.

Developmental linguistics – study of the development of linguistic ability in an individual, particularly the acquisition of language in childhood.

language acquisition –
the process by which humans acquire the capacity to perceive and comprehend language, as well as to produce and use words to communicate.

Dialectology
– scientific study of linguistic dialect, a sub-field of sociolinguistics.

dialectometry – the study of high levels of structure in geographical dialect networks.

Discourse analysis – general term for a number of approaches to analyzing use of written, oral or sign language or any significant semiotic event.

Etymology – study of the history of words, their origins, and
how their form and meaning have changed over time.

Evolutionary linguistics – the scientific study of both the origins and development of language as well as the cultural evolution of languages.

Forensic linguistics – application of linguistic knowledge, methods and insights to the forensic context of law, language, crime investigation, trial, and judicial procedure.

Geolinguistics – branch of human geography that studies the geographic distribution of language or its constituent elements.

Historical linguistics – study of language change.

Language – is a structured means of communication
Lexis – total vocabulary or lexicon having items of lexical, rather than grammatical,
meaning.

Linguistic typology – subfield of linguistics that studies and classifies languages according to their structural features.

Literature – refers to writing considered to be an art form or any single writing deemed to have artistic or intellectual value, often due to deploying language in ways that differ from ordinary usage.

Morphology – identification, analysis and description of the structure of a given language's morphemes and other linguistic units, such as words, affixes, parts of speech, intonation/stress, or implied context (words in a lexicon are the subject matter of lexicology).

Neurolinguistics – study of the neural mechanisms in the human brain that control the comprehension, production, and acquisition of language.

Philology – study of language in written historical sources; it is a combination of literary studies, history and linguistics.

Phonetics – branch of linguistics that comprises the study of the sounds of human speech, or the equivalent aspects of sign.

Phonology – branch of linguistics concerned with the systematic organization of sounds in languages.

Phraseology – study of set or fixed expressions, such as idioms, phrasal verbs, and other types of multi-word lexical units (often collectively referred to as phrasemes), in which the component parts of the expression take on a meaning more specific than or otherwise not predictable from the sum of their meanings when used independently.

Pragmatics – subfield of linguistics which studies the ways in which context contributes to meaning.

Psycholinguistics – study of the psychological and neurobiological factors that enable humans to acquire, use, comprehend and produce language.

Sociolinguistics – descriptive study of the effect of any and all aspects of society, including cultural norms, expectations, and context, on the way language is used, and the effects of language use on society.

Speech science –
Speech science refers to the study of production, transmission and perception of speech.
Speech science involves anatomy, in particular the anatomy of the oro-facial region and neuroanatomy, physiology, and acoustics.

Stylistics – study and interpretation of texts from a linguistic perspective.

Syntax – "the study of the principles and processes by which sentences are constructed in particular languages."

Semantics – study of meaning.

Writing systems and orthography – representation of language in a textual medium through the use of a set of signs or symbols (known as a writing system).

Mathematics-is from formal sciences, yet exactly how it does in formal science, it also provides support (in form of models, theories,patterns,etc.)for the development of social science (in variety of ways) and it’s various other branches.
like in Sociology, Economics, Finance, Management, Accountability, Anthropology, communication, business-studies, Industrial design, Law, Political science ,etc.
(
including statistics ,Theoretical linguistics, Philosophy also);(the other fields from formal science include decision theory, game theory, theoretical Philosophy ,etc.)

Management– in addition to the administration of an organization, it is the act of getting people together to accomplish desired goals and objectives using available resources efficiently and effectively.

Media studies – academic discipline and field of study that deals with the content, history and effects of various media; in particular, the 'mass media'.

Communication studies – academic field that deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning.

Philosophy – study of general and fundamental problems concerning matters such as existence, knowledge, values, reason, mind, and language.
Academic philosophy is considered a science by some.
Others say that philosophy is not a science
but it is instead a precursor of it.
The role of philosophy is also a philosophical question.
Philosophy of language –  is concerned with four central problems: the nature of meaning, language use, language cognition, and the relationship between language and reality.

Philosophy of information – (PI) is the area of research that studies conceptual issues arising at the intersection of computer science, information science, information technology, and philosophy.

Political philosophy – is the study of topics such as politics, liberty, justice, property, rights, law, and the enforcement of a legal code by authority.

Epistemology – study of how we know what we know; study of the nature and scope of knowledge.

Ethics – major branch of philosophy, encompassing right conduct and good life.
It is significantly broader than the common conception of analyzing right and wrong.

Logic –  formal science of using reason
Philosophy of mind – branch of philosophy that studies the nature of the mind, mental events, mental functions, mental properties, consciousness and their relationship to the physical body, particularly the brain.

Philosophy of science – questions the assumptions, foundations, methods and implications of science; questions the use and merit of science; sometimes overlaps metaphysics and epistemology by questioning whether scientific results are actually a study of truth.

Social philosophy – is the study of questions about social behavior and interpretations of society and social institutions in terms of ethical values rather than empirical relations.

Aesthetics –  is a branch of philosophy dealing with the nature of art, beauty, and taste, with the creation and appreciation of beauty.

Philosophy of mathematics –  is the branch of philosophy that studies the philosophical assumptions, foundations, and implications of mathematics.
The aim of the philosophy of mathematics is to provide an account of the nature and methodology of mathematics and to understand the place of mathematics in people's lives.

Philosophy of education –  Philosophy of education can refer to either the academic field of applied philosophy or to one of any educational philosophies that promote a specific type or vision of education,
and/or which examine the definition, goals and meaning of education.

Planning
Environmental planning – is the process of facilitating decision making to carry out land development with the consideration given to the natural environment, social, political, economic and governance factors and provides a holistic framework to achieve sustainable outcomes.
A major goal of environmental planning is to create sustainable communities, which aim to conserve and protect undeveloped land.

Urban planning – studies the development and use of land, protection and use of the environment, public welfare, and the design of the urban environment, including air, water, and the infrastructure passing into and out of urban areas, such as transportation, communications, and distribution networks.

Regional planning – deals with the efficient placement of land-use activities, infrastructure, and settlement growth across a larger area of land than an individual city or town.

Political science – social science discipline concerned with the study of the state, government, and politics.

Civics – study of the theoretical and practical aspects of citizenship, its rights and duties; the duties of citizens to each other as members of a political body and to the government.

Comparative politics – field and a method used in political science, characterized by an empirical approach based on the comparative method.

Game theory – study of strategic decision making.

Geopolitics – theory that describes the relation between politics and territory whether on local or international scale.

political geography –  field of human geography that is concerned with the study of both the spatially uneven outcomes of political processes and the ways in which political processes are themselves affected by spatial structures.

Ideology – set of ideas that constitute one's goals, expectations, and actions.

Political economy – Political economy originally was the term for studying production, buying, and selling, and their relations with law, custom, and government, as well as with the distribution of national income and wealth, including through the budget process.
Political economy originated in moral philosophy.
It developed in the 18th century as the study of the economies of states, polities, hence political economy.

Political psychology, bureaucratic, administrative and judicial behaviour –
Psephology – branch of political science which deals with the study and scientific analysis of elections.

Voting systems – methods by which voters make a choice between options, often in an election or on a policy referendum.

Public administration – houses the implementation of government policy and an academic discipline that studies this implementation and that prepares civil servants for this work.

Public policy – generally the principled guide to action taken by the administrative or executive branches of the state with regard to a class of issues in a manner consistent with law and institutional customs.

Public health – the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life and promoting human health through organized efforts and informed choices of society, organizations, public and private, communities and individuals
Local government studies – form of public administration which in a majority of contexts, exists as the lowest tier of administration within the a given state.

International politics – study of relationships between countries, including the roles of states, inter-governmental organizations (IGOs), international nongovernmental organizations (INGOs), non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and multinational corporations (MNCs).

International relations theory – study of international relations from a theoretical perspective; it attempts to provide a conceptual framework upon which international relations can be analyzed.

Psychology –
science of behavior and mental processes
Applied psychology – use of psychological principles and theories to overcome problems in other areas, such as mental health, business management, education, health, product design, ergonomics, and law.

Psychological testing – field characterized by the use of samples of behavior in order to assess psychological construct(s), such as cognitive and emotional functioning, about a given individual.

Clinical psychology – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Community psychology – Sense of community Social capital
Consumer behaviour – study of when, why
, how, and where people do or do not buy a product.

Counseling psychology – psychological specialty that encompasses research and applied work in several broad domains: counseling process and outcome; supervision and training; career development and counseling; and prevention and health.

Educational psychology – study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations.

Forensic psychology – intersection between psychology and the courtroom—criminal, civil, family and Federal.

Health psychology – concerned with understanding how biological, psychological, environmental, and cultural factors are involved in physical health and illness.

Industrial and organizational psychology
– scientific study of employees, workplaces, and organizations.

Legal psychology – involves empirical, psychological research of the law, legal institutions, and people who come into contact with the law.

Media psychology – seeks an understanding of how people perceive, interpret, use, and respond to a media-rich world.

Military psychology – research, design and application of psychological theories and experimentation data towards understanding, predicting and countering behaviours either in friendly or enemy forces or civilian population that may be undesirable, threatening or potentially dangerous to the conduct of military operations.

Occupational health psychology – concerned with the psychosocial characteristics of workplaces that contribute to the development of health-related problems in people who work.

Pastoral psychology – application of psychological methods and interpretive frameworks to religious traditions, as well as to both religious and irreligious individuals.

Political psychology – interdisciplinary academic field dedicated to understanding political science, politicians and political behavior through the use of psychological theories.

Psychometrics – field of study concerned with the theory and technique of psychological measurement, which includes the measurement of knowledge, abilities, attitudes, personality traits, and educational measurement.

School psychology – field that applies principles of clinical psychology and educational psychology to the diagnosis and treatment of children's and adolescents' behavioral and learning problems.

Sport psychology – interdisciplinary science that draws on knowledge from the fields of Kinesiology and Psychology.

Systems psychology – branch of applied psychology that studies human behaviour and experience in complex systems.

Traffic psychology – study of the behavior of road users and the psychological processes underlying that behavior
(Rothengatter, 1997, 223) as well as to the relationship between behavior and accidents
Behavior analysis – philosophy of psychology based on the proposition that all things that organisms do can and should be regarded as behaviors, and that psychological disorders are best treated by altering behavior patterns or modifying the environment.

Biopsychology – application of the principles of biology (in particular neurobiology), to the study of physiological, genetic, and developmental mechanisms of behavior in human and non-human animals.

Cognitive psychology – subdiscipline of psychology exploring internal mental processes.

Clinical psychology – integration of science, theory and clinical knowledge for the purpose of understanding, preventing, and relieving psychologically based distress or dysfunction and to promote subjective well-being and personal development.

Cultural psychology – field of psychology which assumes the idea that culture and mind are inseparable, and that psychological theories grounded in one culture are likely to be limited in applicability when applied to a different culture.

Developmental psychology – scientific study of systematic psychological changes, emotional changes, and perception changes that occur in human beings over the course of their life span.

Educational psychology – study of how humans learn in educational settings, the effectiveness of educational interventions, the psychology of teaching, and the social psychology of schools as organizations.

Evolutionary psychology – approach in the social and natural sciences that examines psychological traits such as memory, perception, and language from a modern evolutionary perspective.

Experimental psychology – application of experimental methods to the study of behavior and the processes that underlie it.

Forensic psychology – intersection between psychology and the courtroom—criminal, civil, family and Federal.

Health psychology – concerned with understanding how biological, psychological, environmental, and cultural factors are involved in physical health and illness.

Humanistic psychology – psychological perspective which rose to prominence in the mid-20th century in the context of the tertiary sector beginning to produce in the most developed countries in the world more than the secondary sector was producing, for the first time in human history demanding creativity and new understanding of human capital.

Industrial and organizational psychology
– scientific study of employees, workplaces, and organizations.

Music therapy – allied health profession and one of the expressive therapies, consisting of an interpersonal process in which a trained music therapist uses music to help clients to improve or maintain their health.

Neuropsychology – studies the structure and function of the brain as they relate to specific psychological processes and behaviors.

Personality psychology – branch of psychology that studies personality and individual differences.

Psychometrics – field of study concerned with the theory and technique of psychological measurement, which includes the measurement of knowledge, abilities, attitudes, personality traits, and educational measurement.

Psychology of religion – application of psychological methods and interpretive frameworks to religious traditions, as well as to both religious and irreligious individuals.

Psychophysics – quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.

Sensation and perception psychology –
Public administration – houses the implementation of government policy and an academic discipline that studies this implementation and that prepares civil servants for this work.

Religious studies – is an academic field devoted to research into religion beliefs, behaviors, and institutions.

Science and technology studies – the study of how society, politics, and culture affect scientific research and technological innovation, and how these, in turn, affect society, politics and culture.

Social work – professional and academic discipline that seeks to improve the quality of life and wellbeing of an individual, group, or community by intervening through research, policy, community organizing, direct practice, and teaching on behalf of those afflicted with poverty or any real or perceived social injustices and violations of their human rights.

Sociology – studies society using various methods of empirical investigation and critical analysis to understand human social activity, from the micro level of individual agency and interaction to the macro level of systems and social structure.

Criminology – study of the nature, extent, causes, and control of criminal behavior in both the individual and in society.

Demography – statistical study of human populations and sub-populations.

Urban and rural sociology - the analysis of social life in metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas.

Sustainable development – the process of meeting human development goals while sustaining the ability of natural systems to continue to provide the natural resources and natural system services upon which the economy of human society depends.

Sustainable agriculture – farming in sustainable ways based on an understanding of ecosystem services, the study of relationships between organisms and their environment.

Sustainability studies – focuses on the interdisciplinary perspective of the sustainability concept.
Programs include instruction in sustainable development, geography, environmental policies, ethics, ecology, landscape architecture, city and regional planning, economics, natural resources, sociology, and anthropology, many of which are considered social sciences in their own right.

==
History of social science ==
History of the social sciences
History of anthropology
History of archaeology
History of area studies
History of communication studies
History of cultural studies
History of development studies
History of economics
History of education
History of environmental studies
History of gender studies
History of geography
History of human geography
History of history
History of information science
History of journalism
History of law
History of library science
History of linguistics
History of management
History of political science
History of international studies
History of international relations
History of political economy
History of public administration
History of psychology
History of social psychology
History of social work
History of sociology
History of criminal justice
History of demography
History of sustainability
==
Education and degrees ==
Bachelor of
Social Science
Bachelor of Science
Bachelor of Arts
Bachelor of Economics


==
General social science concepts ==
Ethical research in social science
Open and closed systems in social scienceAshishmedia


==
Social science organizations ==


==
Social science publications ==
List of social science journals


==
Social scientists ==
List of anthropologists
List of business theorists
List of developmental psychologists
List of economists
List of socialist economists
List of educational psychologists
List of geographers
List of psychologists
List of political scientists
List of social psychologists
List of sociologists
List of urban planners
List of urban theorists


==
See also ==
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science
National Nothing Day


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Social Science Virtual Library
UC Berkeley Experimental Social Science Laboratory
Intute: Social Sciences (UK)
History of Social Science
On the Social Sciences Critical Essays
praxeology as the method of the social sciences
in defense of extreme apriorism
The Brazilian military government, also known as the Fifth Brazilian Republic (Portuguese: Quinta República Brasileira), was the authoritarian military dictatorship that ruled Brazil from 1 April 1964 to 15 March 1985.
It began with the 1964 coup d'état led by the Armed Forces against the administration of President João Goulart—who, having been vice-president, had assumed the office of president upon the resignation of the democratically elected president Jânio Quadros—and ended when José Sarney took office on 15 March 1985 as President.
The military revolt was fomented by Magalhães Pinto, Adhemar de Barros, and Carlos Lacerda (who had already participated in the conspiracy to depose Getúlio Vargas in 1945), then governors of the states of Minas Gerais, São Paulo, and Guanabara, respectively.
The coup was planned and executed by the most forefront commanders of the Brazilian Army and received the support of almost all high-ranking members of the military, along with conservative elements in society, like the Catholic Church and anti-communist civil movements among the Brazilian middle and upper classes.
Internationally, it was supported by the State Department of the United States through its embassy in Brasilia.
The military dictatorship lasted for almost twenty-one years; despite initial pledges to the contrary, the military government, in 1967, enacted a new, restrictive Constitution, and stifled freedom of speech and political opposition.
The regime adopted nationalism, economic development, and anti-communism as its guidelines.

The dictatorship reached the height of its popularity in the 1970s with the so-called "Brazilian Miracle", even as the regime censored all media, and tortured and exiled dissidents.
João Figueiredo became President in March 1979; in the same year he passed the Amnesty Law for political crimes committed for and against the regime.
While combating the "hardliners" inside the government and supporting a re-democratization policy, Figueiredo could not control the crumbling economy, chronic inflation and concurrent fall of other military dictatorships in South America.
Amid massive popular demonstrations in the streets of the main cities of the country, the first free elections in 20 years were held for the national legislature in 1982.
In 1985, another election was held, this time to elect (indirectly) a new president, being contested between civilian candidates for the first time since the 1960s, being won by the opposition.
In 1988, a new Constitution was passed and Brazil officially returned to democracy.
Since then, the military has remained under the control of civilian politicians, with no official role in domestic politics.

Brazil's military government provided a model for other military regimes and dictatorships throughout Latin America, being systematized by the so-called "Doctrine of National Security", which "justified" the military's actions as operating in the interest of national security in a time of crisis, creating an intellectual basis upon which other military regimes relied.
In 2014, nearly 30 years after the regime collapsed, the Brazilian military recognized for the first time the excesses committed by its agents during the years of the dictatorship, including the torture and murder of political dissidents.
In May 2018, the United States government released a memorandum, written by Henry Kissinger, dating back to April 1974 (when he was serving as Secretary of State), confirming that the leadership of the Brazilian military regime was fully aware of the killing of dissidents.
It is estimated that 434 people were either confirmed killed or went missing (not to be seen again), 8,000 indigenous people suffered a genocide and 20,000 people were tortured during the military dictatorship in Brazil.
While some human rights activists and others assert that the true figure could be much higher, the armed forces have always disputed this.

==
Background ==
Brazil's political crisis stemmed from the way in which the political tensions had been controlled in the 1930s and 1940s during the Vargas Era.
Vargas' dictatorship and the presidencies of his democratic successors marked different stages of Brazilian populism (1930–1964), an era of economic nationalism, state-guided modernization, and import substitution trade policies.
Vargas' policies were intended to foster an autonomous capitalist development in Brazil, by linking industrialization to nationalism, a formula based on a strategy of reconciling the conflicting interests of the middle class, foreign capital, the working class, and the landed oligarchy.

Essentially, this was the epic of the rise and fall of Brazilian populism from 1930 to 1964:
Brazil witnessed over the course of this time period the change from export-orientation of the First Brazilian Republic (1889–1930) to the import substitution of the populist era (1930–1964) and then to a moderate structuralism of 1964–80.
Each of these structural changes forced a realignment in society and caused a period of political crisis.
Period of right-wing military dictatorship marked the transition between populist era and the current period of democratization.

The Brazilian Armed Forces acquired great political clout after the Paraguayan War.
The politicization of the Armed Forces was evidenced by the Proclamation of the Republic, which overthrew the Empire, or within Tenentismo (Lieutenants' movement) and the Revolution of 1930.
Tensions escalated again in the 1950s, as important military circles (the "hard-line militars", old positivists whose origins could be traced back to the AIB and the Estado Novo) joined the elite, medium classes and right-wing activists in attempts to stop Presidents Juscelino Kubitschek and João Goulart from taking office, due to their supposed support for Communist ideology.
While Kubitschek proved to be friendly to capitalist institutions, Goulart promised far-reaching reforms, expropriated business interests and promoted economical-political neutrality with the US.

After Goulart suddenly assumed power in 1961, society became deeply polarized, with the elites fearing that Brazil would become another Cuba and join the Communist Bloc, while many thought that the reforms would boost greatly the growth of Brazil and end its economical subservience with the US, or even that Goulart could be used to increase the popularity of the Communist agenda.
Influential politicians, such as Carlos Lacerda and even Kubitschek, media moguls (Roberto Marinho, Octávio Frias, Júlio de Mesquita Filho), the Church, landowners, businessmen, and the middle class called for a coup d'état by the Armed Forces to remove the government.
The old "hard-line" army officers, seeing a chance to impose their positivist economic program, convinced the loyalists that Goulart was a communist menace.

==
Goulart and the fall of the Fourth Republic ==
After the Presidency of Juscelino Kubitschek, the right wing opposition elected Jânio Quadros, who based his electoral campaign on criticizing Kubitschek and government corruption.
Quadros' campaign symbol was a broom, with which the president would "sweep away the corruption.
"
In his brief tenure as president, Quadros made moves to resume relations with some communist countries, made some controversial laws and law proposals, but without legislative support, he couldn't follow his agenda.
In the last days of August 1961, Quadros tried to break the impasse by resigning from the presidency, apparently with the intention of being reinstated by popular demand.
João Goulart was Vice President.
He was a member of the Brazilian Labour Party and has been active in politics since the Vargas Era.
As Quadros resigned, Goulart was outside the country visiting China.
At that time Brazil's President and Vice President were elected from different party tickets.
Some military top brass tried to prevent Goulart from assuming the Presidency, accusing him of being communist, but the legalist campaign in support of Goulart was already strong.
The crisis was solved by the "parliamentarian solution" - an arrangement that decreased the powers of the President by creating a new post of Prime Minister which was filled by Tancredo Neves and instituting a Parliamentary republic.

Brazil returned to Presidential government in 1963 after a referendum, and, as Goulart's powers grew, it became evident that he would seek to implement "base reforms" (bottom-up reforms) such as land reform and nationalization of enterprises in various economic sectors (which would remove the nation from its antique latifundial economy).
The reforms were considered communist.
Goulart sought to implement the reforms regardless of assent from established institutions such as Congress.
Goulart had low parliamentarian support, due to the fact that his centrist attempts to win support from both sides of the spectrum gradually came to alienate both.
Over time, Goulart was forced to shift well to the left of his mentor Getúlio Vargas and was forced to mobilize the working class and even the peasantry amid falling urban bourgeois support.
The core of Brazilian populism was economic nationalism, and that was no longer appealing to the middle classes.
On 1 April 1964, after a night of conspiracy, rebel troops made their way to Rio de Janeiro, considered a legalist bastion.
São Paulo's and Rio de Janeiro's generals were convinced to join the coup.
To prevent a civil war, and in knowledge that the USA would openly support the army, the President fled first to Rio Grande do Sul, and then went to exile in Uruguay, where his family owned large estates.

===
United States involvement ===
The US Ambassador Lincoln Gordon later admitted that the embassy had given money to anti-Goulart candidates in the 1962 municipal elections, and had encouraged the plotters; many extra United States military and intelligence personnel were operating in four United States Navy oil tankers and the aircraft carrier USS Forrestal, in an operation code-named Operation Brother Sam.
These ships had positioned off the coast of Rio de Janeiro in case Brazilian troops required military assistance during the 1964 coup.
A document from Gordon in 1963 to
US president John F. Kennedy also describes the ways João Goulart should be put down, and his fears of a communist intervention supported by the Soviets or by Cuba.
Washington immediately recognized the new government in 1964, and hailed the coup d'état as one of the "democratic forces" that had allegedly staved off the hand of international communism.
American mass media outlets like Henry Luce's TIME also gave positive remarks about the dissolution of political parties and salary controls at the beginning of Castello Branco mandate.
Brazil actively participated in the CIA-backed state terror campaign against left-wing dissidents known as Operation Condor.
===
The Excuse of the "Communist Threat" ===
The argument used to justify the establishment of a military dictatorship in the country was the imminence of a "communist threat" in 1964.
The historian Rodrigo Patto Sá Motta (pt) disputes the assertion that communism was of sufficient strength in Brasil to threaten the democratic system in 1964.
In an interview, Motta said:
If the political regime established in 1964 was popular and had the majority support of the population, why the hell did it need authoritarian mechanisms to stay in power?".
And he adds: "Let us consider for a moment, just to construct hypothetical reasoning, that there was a serious communist threat and the military intervention aimed at defending democracy against totalitarianism
(I reiterate that I consider such arguments unfounded).
If so, what justification, then, for having installed a dictatorship and ending up in power for two decades?
Why did they not hand over power to civilians after the "threat" had been defeated?

Instead, Motta asserts that the assertion of a "communist threat" was fabricated to unify the Brasilian armed forces and increase their support among the general population.

...
the big press and other institutions made a strong discursive dam in favor of the fall of Goulart, in which they mobilized to exhaustion the theme of red danger (communists) to increase the climate of panic.
What is certain is that on leaving the HQs the Armed Forces unbalanced the situation and promoted the overthrow of Goulart, so their role was essential in the coup.

The Intercept reported that the asserted threat of Jango's "guerrillas," the weapons in possession of the Peasant Leagues (pt) (considered the MST of the time) and the communist infiltrations into the armed forces were nothing more than fantasy, and that the coup of 64 occurred without resistance, since "there was no resistance."
Moreover, the communist armed struggles only appeared after the implementation of the dictatorship, and not before it, and in fact never put Brazilian democracy at risk.

== Divisions within the officer corps ==
The armed forces' officer corps was divided between those who believed that they should confine themselves to their barracks, and the hard-liners who regarded politicians as willing to turn Brazil to communism.
The victory of the hard-liners dragged Brazil into what political scientist Juan J. Linz called "an authoritarian situation."
However, because the hard-liners could not ignore the counterweight opinions of their colleagues or the resistance of society, they were unable to institutionalize their agenda politically.
In addition, they did not attempt to eliminate liberal constitutionalism because they feared disapproval of international opinion and damage to their alignment with the United States.
The United States as bastion of anticommunism during the Cold War, provided the ideology that the authoritarians used to justify their hold on power.
Washington also preached liberal democracy, which forced the authoritarians to assume the contradictory position of defending democracy, while destroying it.
Their concern for appearances caused them to abstain from personal dictatorship by requiring each successive general-president to hand over power to his replacement.

Presidents during the military regime
		
		
		
		
		


==
Establishing the regime, Castelo Branco ==
The Army could not find a civilian politician acceptable to all of the factions that supported the ouster of João Goulart.

On 9 April 1964 coup leaders published the First Institutional Act, which greatly limited the freedoms of the 1946 constitution.
President was granted authority to remove elected officials from office, dismiss civil servants, and revoke for 10 years the political rights of those found guilty of subversion or misuse of public funds.
On 11 April 1964 the Congress elected the Army Chief of Staff, Marshal Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco as President for the remainder of Goulart's term.

Castelo Branco had intentions of overseeing a radical reform of the political-economic system and then returning power to elected officials.
He refused to remain in power beyond the remainder of Goulart's term or to institutionalize the military in power.
However, competing demands radicalized the situation.
Military "hard-line" wanted a complete purge of left-wing and populist influences while civilian politicians obstructed Castelo Branco's reforms.
The latter accused him of hard-line actions to achieve his objectives, and the former accused him of leniency.
On 27 October 1965, after victory of opposition candidates in two provincial elections, he signed the Second Institutional act which purged Congress, removed objectionable state governors and expanded President's arbitrary powers at the expense of the legislative and judiciary branches.
This gave him the latitude to repress the populist left but also provided the subsequent governments of Artur da Costa e Silva (1967–69) and Emílio Garrastazu Médici (1969–74) with a "legal" basis for their hard-line authoritarian rule.

But this is no military dictatorship.
If it were, Carlos Lacerda would never be allowed to say the things he says.
Everything in Brazil is free — but controlled.

– Minister of Transportation and colonel Mario Andreazza to journalist Carl Rowan, 1967
Castelo Branco, through extra-constitutional decrees dubbed "Institutional Acts"
(Portuguese:
"Ato Institucional" or "AI"), gave the executive the unchecked ability to change the constitution and remove anyone from office ("AI-1") as well as to have the presidency elected by Congress.
A two-party system was created - the ruling government-backed National Renewal Alliance (ARENA) and the mild not-leftist opposition Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB) party ("AI-2").
In the new Constitution of 1967 the name of the country was changed from Republic of the United States of Brazil to Federative Republic of Brazil.

==
Hardening of the regime, Costa e Silva ==
Castelo Branco was succeeded to the Presidency by General Artur da Costa e Silva who was representative of hard-line elements of the regime.
On 13 December 1968 he signed the Fifth Institutional Act that gave President dictatorial powers, dissolved Congress and state legislatures, suspended the constitution, and imposed censorship.
On 31 August 1969 Costa e Silva suffered a stroke.
Instead of his Vice-president all state power was assumed by military joint, which then chose General Emílio Garrastazu Médici as the new President.

== Years of Lead, Médici ==
A hardliner, Médici sponsored the greatest human rights abuses of the time period.
During his government, persecution and torture of dissidents, harassment against journalists and press censorship became ubiquitous.
The succession of kidnappings of foreign ambassadors in Brazil embarrassed the military government.
The anti-government manifestations and the action of guerrilla movements generated an increase in repressive measures.
Urban guerrillas from Ação Libertadora Nacional and Revolutionary Movement
8th October were suppressed, and military operations undertaken to finish the Araguaia Guerrilla War.

The "ideological frontiers" of Brazilian foreign policy were reinforced.
By the end of 1970, the official minimum wage went down to US$40/month, and the more than one-third of Brazilian workforce which had their wages tied to it lost about 50% of its purchasing power in relation to the 1960 levels of the Juscelino Kubitschek administration.

Nevertheless, Médici was popular, as his term was met with the largest economic growth of any Brazilian President, the Brazilian Miracle unfolded and the country won the 1970 Football World Cup.
In 1971 Médici presented the First National Development Plan aimed at increasing the rate of economic growth especially in remote Northeast and Amazonia.
The results of his economic policy consolidated the option for the national-development model.
Because of these results, the country's foreign economic connections were transformed, allowing its international presence to be broadened.

In November 1970 federal, state, and municipal elections were held.
Most of the seats were won by ARENA candidates.
In 1973 electoral college was created and in January 1974 General Ernesto Geisel was elected to be the next President.
==
Resistance ==
The fall of João Goulart worried many citizens.
Many students, Marxists, and workers formed groups that opposed military rule.
A minority of these adopted direct armed struggle, while most supported political solutions to the mass suspension of human rights.
In the first few months after the coup, thousands of people were detained, while thousands of others were removed from their civil service or university positions.

In 1968 there was a brief relaxation of the nation's repressive politics.
Experimental artists and musicians formed the Tropicalia movement during this time.
However, some of the major popular musicians Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso, for instance were arrested, imprisoned, and exiled.
Chico Buarque left the country, in self-proclaimed exile.

The first signs of resistance to this repression were seen with the appearance of widespread student protests.
In response, the government issued the Fifth Institutional Act in December 1968, which suspended habeas corpus, closed Congress, ended democratic government, and instituted other repressive features.

In 1969 the Revolutionary Movement 8th October kidnapped Charles Burke Elbrick, the U.S. ambassador to Brazil.
The resistance fighters demanded the release of imprisoned dissidents who were being cruelly tortured in exchange for Ambassador Elbrick.
The government responded by adopting more brutal measures of counter-insurgency, leading to the assassination of Carlos Marighela, a guerrilla leader, two months after Elbrick's kidnapping.
This marked the beginning of the decline of armed opposition.
In 1970, Nobuo Okuchi, Japanese consul general in Sāo Paulo, was kidnapped, while Curtis C. Cutter, U.S. consul in Porto Alegre, was wounded in the shoulder but escaped kidnapping.
Also in 1970, Ehrenfried von Holleben, West German Ambassador, was kidnapped in Rio and one of his bodyguards was killed.

== Repression ==
After the military coup, the new government put forward a series of measures to strengthen its rule and weaken the opposition.
The complex structure of the state’s repression reached several areas of Brazilian society, and involved the implementation of measures of censorship, persecutions, and violations of human rights.
The systematic repression during this period in the Brazilian history was dependent on and alternated between the so-called “moderates” (“moderados”) and “hard-liners” (“linha dura”) in power.
The most aggressive set of repressive measures took place during the period between 1968 and 1978, called the Leaden Years (Anos de Chumbo).
The repressive characteristic of the regime, however, was present in the Brazilian society throughout the military rule.

===
Censorship ===
The mainstream media, initially in pair with the military intervention at the coup’s eve, later became contrary to the government and thus under heavy censorship rules .
The management of all sectors of national communication was overseen by the Special Counsel of Public Relations (Assessoria Especial de Relações Públicas) created in the beginning of 1968 while censorship was institutionalized through the Higher Counsel of Censorship (Conselho Superior de Censura) later on that same year.
The Higher Counsel of Censorship was overseen by the Ministry of Justice, which was in charge of analyzing and revising decisions put forward by the director of the Federal Cops department.
The ministry also was responsible for establishing guidelines and norms to implement censorship at local levels.
Institutionalized censorship affected all areas of communication in Brazilian society:- newspaper, television, music, theater, and all industries related to mass communication activities, including marketing companies.
Despite the regime’s efforts to censor any and all pieces of media that could hurt the government, the population found ways to get around it as much as possible.
Even though artists and journalists had to have permission from the counsel to publish any piece of communication, they sometimes were able to surpass censorship barriers through unconventional ways.
Musicians would rely on word play to publish songs with veiled criticisms towards the government while famous newspapers would fill in empty spaces left blank due to censored articles with random cake recipes, a way to indicate to the population the government’s involvement with their publication.

===
Human rights violations ===
As early as 1964, the military government was already using the various forms of torture it devised systematically to not only gain information it used to crush opposition groups, but to intimidate and silence any further potential opponents.
This radically increased after 1968.While other dictatorships killed more people, Brazil saw the widespread use of torture, as it also had during the dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas; Vargas's enforcer Filinto Müller has been named the "patron of torturers" in Brazil.
Advisors from the United States and United Kingdom trained Brazilian forces in interrogation and torture.
To extinguish its left-wing opponents, the dictatorship used arbitrary arrests, imprisonment without trials, kidnapping, and most of all, torture, which included rape and castration.
The book Torture in Brazil provides accounts of only a fraction of the atrocities committed by the government.
The military government murdered hundreds of others, although this was done mostly in secret and the cause of death often falsely reported as accidental.
The government occasionally dismembered and hid the bodies.
French General Paul Aussaresses, a veteran of the Algerian War, came to Brazil in 1973.
General Aussaresses used "counter-revolutionary warfare" methods during the Battle of Algiers, including the systemic use of torture, executions and death flights.
He later trained U.S. officers and taught military courses for Brazil's military intelligence.
He later acknowledged maintaining close links with the military.
So far nobody has been punished for these human rights violations, because of the 1979 Amnesty Law written by the members of the government who stayed in place during the transition to democracy.
The law grants amnesty and impunity to any government official or citizen accused of political crimes during the dictatorship.
Because of a certain "cultural amnesia" in Brazil, the victims have never garnered much sympathy, respect, or acknowledgement of their suffering.
Work is underway to alter the Amnesty Law, which has been condemned by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
The National Truth Commission was created in 2011 attempting to help the nation face its past and honor those who fought for democracy, and to compensate the family members of those killed or disappeared.
Its work was concluded in 2014.
It reported that under military regime at least 191 people were killed and 243 "disappeared".
The total number of deaths probably measures in the hundreds, not reaching but could be nearing one thousand, while more than 50,000 people were detained and 10,000 forced to go into exile.
According to the Comissão de Direitos Humanos e Assistência Jurídica da Ordem dos Advogados do Brasil, the "Brazilian death toll from government torture, assassination and 'disappearances' for 1964–81 was [...]
333, which included 67 killed in the Araguaia guerrilla front in 1972–74".
According to the Brazilian Army 97 military and civilians were killed by terrorist and guerrilla actions made by leftist groups during the same period.
In a 2014 report by Brazil's National Truth Commission which documented the human rights abuses of the military government, it was noted that the United States "had spent years teaching the torture techniques to the Brazilian military during that period."
==
Geisel administration, distensão, and the 1973 oil shock ==
It was in this atmosphere that retired General Ernesto Geisel (1974–79) was elected to Presidency with Médici's approval.
Geisel was a well-connected Army General and former president of Petrobras.

There had been intense behind-the-scenes maneuvering by the hard-liners against him and by the more moderate supporters of Castelo Branco for him.
Fortunately for Geisel, his older brother, Orlando Geisel was the Minister of Army, and his close ally, General João Baptista de Oliveira Figueiredo, was chief of Médici's military staff.
Once in power, Geisel adopted a more moderate stance with regards to political opposition than his predecessor Médici.

===
Decompression policy ===
Although not immediately understood by civilians, Ernesto Geisel's accession signaled a move toward a less oppressive rule.
He replaced several regional commanders with trusted officers and labeled his political programs abertura (opening) and distensão (decompression), meaning a gradual relaxation of authoritarian rule.
It would be, in his words, "the maximum of development possible with the minimum of indispensable security.
"Together
with his Chief of Staff, Minister Golbery do Couto e Silva Geisel devised a plan of gradual, slow democratization that would eventually succeed despite all the threats and opposition from hard-liners.

However, the torture of the regime's left-wing and Communist opponents by DOI-CODI was still ongoing as demonstrated by the murder of Vladimir Herzog.

Geisel allowed opposition Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB) to run an almost free election campaign before November 1974 elections and MDB won more votes than ever.

When opposition MDB party won more seats in 1976 Congress elections, Geisel in April 1977 used powers granted to him by AI-5, dismissed Congress and introduced a new package of laws (April Package), that made gubernatorial elections indirect and created an electoral college for electing the next President, thus safeguarding ARENA positions.

In 1977 and 1978 the Presidential succession issue caused further political confrontation with the hard-liners.
In October 1977 he suddenly dismissed the far-right Minister of Army, General Sylvio Couto Coelho da Frota who had tried to become candidate for the next President.
In May 1978 Geisel had to deal with the first labor strikes since 1964.
500 000 workers, led by the future President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, demanded and won 11% wage increase.
By the end of his Presidency Geisel had allowed exiled citizens to return, restored habeas corpus, repealed the extraordinary powers, on December 1978 ended the Fifth Institutional Act, and imposed General João Figueiredo (1979–85) as his successor in March 1979.

===
Economy ===
President Geisel sought to maintain high economic growth rates of the Brazilian Miracle which were tied to maintaining the prestige of the regime, even while seeking to deal with the effects of the 1973 oil crisis.
Geisel removed long-time Minister of Finance Antônio Delfim Netto.
He maintained massive state investments in infrastructure—highways, telecommunications, hydroelectric dams, mineral extraction, factories, and atomic energy.
All this required more international borrowing and increased state's debt.

Fending off nationalist objections, he opened Brazil to oil prospecting by foreign firms for the first time since the early 1950s.
He also tried to reduce Brazil's reliance on oil, by signing a US$10 billion agreement with West Germany to build eight nuclear reactors in Brazil.
During this time ethanol production program was promoted as an alternative to gasoline and the first ethanol fueled cars were produced.

Brazil suffered drastic reductions in its terms of trade as a result of the 1973 oil crisis.
In the early 1970s, the performance of the export sector was undermined by an overvalued currency.
With the trade balance under pressure, the oil shock led to a sharply higher import bill.
Thus, the Geisel government borrowed billions of dollars to see Brazil through the oil crisis.
This strategy was effective in promoting growth, but it also raised Brazil's import requirements markedly, increasing the already large current-account deficit.
The current account was financed by running up the foreign debt.
The expectation was that the combined effects of import substitution industrialization and export expansion eventually would bring about growing trade surpluses, allowing the service and repayment of the foreign debt.

Brazil shifted its foreign policy to meet its economic needs.
"
Responsible pragmatism" replaced strict alignment with the United States and a worldview based on ideological frontiers and blocs of nations.
Because Brazil was 80% dependent on imported oil, Geisel shifted the country from uncritical support of Israel to a more neutral stance on Middle Eastern affairs.
His government also recognized the People's Republic of China and the new socialist governments of Angola and Mozambique, both former Portuguese colonies.
The government moved closer to Latin America, Europe, and Japan.

Brasil's intention to build nuclear reactors with West Germany's help created tensions with the US which did not want to see a nuclear Brazil.
After election of Carter a greater emphasis was put on the human rights.
The new Harkin Amendment limited American military assistance to countries with human rights violations.
Brazilian right-wingers and military viewed this as incursion on Brazilian sovereignty and Geisel renounced any future military aid from United States in April 1977.

==
Transition to democracy, Figueiredo ==
President João Figueiredo steered the country back to democracy and promoted the transfer of power to civilian rule, facing opposition from hardliners in the military.
Figueiredo was an Army General and former head of the secret service, National Intelligence Service of Brazil.

As president, he continued the gradual "abertura" (democratization) process that was begun in 1974.
An amnesty law, signed by Figueiredo on 28 August 1979, amnestied those convicted of "political or related" crimes between 1961 and 1978.
In the early 1980s, the military regime could no longer effectively maintain the two-party system established in 1966.
The Figueiredo administration dissolved the government-controlled National Renewal Alliance Party (ARENA) and allowed new parties to be formed.
The president was often incapacitated by illness and took two prolonged leaves for health treatment in 1981 and 1983, but the civilian vice president Antônio Aureliano Chaves de Mendonça did not enjoy major political power.

In 1981 the Congress enacted a law on restoration of direct elections of state governors.
The general election of 1982 brought a narrow victory to ARENA's successor, pro-government Democratic Social Party (43.22% of the vote), while the opposition Brazilian Democratic Movement Party received 42.96% of votes.
The governorship of three major states, São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Minas Gerais, was won by the opposition.

However, the political developments were overshadowed by increasing economic problems.
As inflation and unemployment soared, the foreign debt reached massive proportions making Brazil the world's biggest debtor owing about US$90 billion to international lenders.
The austerity program imposed by the government brought no signs of recovery for the Brazilian economy.

In 1984, Diretas Já demonstrators took over the country and epitomized the newly regained freedoms of assembly and expression, but the movement's primary objective was not attained, and the 1985 presidential election was held indirectly, via selected electoral college.
The opposition vigorously struggled for passing a constitutional amendment that would allow direct popular Presidential elections in November 1984, but the proposal failed to win passage in the Congress.
Opposition's candidate Tancredo Neves succeeded Figueiredo when Congress held an election for the new President.

==
Foreign relations ==
During this period Brazil's international agenda incorporated new perceptions.
With nationalist military — who were State-control devotees — in power, there was increased energy for questioning the disparities of the international system.
Interest in expanding state presence in the economy was accompanied by policies intended to transform Brazil's profile abroad.
The relationship with the United States was still valued, but policy alignment was no longer total.
Connections between Brazilian international activity and its economic interests led foreign policy, conducted by foreign minister José de Magalhães Pinto (1966–67), to be labeled "Prosperity Diplomacy.
"This new emphasis of Brazil's international policy was followed by an appraisal of relations maintained with the United States in the previous years.
It was observed that the attempted strengthening of ties had yielded limited benefits.
A revision of the Brazilian ideological stand within the world system was added to this perception.
This state of affairs was further enhanced by the momentary relaxation of the bipolar confrontation during détente.
In this context, it became possible to think of substituting the concept of limited sovereignty for full sovereignty.
Development was made a priority for Brazilian diplomacy.
These conceptual transformations were supported by the younger segments of Itamaraty (Ministry of External Relations), identified with the tenets of the independent foreign policy that had distinguished the early 1960s.
Based on the priorities of its foreign policy, Brazil adopted new positions in various international organizations.
Its performance at the II Conference of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
in 1968, in defense of non-discriminatory and preferential treatment for underdeveloped countries' manufactured goods, was noteworthy.
The same level of concern distinguished the Brazilian stand at the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA) meeting in Viña del Mar (1969).
On this occasion, Brazil voiced its support of a Latin American union project.
In the security sphere, disarmament was defended and the joint control system of the two superpowers condemned.
Brazil was particularly critical of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, with a view to guarantee the right to develop its own nuclear technology.
This prerogative had already been defended previously, when the Brazilian government decided not to accept the validity of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TNP) in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Brazil's position on the TNP became emblematic of the negative posture that it would, from then onwards, sustain regarding the power politics of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Its initial detailing was influenced by the presence of João Augusto de Araújo Castro as ambassador to the UN and president of the Security Council in the years 1968–69.
Brazil tried to strengthen its position with nuclear cooperation negotiated settlements with countries such as Israel (1966), France (1967), India (1968) and the United States (1972).The changes in Brazilian diplomacy were to be also reflected in other matters on the international agenda, such as the moderate stance taken with regard to the "Six-Day War" between Arabs and Israelis.
In the multilateral sphere, the country championed the cause of the reform of the United Nations Organization charter.
The expansion of Brazil's international agenda coincided with the administrative reform of the Ministry of External Relations.
Its move to Brasília in 1971 was followed by internal modernization.
New departments were created, responding to the diversification of the international agenda and the increasing importance of economic diplomacy.
Examples include the creation of a trade promotion system (1973) and the Alexandre de Gusmão Foundation (1971) to develop studies and research foreign policy.
Foreign policy during the Gibson Barboza mandate (1969–74)
united three basic positions.
The first one, ideological, defended the existence of military governments in Latin America.
To achieve that, the Organization of American States fought terrorism in the region.
The second one criticized the distension process between the two superpowers, condemning the effects of American and Soviet power politics.
The third requested support for development, considering that Brazil, with all its economic potential, deserved greater responsibility within the international system.
New demands and intentions appeared, related to the idea that the nation was strengthening its bargaining power in the world system.
At international forums, its main demand became "collective economic security".
The endeavor to lead Third World countries made Brazil value multilateral diplomacy.
Efforts in this direction can be observed at the UN Conference on Environment (1972), the GATT meeting in Tokyo (1973) and the Law of the Sea Conference (1974).This new Brazilian stance served as a base for the revival of its relationship with the United States.
Differentiation from other Latin American countries was sought, to mean special treatment from the United States.
Nevertheless, not only was this expectation not fulfilled but military assistance and the MEC-USAID educational cooperation agreement were interrupted.
Washington held itself aloof at the time of President Médici's visit to the United States in 1971.
In response, especially in the military and diplomatic spheres, nationalist ideas were kindled and raised questions about the alignment policy with the United States.
The presence of J.A. de Araújo Castro as ambassador to Washington contributed to the re-definition of relations with the American government.
The strategic move was to try to expand the negotiation agenda by paying special attention to the diversification of trade relations, the beginning of nuclear cooperation, and the inclusion of new international policy themes.
In 1971 the military dictatorship helped rig Uruguayan elections, which Frente Amplio, a left-wing political party, lost.
The government participated in Operation Condor, which involved various Latin American security services (including Pinochet's DINA and the Argentine SIDE) in the assassination of political opponents.
During this period, Brazil began to devote more attention to less-developed countries.
Technical cooperation programs were initiated in Latin America and in Africa, accompanied in some cases by State company investment projects – in particular in the fields of energy and communication.
With this pretext, an inter-ministerial system was created by Itamaraty and the Ministry of Planning, whose function it was to select and coordinate international cooperation projects.
To foster these innovations, in 1972 foreign minister Gibson Barboza visited Senegal, Togo, Ghana, Dahomey, Gabon, Zaïre, Nigeria, Cameroon and Côte d'Ivoire.
However, the prospect of economic interests and the establishment of cooperation programs with these countries was not followed by a revision of the Brazilian position on the colonial issue.
Traditional loyalty was still towards Portugal.
Attempts were made to consolidate the creation of a Portuguese-Brazilian community.

==
Timeline ==
April 1964 - the coup.
October 1965
- political parties abolished, creation of two party system.

October 1965 -
Presidential elections to be indirect.

January 1967 - a new Constitution.

March 1967 -
Costa e Silva takes office.

November 1967
- opposition starts armed resistance.

March 1968 - beginning of student protests.

December 1968
- Institutional Act
Nr.5.

September 1969 - Medici selected as President.

October 1969 - a new Constitution.

January 1973 - armed resistance suppressed.

June 1973 - Medici announces Geisel as his successor.

March 1974 -
Geisel takes office.

August 1974 - political relaxation announced.

November 1974
- MDB wins in Senate elections.

April 1977 -
National Congress dismissed.

October 1977 - Head of the Armed Forces dismissed.

January 1979 - Institutional Act Nr.
5 dismissed.

March 1979 -
Figueiredo takes office.

November 1979
- two party system of ARENA and MDB ended.

November 1982
- opposition wins Lower house of Parliament.

April 1984 - amendment for direct Presidential elections defeated.

March 1985 - Jose Sarney takes office.

== See also ==
1964
Brazilian coup d'état
Corinthians Democracy
Films depicting Latin American military dictatorships
History of ethanol fuel in Brazil
Nuclear activities in Brazil
Operation Condor
Volkswagen do Brasil
List of the killed and politically disappeared people during the Brazilian military dictatorship


==
References ==


===
Sources ===
Kirsch, Bernard (1990).
Revolution in Brazil.
New York:
Basic Books.
ISBN 978-0-19-506316-5.
==
Further reading ==
The Politics of Military Rule in Brazil 1964-1985, by Thomas E. Skidmore (1988).

The Political System of Brazil:
Emergence of a "Modernizing" Authoritarian Regime, 1964–1970, by Ronald M. Schneider (1973).

The Military in Politics: Changing Patterns in Brazil, by Alfred Stepan (1974).

Brazil and the Quiet Intervention: 1964, by Phyllis R. Parker (1979).

Mission in Mufti: Brazil's Military Regimes, 1964–1985, by Wilfred A. Bacchus (1990).

Eroding Military Influence in Brazil: Politicians Against Soldiers, by Wendy Hunter (1997).

Brazil, 1964-1985:
The Military Regimes of Latin America in the Cold War by Herbert S. Klein and Francisco Vidal Luna (2017).
===
Film documentaries ===
Beyond Citizen Kane by Simon Hartog (1993)


==
External links ==
Declassified documents from US Department of State and CIA about the 1964 coup
Lethal Weapon 2 is a 1989 American buddy cop action film directed by Richard Donner, and starring Mel Gibson, Danny Glover, Joe Pesci, Patsy Kensit, Derrick O'Connor and Joss Ackland.
It is a sequel to the 1987 film Lethal Weapon and the second installment in the Lethal Weapon film series.

Gibson and Glover respectively reprise their roles as LAPD officers Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh, who protect an irritating federal witness (Pesci), while taking on a gang of South African drug dealers hiding behind diplomatic immunity.
The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Sound Editing (for Robert G. Henderson).
The film received mostly positive reviews and earned more than $227 million worldwide.

==
Plot ==
Two years after the events of the first film, LAPD sergeants Martin Riggs and Roger Murtaugh are pursuing unidentified suspects transporting an illegal shipment of gold krugerrands.
The Afrikaner apartheid government of South Africa subsequently orders Los Angeles consul-general Arjen Rudd (Joss Ackland) and security agent Pieter Vorstedt (Derrick O'Connor) to warn both detectives off the investigation; they are reassigned to protecting an obnoxious federal witness, Leo Getz (Joe Pesci), after an attack on Murtaugh's home.

It soon becomes clear that both cases are related: after an attempt on Leo's life, Riggs and Murtaugh learn of the former's murky past laundering funds for vengeful drug smugglers.
Leo leads them to the gang, but upon dispatching his would-be assassin and returning with backup they are confronted by Rudd, who invokes diplomatic immunity on behalf of his unscrupulous "associates."

Though instructed to leave the case alone, Riggs begins to openly harass the South African consulate, defying Rudd and romancing his secretary, Rika van den Haas (Patsy Kensit), a liberal-minded Afrikaner who despises her boss and his racial philosophy.
Murtaugh enlists Leo's help in creating a scene at the consulate that wins the support of anti-apartheid protesters outside.
Vorstedt is dispatched to murder all of the officers investigating them while Murtaugh deduces that Rudd is attempting to ship funds from his smuggling ring in the United States to Cape Town via Los Angeles Harbor.
Two assassins attack Murtaugh at his home, but he kills them both with his contractor's nail gun, though Leo is abducted in the process.

After killing many of the investigating officers, Vorstedt seizes Riggs at van den Haas' apartment and discloses that he was responsible for the death of Martin's wife
years earlier during a botched assassination attempt on Riggs.
He has his men kill Rika by drowning her and orders them to do the same to Riggs, who escapes and brutally kills both of the men.
He phones Murtaugh, declaring an intention to pursue Rudd and avenge his wife, Rika, and their fallen friends; the other policeman willingly forsakes his badge to aid his partner.
After rescuing Leo and destroying Rudd's house, they head for the Alba Varden, Rudd's freighter docked in the Port of Los Angeles, as the South Africans prepare their getaway with hundreds of millions in drug money.

While investigating a guarded 40 foot cargo container at the docks, Riggs and Murtaugh are locked inside by Rudd's men.
They break out of the box, scattering two pallets of Rudd's drug money into the harbor in the process.
Riggs and Murtaugh engage in a firefight with some of Rudd's men aboard the Alba Varden before separating to hunt down Rudd.

Riggs confronts and fights Vorstedt hand-to-hand, culminating when Riggs stabs Vorstedt with his own knife and crushes him by dropping a cargo container on him.
Rudd retaliates by shooting Riggs in the back multiple times with an antique Broomhandle Mauser pistol.
Rudd again invokes diplomatic immunity upon seeing Murtaugh aim his gun at him; Murtaugh fatally shoots him, revoking the claim.
He then tends to Riggs, sharing a laugh with him as more LAPD personnel respond to the scene.

== Cast ==


==
Production ==


===
Shane Black and Warren Murphy's original Play Dirty script ===
Following the success of the first film, Warner Bros. and producers decided to make the sequel.
Producer Joel Silver asked writer of the first film Shane Black to write the script for the sequel in the spring of 1987 and Black agreed.
Although he was struggling with personal issues, Black still managed to write the first draft along with his friend, novelist Warren Murphy, co-creator of Remo Williams (the lead character of The Destroyer novels).
Their original title for the script was Play Dirty.
Although many people thought that their script was brilliant, it was rejected by Silver, studio and director Richard Donner for being too dark and bloody, and
because in the ending of the script Riggs dies, while they wanted to keep him alive in case of further sequels.
They also wanted the second film to focus more on comedy, while Black's draft focused more on courage and heroics, like Riggs willing to die to protect Murtaugh and his family, due to his love for them.
When his script was rejected, Black felt that he had failed the producers.
He initially offered to give his payment back, but his agent talked him out of it.
Black also refused to re-write the script and quit from the project after working for six months on it.
Black later said how the problem with the second film was that they did too much comedy, and how he dislikes the third and fourth films because of the way Riggs' character was changed.

The final version of the script written by Jeffrey Boam that was used for filming was completely different from Black's draft, other than the scene where the stilt house is destroyed.
The character of Leo Getz was originally a minor character in Black's draft with only one scene and few lines of dialogue.
Some of the other differences include more graphic violence throughout the script, which included the South Africans being even more vicious than in the final film; at one point Shapiro, the female police officer working with Riggs and Murtaugh, is tortured to death by them.
There was also a scene where Riggs gets tortured by them in a similar way to how he was in first film, but a lot worse.
There was also an action scene in the script where a plane full of cocaine gets destroyed and cocaine falls over Los Angeles "like snow".
In Black's script the final battle took place on hills covered with a big brush fire, and after destruction of the stilt house Riggs chases the main villain Benedict (Pieter Vorstedt in the film), a much different and more dangerous character in original script and Riggs' "arch-nemesis and worst nightmare" according to Black, into the heart of the fire, after which Riggs gets stabbed and dies slowly from his wounds.
The last scene in the script was Murtaugh watching the video tape that Riggs made before the final battle since he knew that he was going to die, and on which he says goodbye to Murtaugh.
Black's reason for killing Riggs in his draft of the script, as he said in an interview, was that in first film Riggs was a "suicidal mess" who did not care about living or dying but his friendship with Murtaugh and his family was what helped him, and him sacrificing himself to save them would be the last thing he would have to do to be fully at peace.
Black also said how the death scene he wrote for Riggs was "beautiful" and would make the audience cry.
Black later labeled his rejected Play Dirty script "the best thing I ever wrote" and said he learned to trust his instincts after this experience.
Black's script was never released and despite attempts by fans to find a copy of it, it remains unreleased.
Director Richard Donner said in the film's Blu-ray commentary that the film was shot in such a way that it could be edited with two different endings, one in which Riggs dies and one in which he lives.
Audiences in test screenings responded well to Riggs' survival, and this was kept, though the last shot in the film with the camera moving away from Murtaugh holding Riggs was shot for the ending in which he dies.

===
Jeffrey Boam's final script ===
When the original Shane Black screenplay was changed, he left the series.
The rewrites that resulted in the final film are by Jeffrey Boam (screenwriter for Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade and The Lost Boys).
Boam also did some uncredited re-writing of the script for the first film when Donner thought that some parts of it were too dark and violent.
Boam initially wrote two different drafts for his re-write of  Lethal Weapon 2; one which was hard-boiled action script and one which had more comedy.
He was told to mix the two drafts together and make a new one that was going to be used for filming.
However, not only did Boam end up having to re-write the script many times even before filming started, but he also had to keep re-writing it during production since Donner would always want to improvise something new in a scene or demanded changes to be made on the script in the middle of filming.
Boam also wrote the script for Lethal Weapon 3
and he once again had to re-write his script many times before and during filming of that sequel for same reasons.
He also wrote an unused draft for the fourth film around January 1995 which had Riggs and Murtaugh fighting against a neo-Nazi survivalist militia group that was committing a terrorist attack in L.A.Screenwriter
Robert Mark Kamen said in October 2012 interview for craveonline that during the time when he was working as screenwriter for Warner Bros. and would often do lot of uncredited work on their films, he also worked on Lethal Weapon 2 and 3.
He said how amongst large chunks of the stuff he added in Lethal Weapon 2 script during re-writes were all the parts with South African villains.
Although he was uncredited for his work on this film, he did get a credit for his work on Lethal Weapon 3 because he did a lot more work on that sequel.
Originally, the character of Rika was intended to survive, with the last scene in the film being Riggs and Rika eating Thanksgiving dinner with the Murtaughs, but the director decided to kill the character to increase Riggs' motivation to destroy the South African drug smugglers.
The film was the debut of Leo Getz (Joe Pesci), a crooked but whistle-blowing CPA who is placed in protective custody by Riggs and Murtaugh, and makes the detectives' more difficult due to his neurotic behavior.
The Getz character remained a regular throughout the remainder of the film series.

===
Filming ===
The scene where Riggs is on the road outside Arjen's stilt house and grabs onto the front of the truck (the same scene with the surfboard killing a driver) was filmed on March 21, 1989.
The opening chase sequence was filmed on November 28, 1988.
The scenes where Riggs and Rika are ambushed by helicopters at night on the beach were filmed at Marineland of the Pacific in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, on "Cobble Beach".
Other portions of the film were shot in Palm Springs, California.
The Star Wars series and Ghostbusters notwithstanding (which were released some years before), the film was among the first of the summer blockbusters to feature the 'title only' style of opening that would become an established feature of 'event' films from that point on.

==
Soundtrack ==
The soundtrack was released on Warner Bros. Records and was written and performed by Michael Kamen, Eric Clapton, and David Sanborn.

The track list released commercially is as follows:
"Cheer Down" by George Harrison
"
Still Cruisin' (After All These Years)" by The Beach Boys
"Knockin' on Heaven's Door" (Bob Dylan) by Randy Crawford, Eric Clapton and David Sanborn
"Riggs"
"The Embassy"
"Riggs and Roger"
"Leo"
"Goodnight Rika"
"
The Stilt House"
"The Shipyard/Knockin' on Heaven's Door"The soundtrack also includes "I'm Not Scared" performed by Eighth Wonder, which features co-star Patsy Kensit on vocals, and The Skyliners performed "Since I Don't Have You", "This I Swear", "Lonely Way", "How Much", and "Believe Me"; however, none of these are included on the soundtrack album.

In 2013 La-La Land Records issued the complete score (plus the original soundtrack album) as Discs 3 and 4 of its Lethal Weapon Soundtrack Collection eight-disc set.

==
Release ==


===
Box office performance ===
Lethal Weapon 2 was the third most successful film of 1989 in North America (after Batman and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade), earning nearly $150 million in the US and $80.6 million overseas.

===
Critical reception ===
Lethal Weapon 2 holds an 82% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 44 reviews and has an average rating of 6.71/10.

The consensus reads: "Lethal Weapon 2 may sport a thin plot typical of action fare, but its combination of humor and adrenaline, along with the chemistry between its leads, make this a playful, entertaining sequel."
On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 70 out of 100, based on 21 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale.
The New York Times stated, "Though it includes a smashed car full of Krugerrands, a hillside house blown off its stilts and a bomb set under a toilet, the point of Lethal Weapon 2 is that Mel Gibson and Danny Glover get to race around in all that chaos, acting crazy.
Before it skids out of control in the final sequence, the film is so careful to preserve its successful comic-action formula that it follows the most basic law of sequels.
If you liked Lethal Weapon, you'll like Lethal Weapon 2; it's almost as simple as that."
Los Angeles Times reviewer Michael Wilmington stated that "though it's nice to have a big-audience action movie attacking apartheid and the slaughter of sea mammals, instead of acting as an enlistment poster for the Army Air Corps, local vigilante groups or the reopening of the Vietnam War, the sentiments don't really transcend the car crashes."
===
Home media releases ===
Lethal Weapon 2 has been released on VHS and DVD numerous times, along with a singular Blu-ray Disc release.

The first DVD was released in 1997 and featured the film's theatrical version.

The Director's Cut was released in 2000.

Since then, numerous sets have been released that contain all four films in the series (featuring the same DVDs).
The theatrical version was also released on Blu-ray in 2006.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Lethal Weapon 2 at the American Film Institute Catalog
Lethal Weapon 2 at IMDb
Lethal Weapon 2 at AllMovie
Lethal Weapon 2 at Rotten Tomatoes
Lethal Weapon 2 at Box Office Mojo
A division is a large military unit or formation, usually consisting of between 6,000 and 25,000 soldiers.

In most armies, a division is composed of several regiments or brigades; in turn, several divisions typically make up a corps.
Historically, the division has been the default combined arms unit capable of independent operations.
Smaller combined arms units, such as the American regimental combat team (RCT) during World War II, were used when conditions favored them.
In recent times, modern Western militaries have begun adopting the smaller brigade combat team (similar to the RCT) as the default combined arms unit, with the division they belong to being less important.

While the focus of this article is on army divisions, in naval usage, "division" has a completely different meaning, referring to either an administrative/functional sub-unit of a department (e.g., fire control division of the weapons department) aboard naval and coast guard ships, shore commands, and in naval aviation units (including navy, marine corps, and coast guard aviation), to a sub-unit of several ships within a flotilla or squadron, or to two or three sections of aircraft operating under a designated division leader.
Some languages, like Russian, Serbian, Croatian and Polish, also use a similar word, divizion/divizijun/dywizjon, for a battalion-size artillery or cavalry unit.

==
History ==


===
Origins ===
In the West, the first general to think of organising an army into smaller combined-arms units was Maurice de Saxe (d. 1750),
Marshal General of France, in his book Mes Rêveries.
He died at the age of 54, without having implemented his idea.
Victor-François de Broglie put the ideas into practice.
He conducted successful practical experiments of the divisional system in the Seven Years' War.
===
Early divisions ===
The first war in which the divisional system was used systematically was the French Revolutionary War.
Lazare Carnot of the Committee of Public Safety, who was in charge of military affairs, came to the same conclusion about it as the previous royal government, and the army was organised into divisions.

It made the armies more flexible and easy to maneuver, and it also made the large army of the revolution manageable.
Under Napoleon, the divisions were grouped together into corps, because of their increasing size.
Napoleon's military success spread the divisional and corps system all over Europe; by the end of the Napoleonic Wars, all armies in Europe had adopted it.

=== World War II ===
The divisional system reached its numerical height during the Second World War.
The Soviet Union's Red Army consisted of more than a thousand division-sized units at any one time, and the number of rifle divisions raised during the Great Patriotic War of 1941–1945 is estimated at 2,000.
Nazi Germany had hundreds of numbered and/or named divisions, while the United States employed up to 91 divisions.

A notable change to divisional structures during the war was completion of the shift from square divisions (composed of two brigades each with two regiments) to triangular divisions (composed of three regiments with no brigade level) that many European armies had started using in World War I.
This was done to increase flexibility and to pare down chain-of-command overhead.
The triangular division structure allowed the tactic of "two forward, one back", where two of the division's regiments could engage the enemy with one regiment in reserve.

All divisions in World War II were expected to have their own artillery formations, usually (depending upon the nation)
the size of a regiment.
Divisional artillery was occasionally seconded by corps-level command to increase firepower in larger engagements.

During the war the US also used regimental combat teams, whereby attached and/or organic divisional units were parceled out to infantry regiments, creating smaller combined-arms units with their own armor and artillery and support units.
These combat teams would still be under divisional command but had some level of autonomy on the battlefield.

Organic units within divisions were units which operated directly under divisional command and were not normally controlled by the regiments.
These units were mainly support units in nature, and included signal companies, medical battalions, supply trains and administration.
Attached units were smaller units that were placed under divisional command temporarily for the purpose of completing a particular mission.
These units were usually combat units such as tank battalions, tank-destroyer battalions or cavalry-reconnaissance squadrons.

===
Modern divisions ===
In modern times, most military forces have standardized their divisional structures.
This does not mean that divisions are equal in size or structure from country to country, but divisions have, in most cases, come to be units of 10,000 to 15,000 soldiers with enough organic support to be capable of independent operations.
Usually, the direct organization of the division consists of one to four brigades or battle groups of its primary combat arm, along with a brigade or regiment of combat support (usually artillery) and a number of direct-reporting battalions for necessary specialized support tasks, such as intelligence, logistics, reconnaissance, and combat engineers.
Most militaries standardize ideal organization strength for each type of division, encapsulated in a Table of Organization and Equipment (TO&E) which specifies exact assignments of units, personnel, and equipment for a division.

The modern division became the primary identifiable combat unit in many militaries during the second half of the 20th century, supplanting the brigade; however, the trend started to reverse since the end of the Cold War.
The peak use of the division as the primary combat unit occurred during World War II, when the belligerents deployed over a thousand divisions.
With technological advances since then, the combat power of each division has increased.

== Types ==
Divisions are often formed to organize units of a particular type together with appropriate support units to allow independent operations.
In more recent times, divisions have mainly been organized as combined arms units with subordinate units representing various combat arms.
In this case, the division often retains the name of a more specialized division, and may still be tasked with a primary role suited to that specialization.

===
Infantry division ===
"Infantry division" refers to a military formation composed primarily of infantry units, also supported by units from other combat arms.
In the Soviet Union and Russia, an infantry division is often referred to as a "rifle division".
A "motorised infantry" division refers to a division with a majority of infantry subunits transported on soft-skinned motor vehicles.
A "mechanized infantry" division refers to a division with a majority of infantry subunits transported on armored personnel carriers (APCs) or infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) or both, or even some other class of armored fighting vehicles designed for the transportation of infantry.
Mechanized infantry divisions in Nazi Germany were called "Panzergrenadier divisions".
In Russia, they were known as "motor rifle divisions".

Because of the ease and simplicity involved in forming divisions of infantry compared to other formations, infantry divisions have often been the most numerous in historical warfare.
Most US divisions during World War II were infantry divisions.

Infantry divisions were also expected to travel by foot from place to place, with transport vehicles or pack horses used to augment their travel.
Divisions evolved over the course of time.
For instance, in 1944, Nazi Germany designated some of their infantry formations as Volksgrenadier divisions, which were slightly smaller than the regular divisions, with wider issue of sub-machine guns, automatic and anti-tank weapons to reflect the reality that they were to be used in defensive warfare.
In 1945, Nazi Germany seconded members of the Kriegsmarine to create "naval divisions", which were of lower quality that the infantry divisions of the Army.
They also created "Luftwaffe field divisions" from members of the Luftwaffe.

Infantry divisions were sometimes given the responsibility of garrison work.
These were named "frontier guard divisions", "static infantry divisions" and "fortress divisions", and were mainly used by Nazi Germany.
===
Cavalry division ===
For most nations, cavalry was deployed in smaller units and was not therefore organized into divisions, but for larger militaries, such as that of the British Empire, United States, First French Empire, France, German Empire, Nazi Germany, Russian Empire, Empire of Japan, Second Polish Republic and Soviet Union, a number of cavalry divisions were formed.
They were most often similar to the nations' infantry divisions in structure, although they usually had fewer and lighter support elements, with cavalry brigades or regiments replacing the infantry units, and supporting units, such as artillery and supply, being horse-drawn.
For the most part, large cavalry units did not remain after World War II.

While horse cavalry had been found to be obsolete, the concept of cavalry as a fast force capable of missions traditionally fulfilled by horse cavalry made a return to military thinking during the Cold War.
In general, two new types of cavalry were developed: air cavalry or airmobile, relying on helicopter mobility, and armored cavalry, based on an autonomous armored formation.
The former was pioneered by the 11th Air Assault Division (Test), formed on 1 February 1963 at Fort Benning, Georgia.
On 29 June 1965, the division was renamed the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile), before its departure for the Vietnam War.

After the end of the Vietnam War, the 1st Cavalry Division was reorganised and re-equipped with tanks and armored scout vehicles to form armored cavalry.

The concept of a fast-moving, armored reconnaissance force has remained in modern armies, but these units are now smaller and make up a combined arms force used in modern brigades and divisions, and are no longer granted divisional status.

"Light divisions" were German horse cavalry divisions organized early in World War II which included motorized units.

===
Armored division ===
The development of the tank during World War
I prompted some nations to experiment with forming them into division-size units.
Many did this the same way as they did cavalry divisions, by merely replacing cavalry with AFVs (including tanks) and motorizing the supporting units.
This proved unwieldy in combat, as the units had many tanks but few infantry units.
Instead, a more balanced approach was taken by adjusting the number of tank, infantry, artillery, and support units.

The terms "tank division" or "mechanized division" are alternative names for armored divisions.
A "Panzer division" was an armoured division of the Wehrmacht and the Waffen-SS of Germany during World War II.

Since the end of the war, most armoured and infantry divisions have had significant numbers of both tank and infantry units within them.
The difference has usually been in the mix of battalions assigned.
Additionally, in some militaries, armoured divisions are equipped with more advanced or powerful tanks than other divisions.
===
Mountain division ===
Mountain divisions are infantry divisions given special training and equipment to operate in hilly, mountainous or arctic areas.
Some examples of these formations include the US 10th Mountain Division, the German 1st Ski Division or the French 27th Alpine Infantry Division.

Nazi Germany also organized "Jäger divisions" to operate in more adverse terrain.

Italian Mountain divisions are called "Alpini divisions".
===
Airborne division ===
An airborne division is an infantry division given special training and equipment for air transport.

The US, Britain, and Germany experimented during World War II with specialized light infantry divisions capable of being quickly transported by transport aircraft, or dropped into an area by parachute or glider.
This required both high-quality equipment and training, creating elite units in the process and usually manned by volunteers rather than conscripts.

The German 1st Parachute Division, which was part of the Luftwaffe and not the Heer, was instrumental in the 1941 Battle of Crete.
US and British airborne troops first participated during the 1943 invasion of Sicily.
The use of airborne divisions during the Invasion of Normandy was crucial to its success.
Further allied paratroop operations were made during the 1944 Operation Market Garden and the 1945 Operation Varsity.

When not being used for a specific airborne mission, airborne divisions usually functioned as light infantry divisions.

An "air assault division" is an airborne division that mainly uses helicopters to transport its troops around.

===
Artillery division ===
The Soviet Union developed the concept of the specialized "artillery division" during the Eastern Front of the Second World War in 1942, although plans were in place since the later stages of the Russian Civil War.
An artillery division serves as a specialized division using only artillery howitzers, anti-tank guns, rocket artillery (MRLs and tactical missiles) and mortars (both towed and self-propelled) (and historically siege artillery) and are usually tasked with providing concentrated firepower support to higher combined arms formations.
They are mainly combat support formations most performing operations in support of the infantry and armor.

===
Security division ===
Nazi Germany organized Security divisions to operate in captured territory to provide rear-echelon security against partisans and maintain order among civilians.
Structured like an infantry division, a security division was more likely to contain lower quality troops and was not intended to serve directly at the front.
SS units of this type were called "SS Polizei divisions".

The Soviet Union's People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs (the NKVD) organized security divisions (see Category:
Divisions of the NKVD in World War II).
In a few cases, NKVD divisions were employed in front-line combat as rifle divisions.

==
Nomenclature ==
Divisions are commonly designated by combining an ordinal number and a type name (e.g.: "13th Infantry Division").
Nicknames are often assigned or adopted, although these often are not considered an official part of the unit's nomenclature, with divisions of the Italian Army being one of the exceptions.
In some cases, divisional titles lack an ordinal number, often in the case of unique units or units serving as elite or special troops.
For clarity in histories and reports, the nation is identified before the number.
This also helps in historical studies, but due to the nature of intelligence on the battlefield, division names and assignments are at times obscured.
However, the size of the division rarely makes such obfuscation necessary.

In the years leading up to the end of the cold war and beyond, the type names of various divisions became less important.
The majority of US Infantry divisions were now mechanized and had significant numbers of tanks and IFVs, becoming de facto armored divisions.
US armored divisions had more tanks but less infantry than these infantry divisions.
Moreover, the sole cavalry division was structured the same way as an armored division.

With the introduction of modular brigade combat teams (BCT) in modern divisions, the nomenclature type is even less important, since a division can now be made of up any combination of light infantry, Stryker and armored BCTs.
For example, the US 1st Infantry Division currently consists of two armored BCTs along with support troops, with no light infantry units at all.
By contrast, the current 1st Armored Division consists of two armored BCTs and a Stryker BCT along with its support troops.

Nevertheless, some US division types will retain their mission: The 82nd and 101st airborne divisions have airborne infantry BCTs, while the 10th Mountain Division has only light infantry BCTs.

==
National organization ==


===
Australia ===
Historically, the Australian Army has fielded a number of divisions.
During World War I, a total of six infantry divisions were raised as part of the all-volunteer Australian Imperial Force: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th.
The 1st Division and part of the 2nd saw service during the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915 before later taking part in the fighting on the Western Front between 1916 and 1918 along with the 3rd, 4th and 5th.
The 6th Division existed only briefly in 1917, but was disbanded without seeing combat to make up for manpower shortages in the other divisions.
Another infantry division, known as the New Zealand and Australian Division, was also formed from Australian and New Zealand troops and saw service at Gallipoli.
Two divisions of Australian Light Horse were also formed – the Australian Mounted Division (which also included some British and French units) and the ANZAC Mounted Division – both of which served in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign during the war.

In the inter-war years, on paper the Australian Army was organised into seven divisions: five infantry (1st through to 5th) and two cavalry, albeit on a reduced manning scale.
During World War II, the size of Australia's force was expanded to eventually include 12 infantry divisions: 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th.
Of these, four – the 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th – were raised as part of the all-volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force, while the others formed part of the Militia, and were maintained through a mixture of volunteers and conscripts.
In addition to the infantry divisions, three armoured divisions were formed: 1st, 2nd and 3rd.
The Australian divisions were used in various campaigns, ranging from North Africa, Greece,
Syria and Lebanon, to the South West Pacific.
The Australian army currently has two divisions.
The 1st Division is a skeleton organisation that acts as a deployable force headquarters, while the 2nd is a Reserve formation.

===
Bangladesh ===
The 9th Infantry Division was raised on 20 November 1975 in Dhaka as the first division of the Bangladesh Army.
Currently, Bangladesh Army has ten infantry divisions under its command.
Each infantry division consists of one artillery brigade, 3 or 4 infantry brigades/regiments.
In addition, few divisions have one armored brigade each.
The active infantry divisions are-

7th Infantry Division, headquartered at Sheikh Hasina cantonment, Patuakhali
9th Infantry Division, headquartered at Savar Cantonment, Dhaka
10th Infantry Division, headquartered at Ramu Cantonment, Cox's Bazar
11th Infantry Division, headquartered at Bogra Cantonment, Bogra
17th Infantry Division, headquartered at Jalalabad Cantonment, Sylhet
19th Infantry Division, headquartered at Shahid Salahuddin Cantonment, Tangail
24th Infantry Division, headquartered at Chittagong Cantonment, Chittagong
33rd Infantry Division, headquartered at Comilla Cantonment, Comilla
55th Infantry Division, headquartered at Jessore Cantonment, Jessore
66th Infantry Division, headquartered at Rangpur Cantonment,
Rangpur


===
Brazil ===
The Brazilian Army currently has five army divisions: the 1st Army Division based in Rio de Janeiro and subordinated to the Eastern Military Command, the 2nd Army Division, based in São Paulo and subordinated to the Military Southeastern Military Command and 3rd Army Division, based in Santa Maria –  RS, the 5th Army Division based in Curitiba –  PR and the 6th Army Division based in Porto Alegre –  RS, the latter three being linked to the Southern Military Command.

The other military forces of the Brazilian Army are subordinated directly to the area military commands, not having a commanding division.
In this case, the employment of these troops is coordinated by the operations coordinating center of the area military commands.

===
Canada ===
The first division-sized formation raised by the Canadian military was the First Contingent of the Canadian Expeditionary Force; raised in 1914, it was renamed the Canadian Division in early 1915 when it took to the field, and became the 1st Canadian Division when a 2nd Canadian Division took to the field later that year.
A 3rd Canadian Division and 4th Canadian Division saw service in France and Flanders, and a Fifth Canadian Division was disbanded in the United Kingdom and broken up for reinforcements.
The four divisions (collectively under the command of the Canadian Corps) were disbanded in 1919.

Canada had nominal divisions on paper between the wars, overseeing the Militia (part-time reserve forces), but no active duty divisions.
On 1 September 1939, two divisions were raised as part of the Canadian Active Service Force; a Third Division was raised in 1940, followed by a First Canadian (Armoured) Division and Fourth Canadian Division.
The First Armoured was renamed the Fifth Canadian (Armoured) Division and the Fourth Division also became an armoured formation.
The 1st and 5th Divisions fought in the Mediterranean between 1943 and early 1945; the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Divisions served in Northwest Europe.
A Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Division were raised for service in Canada, with one brigade of the Sixth Division going to Kiska in 1943.
By 1945, the latter three divisions were disbanded as the threat to North America diminished.
A Third Canadian Division (Canadian Army Occupation Force) was raised in 1945 for occupation duty in Germany, organized parallel to the combatant Third Division, and a Sixth Canadian Division (Canadian Army Pacific Force) was undergoing formation and training for the invasion of Japan when the latter country surrendered in September 1945.
All five combatant divisions, as well as the CAOF and CAPF, were disbanded by the end of 1946.

A First Canadian Division Headquarters (later renamed simply First Division) was authorized once again in April 1946, but remained dormant until formally disbanded in July 1954.
Simultaneously, however, another "Headquarters, First Canadian Infantry Division" was authorized as part of the Canadian Army Active Force (the Regular forces of the Canadian military), in October 1953.
This, the first peacetime division in Canadian history, consisted of a brigade in Germany, one in Edmonton and one at Valcartier.
This division was disbanded in April 1958.

The First Canadian Division was reactivated in 1988 and served until the 1990s when the headquarters of the division was transformed into the Canadian Forces Joint Headquarters and placed under the control of the Canadian Expeditionary Force Command.
The CFJHQ was transformed back into Headquarters, 1st Canadian Division, on 23 June 2010, the unit once more falling under the control of the Canadian Army.
The unit is based at Kingston.

Canada currently has five divisions under its command.

1st Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Kingston.

2nd Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Montreal.

3rd Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Edmonton.

4th Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Toronto.

5th Canadian Division, headquarters is located in Halifax.
The 1st Canadian Division has approximately 2000 troops under its command, while the 2nd Canadian Division, 3rd Canadian Division, 4th Canadian Division, and 5th Canadian Division have approximately 10,000 troops each.

===
China ===


===
=
People's Republic ====
The People's Liberation Army Ground Force (PLAGF) is the world's largest ground force, currently totaling some 1.6 million personnel.
The ground forces are divided into five Theater Commands.
The regular forces of the ground forces consist of 18 group armies: corps-size combined arms units each with 24,000–50,000 personnel.
The group armies contained among them:

25 infantry divisions
9 armored divisions
2 artillery divisionsAs of 2011, the PLA went from a division-dominated structure to a brigade-dominated one.
Until 2017, there were a further three airborne divisions in the 15th Airborne Corps, but these were reformed into six airborne brigades and a special operations brigade as part of a reform program aimed at reorganizing all PLA divisions into brigades.

====
National Revolutionary Army ====
The NRA Division (Chinese: 整編師,編制師) was a military unit of the Republic of China.
The original pattern of the infantry division organization of the early Republic was a square division.
It was formed with two infantry brigades of two infantry regiments of three infantry battalions, an artillery regiment of fifty-four guns and eighteen machineguns, a cavalry regiment of twelve squadrons, an engineer battalion of four companies, a transport battalion of four companies, and other minor support units.
In the mid-1930s, the Nationalist government with the help of German advisors attempted to modernize their army and intended to form sixty Reorganized Divisions and a number of reserve divisions.
Under the strains and losses of the early campaigns of the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese decided in mid-1938 to standardize their Divisions as triangular divisions as part of their effort to simplify the command structure and placed them under Corps, which became the basic tactical units.
The remaining scarce artillery and the other support formations were withdrawn from the Division and were held at Corps or Army level or even higher.
During the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Chinese Republic mobilized at least 310 infantry divisions, 23 cavalry divisions, and one mechanized division (the 200th Division).
===
Colombia ===
In the Colombian Army, a division is formed by two or more brigades and is usually commanded by a major general.
Today, the Colombian Army has eight active divisions:

1st Division (Santa Marta) – Its jurisdiction covers the Northern Region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cesar, La Guajira, Magdalena, Sucre, Bolívar and Atlántico.

2nd Division (Bucaramanga) –
Its jurisdiction covers the north eastern Colombia in which there are the departments of Norte de Santander, Santander and Arauca.

3rd Division (Popayán) –
Its jurisdiction covers the South West of Colombia in which there are the departamentos of Nariño, Valle del Cauca, Cauca, Caldas, Quindio, part of Santander and the southern part of the Chocó.

4th Division (Villavicencio) –
Its jurisdiction covers the eastern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Meta, Guaviare, and part of Vaupés.

5th Division (Bogotá) –
Its jurisdiction covers the Central Region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cundinamarca, Boyaca, Huila and Tolima.

6th Division (Florencia) –
Its jurisdiction covers the southern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Amazonas, Caquetá, Putumayo and southern Vaupés.

7th Division (Medellin) –
Its jurisdiction covers the western region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Cordoba, Antioquia, and part of the Chocó.

8th Division (Yopal) –
Its jurisdiction covers the northeastern region of Colombia in which there are the departments of Casanare, Arauca, Vichada, Guainía, and the municipalities of Boyaca of Cubará, Pisba, Paya, Labranzagrande and Pajarito.
===
Egypt ===
In the Egyptian Army, a division has four or five brigades and is usually commanded by Major General, however, a Brigadier General can also command a division.
Today the Egyptian Army has 14 divisions (8 mechanized, 1 infantry, 4 armored, 1 Republican Guard).
Mechanized divisions have more infantry and less tanks than armored divisions while armored divisions have less troops and more tanks than mechanized ones.

2nd Infantry Division (Egypt) –  One of the oldest units in the Egyptian Army, formed in 1947 and currently part of the Central Military Region (Egypt)
the division was originally foot infantry but turned into mechanized in the late 1980s.

3rd Mechanized Infantry Division (Egypt) –
formed in 1951 as foot infantry and was fully mechanized in 1972.
Currently part of the Northern Military Region (Egypt) alongside the 11th independent armored brigade.
The division saw service in the Gulf War alongside the Egyptian 4th Armored Division during Operation Desert Shield.

7th Mechanized Infantry Division –  formed as foot infantry division in the mid 1960s (before Six-Day War).
Currently a part of the Second Army (Egypt).

16th Mechanized Infantry Division –
formed in 1972 and participated in Yom Kippur War and currently part of the Second Army (Egypt)
18th Mechanized Infantry Division –  formed in 1972 and played a vital role in the Yom Kippur War as it accomplished its task of storming the El Qantara fortified points of the Bar Lev Line and liberating the town of El Qantara itself within 6/7 of October and successfully halted & destroyed several Israeli counterattacks on its sector.
Currently part of the Second Army (Egypt)
19th Infantry Division –
Formed in 1972 and participated in Yom Kippur War and considered one of the most notable units of the Egyptian Army due to its heroic actions during Yom Kippur War where it was the only division to not lose a single battle.
One of these battles was Battle of Suez.
Currently part of the Third Army (Egypt).

20th Palestinian/Gaza Division during Suez Crisis.

23rd Mechanized Infantry Division –
formed in 1972 and participated in the Yom Kippur War.
Currently part of the Third Army (Egypt)
33rd Mechanized Infantry Division –  formed in the early 2000s and currently part of the Western Military Region (Egypt).4th Armoured Division (Egypt) –
the Division is considered as one of the greatest, respected and oldest active formations in the Egyptian Army.
It was formed in 1956 and participated in all of Egypt's modern conflicts and because of that, the division is nicknamed the Knights of Egypt and Crown of the Third Army.
Its most notable service was during Yom Kippur War when the 3rd Armored Brigade advanced 12 kilometers deep into Sinai (over the actual sector) without the air, anti-tank and infantry support it requested.
As the brigade surprise attacked the much larger Israeli forces, they gave them heavy casualties
but since the Israeli units had air support, the brigade couldn't survive and lost its commander and most of its tanks in action.
Still part of Third Army.

6th Armored Division –
formed in the mid-1960s as a Mechanized Division then by the late 1990s it was transformed into Armored Division.
Currently part of the Second Army (Egypt).

9th Armored Division –
formed in 1987 with the main objective of protecting Southern Cairo and currently serves as part of the Central Military Region (Egypt).

21st
Armored Division –  formed in the mid-1960s and participated in the Six-Day War and Yom Kippur War.
Currently serving in the Western Military Region (Egypt).

===
France ===
On July 1, 1999, all French divisions were disbanded or converted into brigades.
Four Task force headquarters (état-major de force) were created in order to oversee NATO standard divisions in case of emergency.

The divisional level (niveau divisionnaire) was reintroduced on July 1, 2016.
The French Army has now two active combined divisions:

1re division (HQ in Besançon)
3e division (HQ in Marseille)These two divisions are part of the Scorpion Force.
Each division consists of 25,000 personnel and is made up of three brigades (one light, one medium, and one heavy).
The 1st Division also included the French elements of the Franco-German Brigade.

There are also 11 "divisional level" (niveau divisionnaire)  specialized commands :
Commandement du renseignement (Strasbourg)
Commandement des systèmes d'information et de communication (Cesson-Sévigné)
Commandement de la logistique (Lille, Montlhéry)
Commandement de la maintenance des forces (Lille, Versailles)
Commandement de l'Aviation légère de l'Armée de terre (Vélizy – Villacoublay Air Base)
Commandement des forces spéciales Terre (Pau)
Commandement de la Légion étrangère (Aubagne)
Commandement Terre pour le territoire national (Paris)
Commandement de l'entraînement et des écoles
du combat interarmes
(Mourmelon-le-Grand)
Commandement des ressources humaines et de la formation (Tours)
Service de la maintenance industrielle terrestre (Versailles)


===
Germany ===
The German Army has three divisions:

 1st Panzerdivision, stationed in Hannover.

10th
Panzerdivision, stationed in Sigmaringen.

Rapid Forces Division, stationed in Veitshöchheim.

===
India ===
With 1.13 million soldiers in active service, the Indian Army is the world's second-largest.
An Indian Army division is intermediate between a corps and a brigade.
Each division is headed by a General Officer Commanding (GOC) holding the rank of major general.
It usually consists of 15,000 combat troops and 8,000 support elements.
Currently, the Indian Army has 37 divisions: four RAPIDs ("Reorganised Army Plains Infantry Divisions"), 18 infantry (including one amphibious division), 10 mountain, three armoured, and three artillery.
Each division consists of several brigades.

===
Indonesia ===
The Indonesian Army has 3 infantry divisions (Indonesian: Divisi Infanteri) within the Kostrad strategic command which plays a role for strategic defense operations.
Aside from the infantry divisions, the Indonesian Army also hosts operational combat units from the territorial commands known as "Kodams", which are equivalent to divisions and are similarly organized as infantry divisions.
The infantry divisions from the Kostrad are:

 1st Kostrad Infantry Division at Depok,
West Java
 2nd Kostrad Infantry Division at Malang, East Java
3rd Kostrad Infantry Division at Gowa, South SulawesiThe Indonesian Marine Corps also operates 3 divisions which are:

1st Marine Forces (Pasmar-1) at Sidoarjo, East Java
2nd Marine Forces
(Pasmar-2) at Cilandak, South Jakarta
3rd Marine Forces (Pasmar-3) at Sorong, West Papua


===
Israel ===
The Israeli Defense Forces operates 11 divisions of various sizes that are separated into three categories: regular, territorial and reserve.

Regular divisions:
36th Armored Division
162nd Armored DivisionTerritorial divisions:
80th Territorial Division (Negev)
91st Territorial Division (Galilee)
143rd Territorial Division (Gaza)
210th
Territorial Division (Bashan)
877th Territorial Division (Judea and Samaria)Divisions in reserve:
98th Paratrooper Division (Reserve)
252nd Armored Division (Reserve)
319th Armored Division (Reserve)
340th Armored Division (Reserve)


===
Japan ===
Japan Ground Self-Defense Force divisions are combined arms units with infantry, armored, and artillery units, combat support units and logistical support units.
They are regionally independent and permanent entities.
The divisions strength varies from 6,000 to 9,000 personnel.
The division commander is a lieutenant general.

JGSDF currently has nine active duty divisions (one armored, eight infantry):

 1st Division, in Nerima
 2nd Division, in Asahikawa
 3rd Division, in Itami
 4th Division, in Kasuga
 6th Division, in Higashine
 7th Division (Armored), in Chitose
 8th Division, in Kumamoto
 9th Division, in Aomori
 10th Division, in Nagoya


===
Pakistan ===
An Army division in the Pakistan Army is an intermediate between a corps and a brigade.
It is the largest striking force in the army.
Each division is headed by a General Officer Commanding (GOC) holding the rank of major general.
It usually consists of 15,000 combat troops and 8,000 support elements.
Currently, the Pakistani Army has 29 divisions: 20 infantry, two armoured, two mechanized, two air defence, two strategic and one artillery.
Each division consists of several brigades.

===
South Africa ===
South Africa has fielded several infantry and armoured divisions in its military history:

1 Infantry Division for battles waged in the North African theatre from 1940 to 1943.

2 Infantry Division also for the engagements of North Africa from 1940 to 1942.

6 Armoured Division for the Italian Campaign of 1943 to 1945.

7 Infantry Division for the Border War fought in Southern Africa.
It existed from 1965 to 1990 and consisted of three brigades.

8 Armoured Division also for the Border War and existed from 1974 to 1997 and consisted of three brigades.

9 Infantry Division was formed for geographical purposes but only existed for a short period from 1992 to 1997.

===
United Kingdom ===
In the British Army, a division is commanded by a major general with a WO1 as the Command Sergeant Major and may consist of three infantry, mechanised and/or armoured brigades and supporting units.

Currently, the British Army has three active divisions:
1st
(United Kingdom) Division
3rd (
United Kingdom) Division
6th (United Kingdom)
DivisionThe British Army previously had three other divisions.

2nd Division – Scotland and Northern England, headquartered at Edinburgh
 4th Division – Southern England, headquartered at Aldershot
 5th Division – Wales, English Midlands and Eastern England, headquartered at ShrewsburyAdditionally,
most of the infantry regiments of the British Army are organised for administrative purposes into a number of organisations called "divisions":

Guards Division – 1968–present
Scottish, Welsh and Irish Division –
2017–present
King's Division – 1968–present
Queen's Division – 1968–present
Scottish Division – 1968–2017
Prince of Wales' Division – 1968–2017
Light Division –
1968–2007


===
United States ===
A divisional unit in the United States Army typically consists of 17,000 to 21,000 soldiers, but can grow up to 35,000 to 40,000 with attached support units during operations, and are commanded by a major general.
Two divisions usually form a corps and each division consists of three maneuver brigades, an aviation brigade, an engineer brigade, and division artillery (latter two excluded from divisional structure as of 2007), along with a number of smaller specialized units.
In 2014, divisional artillery (DIVARTY) organizations began to re-appear, with some fires brigades reorganizing to fill this role.

The United States Army currently has ten active divisions and one deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division):
1st Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kansas
 1st Armored Division at Fort Bliss, Texas
 1st Cavalry Division at Fort Hood, Texas
 2nd Infantry Division at Camp Red Cloud, South Korea and in Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
 3rd Infantry Division at Fort Stewart, Georgia and in Fort Benning, Georgia
 4th Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colorado
 7th Infantry Division
(Division Headquarters only) at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, Washington
 10th Mountain Division (Light) at Fort Drum, New York and in Fort Polk, Louisiana
 25th Infantry Division at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii, Fort Richardson, Alaska and in Fort Wainwright, Alaska
 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, North Carolina
101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) at Fort Campbell, KentuckyThe Army National Guard has a further eight divisions:

 28th Infantry Division, Fort Indiantown Gap, Pennsylvania
 29th Infantry Division, Fort Belvoir, Virginia
 34th Infantry Division, Rosemount, Minnesota
 35th Infantry Division, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas
 36th Infantry Division, Camp Mabry, Texas
 38th Infantry Division, Indianapolis, Indiana
 40th Infantry Division, Los Alamitos JFTB, California
 42nd Infantry Division, Troy,
New YorkThere are further nine divisions within the Army Reserve that are responsible for training and support operations:

 78th Division (Operations), Joint Base McGuire–Dix–Lakehurst, New Jersey
86th Division (Decisive Action), Fort McCoy, Wisconsin
91st Division (Operations), Fort Hunter Liggett, California
94th Division (Force Sustainment), Fort Lee, Virginia
95th Division (Entry Training), Fort Sill, Oklahoma
 98th Division (Entry Training), Fort Benning, Georgia
 100th Division (Operational Support), Fort Knox, Kentucky
 102nd Division (Maneuver Support), Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri
104th Division (Leader Training), Fort Lewis, WashingtonThe United States Marine Corps has a further three active divisions and one reserve division.
They consist of a headquarters battalion, two or three infantry regiments, an artillery regiment, and a reconnaissance battalion.
Additionally, all Marine divisions (MARDIV), except 3rd MARDIV, have an assault amphibian (AA) battalion, a tank battalion, a light armored reconnaissance (LAR) battalion (two in 1st MARDIV), and a combat engineer (CE) battalion (two in 1st MARDIV).
(
3rd MARDIV has a combat assault battalion including one company each of AA, LAR, and CE.
Tank support for 3rd MARDIV can be provided by tanks deployed with the 31st MEU or directly from one of the three divisional tank battalions under the Unit Deployment Program.)

1st Marine Division at Camp Pendleton, California.

2nd Marine Division at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina.

3rd Marine Division at Camp Smedley D. Butler, Okinawa, Japan.

4th Marine Division (Reserve) with units located throughout the United States and headquartered in New Orleans, Louisiana.
===
South Korea ===
Republic of
Korea Army divisions are major tactical formations led by general officers.
There are currently 39 Army and two Marine divisions.
Of the 41 Army divisions, six are mechanized infantry divisions (combined arms formations centered around tanks, IFVs, APCs, and SPGs), 16 are infantry divisions (motorized divisions with various levels of mechanization), 12 are "Homeland Infantry Divisions" (향토보병사단, infantry divisions kept at a 40–50% manpower level, to be reinforced during national emergencies) and seven "Reserve Infantry Divisions" (동원보병사단, infantry divisions kept at 10–20% manpower level, to be reinforced during national emergencies).
There are two Marine divisions organized similarly to their American counterparts.
Though similarly formed, the 1st ROK Marine Division is specialized to perform amphibious landing operations while the 2nd ROK Marine Division performs more security operations and mans a sector of the DMZ facing the North Korean border.

Republic of
Korea Army divisions are typically smaller than their foreign counterparts.
Mechanized infantry divisions are fully formed at around 9,900, infantry divisions are fully formed at about 11,500 men, and other types of divisions are smaller in size during normal operations according to their reserve manpower levels.
There are very few articles discussing ROK Marine Corps tactical organization, but an active duty force of 29,000 is divided into two divisions, two brigades, and its supporting units.

Mechanized infantry, infantry, Homeland Infantry, and Marine divisions are led by major generals, while Reserve Infantry Divisions are led by brigadier generals.

List of South Korean Armed Forces Divisions:
Please note that no major Republic of Korea Armed Forces formation contains the number four in their name.

Mechanized Infantry Divisions (기계화보병사단)
Capital Mechanized Infantry Division
8th Mechanized Infantry Division
11th Mechanized Infantry Division
30th Mechanized Infantry Division
Infantry Divisions (보병사단)
1st Infantry Division
3rd Infantry Division
5th Infantry Division
6th Infantry Division
7th Infantry Division
9th Infantry Division
12th Infantry Division
15th Infantry Division
17th Infantry Division
21st Infantry Division
22nd Infantry Division
23rd Infantry Division
25th Infantry Division
27th Infantry Division
28th Infantry Division
Homeland Infantry Division (향토보병사단)
31st
Homeland Infantry Division
32nd Homeland Infantry Division
35th Homeland Infantry Division
36th Homeland Infantry Division
37th Homeland Infantry Division
39th Homeland Infantry Division
50th Homeland Infantry Division
51st Homeland Infantry Division
52nd Homeland Infantry Division
53rd Homeland Infantry Division
55th Homeland Infantry Division
56th Homeland Infantry Division
Reserve Infantry Division (동원보병사단)
60th Reserve Infantry Division
66th Reserve Infantry Division
72nd Reserve Infantry Division
73rd Reserve Infantry Division
75th Reserve Infantry DivisionThe ROK Marine Corps has a further two divisions numbering around 10,000 men each:
1st Marine Division
2nd Marine Division


===
USSR ===
In the Soviet Armed Forces, a division (Russian: diviziya, дивизия) may have referred to a formation in any of the armed services, and included subunits appropriate to the service such as regiments and battalions, squadrons or naval vessels.
Almost all divisions, irrespective of the service branch, had the 3+1+1 structure of major sub-units, which were usually regiments.

There is also a similarly sounding unit of military organization in Russian military terminology, called divizion (дивизион).
A divizion is used to refer to an artillery or cavalry battalion, a specific part of a ship's crew (korabel'nyy divizion, 'ship battalion'), or a group of naval vessels (divizion korabley).

In Imperial Russia, infantry formations were designated as (Russian: pekhoty), 'infantry'.
But on 11 October 1918, all such formations in the new Red Army were re-designated as (Russian: strelkovaya, 'rifle'.
This was deliberately chosen as a means of breaking with the Imperial past, while also giving these troops a sense of being an elite; in the Imperial Army, the riflemen had been the best of the foot soldiers outside the Guards.
The new designation also hearkened back to the Streltsy of the 16th to early 18th Centuries, which were also elite troops.

All Soviet Army infantry, cavalry (until the 1950s) and armor divisions were organized on a unified TO&E of:

Division HQ
3 infantry, cavalry or tank regiments (with an additional infantry (motor rifle) or tank regiment depending on divisional specialization)
Divisional artillery brigade or later just one artillery regiment (horse artillery regiment and tachanka battalion for cavalry)
One light and one heavy howitzer field artillery regiment for brigades
Divisional anti-air defense artillery regiment or battalion (air defense guns, later argumented by air defense surface to air missile battalions)
Divisional anti-tank artillery battalion
Combat and service support companies or battalions
CBRN defense
Combat engineers
Divisional reconnaissance
Medical company
Rear services (including transport)
Signals
Electronic
warfareBefore
the Second World War, besides the mechanised corps, there were independent tank battalions within rifle divisions.
These were meant to reinforce rifle units for the purpose of breaching enemy defences.
They had to act in cooperation with the infantry without breaking away from it and were called tanks for immediate infantry support (Russian: tanki neposredstvennoy podderzhki pekhoty).

After 1945, some Red Army rifle divisions were converted to mechanised (infantry) divisions.
From 1957, all rifle and mechanised divisions became "motor rifle divisions" (MRDs).
These divisions usually had approximately 12,000 soldiers organized into the organizational framework mentioned above.
A typical tank division had some 10,000 soldiers, less than those of the infantry, with near identical organization.
Similar organizations of units were and still are a part of the Russian Airborne Forces.

A typical Soviet "frontal aviation division" consisted of three air regiments, a transport squadron, and associated maintenance units.
The number of aircraft within a regiment varied.
Fighter and fighter-bomber regiments were usually equipped with about 40 aircraft (36 of the primary unit type and a few utility and spares), while bomber regiments typically consisted of 32 aircraft.
Divisions were typically commanded by colonels or major generals, or colonels or major generals of aviation in the Air Force.
Soviet Naval Aviation and the Strategic Missile Forces divisions had either colonels or major generals as commanding officers while the ship divisions were led by captains 1st rank or captains 2nd rank.

===
Russian Federation ===
After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Russian tank and motor rifle divisions were reduced to near-cadre state, many being designated "bases for storage of weapons and equipment" (Russian acronym BKhVT).
These bases, or "cadre" divisions, were equipped with all the heavy armaments of a full-strength motor-rifle or tank division, while having only skeleton personnel strength, as low as 500 personnel.
The officers and men of a cadre division focus primarily on maintaining the equipment in working condition.
During wartime mobilization, such a division would be reinforced up to full manpower strength; however, in peacetime, a cadre division is unfit for any combat.

After the 2008 Russian military reforms, most active divisions were disbanded or converted into brigades.

Since 2013, several divisions were reactivated.
In 2020, the Russian Ground Forces have 10 divisions :
2nd Guards Motor Rifle Division in Moscow
3rd Motor Rifle Division in Valuyki
4th Guards Tank Division in Naro-Fominsk
18th Machine Gun Artillery Division in Goryachiye Klyuchi
19th Motor Rifle Division in Vladikavkaz
42nd Guards Motor Rifle Division in Khankala
90th Guards Tank Division in Chebarkul
127th Motor Rifle Division in Sergeyevka, Primorsky Krai
144th Motor Rifle Division in Yelnya
150th Motor Rifle Division in NovocherkasskThe Coastal Troops of the Russian Navy has :
18th Guards Motor Rifle Division in KaliningradThe Russian Airborne Forces have 4 divisions :
7th Guards Mountain Air Assault Division in Novorossiysk
 76th
Guards Air Assault Division in Pskov
 98th
Guards Airborne Division in Ivanovo
106th Guards Airborne Division in TulaThe Strategic Missile Forces have 12 divisions :
7th Guards Rocket Division at Vypolzovo
8th Rocket Division at Pervomaysky, Kirov Oblast
13th Red Banner Rocket Division at Dombarovskiy
14th Rocket Division at Yoshkar-Ola
28th
Guards Rocket Division at
Kozelsk
29th Guards Rocket Division at Irkutsk
35th Rocket Division at Barnaul
39th Guards Rocket Division at Novosibirsk
42nd Rocket Division at Nizhniy
Tagil
54th Guards Rocket Division at Teykovo
60th Rocket Division at Tatischevo
62nd Rocket Division at UzhurIn addition to the Army divisions
, a division is currently on active duty within the ranks of the National Guard of Russia:
Separate Operational Purpose Division in Moscow.
Also, a number of Aviation Divisions and Air Defense Divisions have been reactivated within the Russian Air Force.

== See also ==
Air Division (United States)
List of military divisions
Military organization


== Notes ==


==
References ==


==
External links ==
Infantry Divisions (British Army and British Indian Army) 1930–1956
A military junta () is a government led by a committee of military leaders.
The term junta means "meeting" or "committee" and originated in the national and local junta organized by the Spanish resistance to Napoleon's invasion of Spain in 1808.
The term is now used to refer to an authoritarian form of government characterized by oligarchic military dictatorship, as distinguished from other categories of authoritarian rule, specifically strongman (autocratic military dictatorships); machine (oligarchic party dictatorships); and bossism (autocratic party dictatorships).A junta often comes to power as a result of a coup d'état.
The junta may either formally take power as the nation's governing body, with the power to rule by decree, or may exercise power by exercising binding (but informal) control over a nominally civilian government.
These two forms of junta rule are sometimes called open rule and disguised rule.
Disguised rule may take the form of either civilianization or indirect rule.
Civilianization occurs when a junta publicly ends its obviously military features, but continues its dominance.
For example, the junta may terminate martial law, forgo military uniforms in favor of civilian attire, "colonize" government with former military officers, and make use of political parties or mass organizations.
"
Indirect rule" involves the junta's exertion of concealed, behind-the-scenes control over a civilian puppet.
Indirect rule by the military can include either broad control over the government or control over a narrower set of policy areas, such as military or national security matters.
Since the mid 1920s, military juntas have been frequently seen in Latin America, typically in the form of an "institutionalized, highly corporate/professional junta" headed by the commanding officers of the different military branches (army, navy, and air force), and sometimes joined by the head of the national police or other key bodies.
Political scientist Samuel Finer, writing in 1988, noted that juntas in Latin America tended to be smaller than juntas elsewhere; the median junta had 11 members, while Latin American juntas typically had three or four.

"Corporate" military coups have been distinguished from "factional" military coups.
The former are carried out by the armed forces as an institution, led by senior commanders at the top of the military hierarchy, while the latter are carried out by a segment of the armed forces and are often led by mid-ranking officers.
A 2014 study published in the Annual Review of Political Science journal found that military regimes behaved differently from both civilian dictatorships and autocratic military strongmen.
The study found that (1) "strongmen and military regimes are more likely to commit human rights abuses and become embroiled in civil wars than are civilian dictatorships"; (2) "military strongmen start more international wars than either military regimes or civilian dictators, perhaps because they have more reason to fear postouster exile, prison, or assassination" and (3) military regimes and civilian dictatorships are more likely to end in democratization, in contrast to the rule of military strongmen, which more often ends by insurgency, popular uprising, or invasions.

== Examples ==
Argentina – National Reorganization Process (1976–1983)
Bolivia – Bolivian military juntas (1970–1971 and 1980–1982)
Brazil – Brazilian military juntas of 1930 (1930-1945) and 1969 (1964-1985)
Chile – Government Junta (1973–1990)
Egypt – Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (2011–2012)
El Salvador – Revolutionary Government Junta
(1979–1982)
Ethiopia – Derg (1974–1987)
Fiji – Military government of Frank Bainimarama (2006–2014)
Greece – Regime of the Colonels, officially the "Revolutionary Committee" (1967–1974)
Georgia – Military Council of the Republic of Georgia
(საქართველოს რესპუბლიკის სამხედრო საბჭო)-Governed the country from January 6, 1992 until March 10 of that year.
Replaced by state council led by Eduard Shevardnadze.

Guinea – National Council for Democracy and Development (2008–2010)
Haiti – Junta that took control in the 1991 coup and was deposed in 1994 (1991–1994)
Liberia – People's Redemption Council (1980-1984)
Mali – National Committee for the Salvation of the People (2020–2021)
Myanmar (Burma) – State Peace and Development Council (1988–2011), known as the State Law and Order Restoration Council from 1988 to 1997 and State Administration Council (2021-present)
Nicaragua – Junta of National Reconstruction (1979–1985)
Nigeria – Military juntas (1966–1979 and 1983–1998)
Peru – Military junta of 1968-1980
(1968–1980)
Poland – Military Council of National Salvation (1981–1983)
Portugal – National Salvation Junta (1974–1975)
South Korea – Supreme Council for National Reconstruction (1961–1963)
Sudan – Transitional Military Council
(2019-present)
Taiwan – Temporary Provisions against the Communist Rebellion (1948–1991) used by Kuomintang after the fall of Mainland China to the Communists
Thailand – Council for National Security (2006–2008) and National Council for Peace and Order (
2014–2019)


==
See also ==
Civilian control of the military
Civil–military relations


==
References ==
The military funding of science has had a powerful transformative effect on the practice and products of scientific research since the early 20th century.

Particularly since World War I, advanced science-based technologies have been viewed as essential elements of a successful military.

World War
I is often called "the chemists’ war", both for the extensive use of poison gas and the importance of nitrates and advanced high explosives.

Poison gas, beginning in 1915 with chlorine from the powerful German dye industry, was used extensively by the Germans and the British ; over the course of the war, scientists on both sides raced to develop more and more potent chemicals and devise countermeasures against the newest enemy gases.

Physicists also contributed to the war effort, developing wireless communication technologies and sound-based methods of detecting U-boats, resulting in the first tenuous long-term connections between academic science and the military.
World War II marked a massive increase in the military funding of science, particularly physics.

In addition to the Manhattan Project and the resulting atomic bomb, British and American work on radar was widespread and ultimately highly influential in the course of the war; radar enabled detection of enemy ships and aircraft, as well as the radar-based proximity fuze.

Mathematical cryptography, meteorology, and rocket science were also central to the war effort, with military-funded wartime advances having a significant long-term effect on each discipline.

The technologies employed at the end—jet aircraft, radar and proximity fuzes, and the atomic bomb—were radically different from pre-war technology; military leaders came to view continued advances in technology as the critical element for success in future wars.

The advent of the Cold War solidified the links between military institutions and academic science, particularly in the United States and the Soviet Union, so that even during a period of nominal peace military funding continued to expand.

Funding spread to the social sciences as well as the natural sciences, and whole new fields, such as digital computing, were born of military patronage.

Following the end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, military funding of science has decreased substantially, but much of the American military-scientific complex remains in place.

The sheer scale of military funding for science since World War II has instigated a large body of historical literature analyzing the effects of that funding, especially for American science.

Since Paul Forman’s 1987 article “
Behind quantum electronics
: National security as a basis for physical research in the United State, 1940-1960,” there has been an ongoing historical debate over precisely how and to what extent military funding affected the course of scientific research and discovery.

Forman and others have argued that military funding fundamentally redirected science—particularly physics—toward applied research, and that military technologies predominantly formed the basis for subsequent research even in areas of basic science; ultimately the very culture and ideals of science were colored by extensive collaboration between scientists and military planners.

An alternate view has been presented by Daniel Kevles, that while military funding provided many new opportunities for scientists and dramatically expanded the scope of physical research, scientists by-and-large retained their intellectual autonomy.

==
Science and military technology before the modern era ==
While there were numerous instances of military support for scientific work before the 20th century, these were typically isolated instances; knowledge gained from technology was generally far more important for the development of science than scientific knowledge was to technological innovation.

Thermodynamics, for example, is a science partly born from military technology: one of the many sources of the first law of thermodynamics was Count Rumford’s observation of the heat produced by boring cannon barrels.

Mathematics was important in the development of the Greek catapult and other weapons, but analysis of ballistics was also important for the development of mathematics, while Galileo tried to promote the telescope as a military instrument to the military-minded Republic of Venice before turning it to the skies while seeking the patronage of the Medici court in Florence.

In general, craft-based innovation, disconnected from the formal systems of science, was the key to military technology well into the 19th century.

Even craft-based military technologies were not generally produced by military funding.

Instead, craftsmen and inventors developed weapons and military tools independently and actively sought the interest of military patrons afterward.

Following the rise of engineering as a profession in the 18th century, governments and military leaders did try to harness the methods of both science and engineering for more specific ends, but frequently without success.

In the decades leading up to the French Revolution, French artillery officers were often trained as engineers, and military leaders from this mathematical tradition attempted to transform the process of weapons manufacture from a craft-based enterprise to an organized and standardized system based on engineering principles and interchangeable parts (pre-dating the work of Eli Whitney in the U.S.).

During the Revolution, even natural scientists participated directly, attempting to create “weapons more powerful than any we possess” to aid the cause of the new French Republic, though there were no means for the revolutionary army to fund such work.

Each of these efforts, however, was ultimately unsuccessful in producing militarily useful results.

A slightly different outcome came from the longitude prize of the 18th century, offered by the British government for an accurate method of determining a ship's longitude at sea (essential for the safe navigation of the powerful British navy): intended to promote—and financially reward—a scientific solution, it was instead won by a scientific outsider, the clockmaker John Harrison.

However, the naval utility of astronomy did help increase the number of capable astronomers and focus research on developing more powerful and versatile instruments.

Through the 19th century, science and technology grew closer together, particularly through electrical and acoustic inventions and the corresponding mathematical theories.

The late 19th and early 20th centuries witnessed a trend toward military mechanization, with the advent of repeating rifles with smokeless powder, long-range artillery, high explosives, machine guns, and mechanized transport along with telegraphic and later wireless battlefield communication.

Still, independent inventors, scientists and engineers were largely responsible for these drastic changes in military technology (with the exception of the development of battleships, which could only have been created through organized large-scale effort).

==
World War I and the interwar years ==
World War
I marked the first large-scale mobilization of science for military purposes.

Prior to the war, the American military ran a few small laboratories as well as the Bureau of Standards, but independent inventors and industrial firms predominated.

Similarly in Europe, military-directed scientific research and development was minimal.

The powerful new technologies that led to trench warfare, however, reversed the traditional advantage of fast-moving offensive tactics; fortified positions supported by machine guns and artillery resulted in high attrition but strategic stalemate.

Militaries turned to scientists and engineers for even newer technologies, but the introduction of tanks and aircraft had only a marginal impact; the use of poison gas made a tremendous psychological impact, but decisively favored neither side.

The war ultimately turned on maintaining adequate supplies of materials, a problem also addressed by military-funded science—and, through the international chemical industry, closely related to the advent of chemical warfare.

The Germans introduced gas as a weapon in part because naval blockades limited their supply of nitrate for explosives, while the massive German dye industry could easily produce chlorine and organic chemicals in large amounts.

Industrial capacity was completely mobilized for war, and Fritz Haber and other industrial scientists were eager to contribute to the German cause; soon they were closely integrated into the military hierarchy as they tested the most effective ways of producing and delivering weaponized chemicals.

Though the initial impetus for gas warfare came from outside the military, further developments in chemical weapon technology might be considered military-funded, considering the blurring of lines between industry and nation in Germany.

Following the first chlorine attack by the Germans in May 1915, the British quickly moved to recruit scientists for developing their own gas weapons.

Gas research escalated on both sides, with chlorine followed by phosgene, a variety of tear gases, and mustard gas.

A wide array of research was conducted on the physiological effects of other gases, such and hydrogen cyanide, arsenic compounds, and a host of complex organic chemicals.

The British built from scratch what became an expansive research facility at Porton Down, which remains a significant military research institution into the 21st century.

Unlike many earlier military-funded scientific ventures, the research at Porton Down did not stop when the war ended or an immediate goal was achieved.

In fact, every effort was made to create an attractive research environment for top scientists, and chemical weapons development continued apace—though in secret—through the interwar years and into World War II.

German military-backed gas warfare research did not resume until the Nazi era, following the 1936 discovery of tabun, the first nerve agent, through industrial insecticide research.

In the United States, the established tradition of engineering was explicitly competing with the rising discipline of physics for World War
I military largess.

A host of inventors, led by Thomas Edison and his newly created Naval Consulting Board, cranked out thousands of inventions to solve military problems and aid the war effort, while academic scientists worked through the National Research Council (NRC) led by Robert Millikan.

Submarine detection was the most important problem that both the physicists and inventors hoped to solve, as German U-boats were decimating the crucial naval supply lines from the U.S. to England.

Edison's Board produced very few useful innovations, but NRC research resulted in a moderately successful sound-based methods for locating submarines and hidden ground-based artillery, as well as useful navigational and photographic equipment for aircraft.

Because of the success of academic science in solving specific military problems, the NRC was retained after the war's end, though it gradually decoupled from the military.
Many industrial and academic chemists and physicists came under military control during the Great War, but post-war research by the Royal Engineers Experimental Station at Porton Down and the continued operation of the National Research Council were exceptions to the overall pattern; wartime chemistry funding was a temporary redirection of a field largely driven by industry and later medicine, while physics grew closer to industry than to the military.

The discipline of modern meteorology, however, was largely built from military funding.

During World War I, the French civilian meteorological infrastructure was largely absorbed into the military.

The introduction of military aircraft during the war as well as the role of wind and weather in the success or failure of gas attacks meant meteorological advice was in high demand.

The French army (among others) created its own supplementary meteorological service as well, retraining scientists from other fields to staff it.

At war's end, the military continued to control French meteorology, sending weathermen to French colonial interests and integrating weather service with the growing air corps; most of the early-twentieth century growth in European meteorology was the direct result of military funding.

World War II would result in a similar transformation of American meteorology, initiating a transition from an apprenticeship system for training weathermen (based on intimate knowledge of local trends and geography) to the university-based, science-intensive system that has predominated since.
==
World War II ==
If World War
I was the chemists’ war, World War II was the physicists’ war.

As with other total wars, it is difficult to draw a line between military funding and more spontaneous military-scientific collaboration during World War II.

Well before the Invasion of Poland, nationalism was a powerful force in the German physics community (see Deutsche Physik); the military mobilization of physicists was all but irresistible after the rise of National Socialism.

German and Allied investigations of the possibility of a nuclear bomb began in 1939 at the initiative of civilian scientists, but by 1942 the respective militaries were heavily involved.

The German nuclear energy project had two independent teams, a civilian-controlled team under Werner Heisenberg and a military-controlled led by Kurt Diebner; the latter was more explicitly aimed at producing a bomb (as opposed to a power reactor) and received much more funding from the Nazis, though neither was ultimately successful.
In the U.S., the Manhattan Project and other projects of the Office of Scientific Research and Development resulted in a much more extensive military-scientific venture, the scale of which dwarfed previous military-funded research projects.

Theoretical work by a number of British and American scientists resulted in significant optimism about the possibility of a nuclear chain reaction.
As the physicists convinced military leaders of the potential of nuclear weapons, funding for actual development was ratcheted up rapidly.

A number of large laboratories were created across the United States for work on different aspects of the bomb, while many existing facilities were reoriented to bomb-related work; some were university-managed while others were government-run, but all were ultimately funded and directed by the military.

The May 1945 surrender of Germany, the original intended target for the bomb, did virtually nothing to slow the project's momentum.

After Japan's surrender immediately following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, many scientists returned to academia or industry, but the Manhattan Project infrastructure was too large—and too effective—to be dismantled wholesale; it became the model for future military-scientific work, in the U.S. and elsewhere.
Other wartime physics research, particularly in rocketry and radar technology, was less significant in popular culture but much more significant for the outcome of the war.

German rocketry was driven by the pursuit of Wunderwaffen, resulting in the V-2 ballistic missile; the technology as well as the personal expertise of the German rocketry community was absorbed by the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. rocket programs after the war, forming the basis of long-term military funded rocketry, ballistic missile, and later space research.

Rocket science was only beginning to make impact by the final years of the war.

German rockets created fear and destruction in London, but had only modest military significance, while air-to-ground rockets enhanced the power of American air strikes; jet aircraft also went into service by the end of the war.

Radar work before and during the war provided even more of an advantage for the Allies.

British physicists pioneered long-wave radar, developing an effective system for detecting incoming German air forces.

Work on potentially more precise short-wave radar was turned over to the U.S.; several thousand academic physicists and engineers not participating the Manhattan Project did radar work, particularly at MIT and Stanford, resulting in microwave radar systems that could resolve more detail in incoming flight formations.

Further refinement of microwave technology led to proximity fuzes, which greatly enhanced the ability of the U.S. Navy to defend against Japanese bombers.

Microwave production, detection and manipulation also formed the technical foundation to complement the institutional foundation of the Manhattan Project in much post-war defense research.

==
American Cold War science ==
In the years immediately following World War II, the military was by far the most significant patron of university science research in the U.S., and the national labs also continued to flourish.

After two years in political limbo (but with work on nuclear power and bomb manufacture continuing apace)
the Manhattan Project became a permanent arm of the government as the Atomic Energy Commission.

The Navy—inspired by the success of military-directed wartime research—created its own R&D organization, the Office of Naval Research, which would preside over an expanded long-term research program at Naval Research Laboratory as well as fund a variety of university-based research.

Military money following up the wartime radar research led to explosive growth in both electronics research and electronics manufacturing.

The Air Force became an independent service branch from the Army and established its own research and development system, and the Army followed suit (though it was less invested in academic science than the Navy or Air Force).

Meanwhile, the perceived communist menace of the Soviet Union caused tensions—and military budgets—to escalate rapidly.

The Department of Defense primarily funded what has been broadly described as “physical research,” but to reduce this to merely chemistry and physics is misleading.

Military patronage benefited a large number of fields, and in fact helped create a number of the modern scientific disciplines.

At Stanford and MIT, for example, electronics, aerospace engineering, nuclear physics, and materials science—all physics, broadly speaking—each developed in different directions, becoming increasingly independent of parent disciplines as they grew and pursued defense-related research agendas.

What began as interdepartmental laboratories became the centers for graduate teaching and research innovation thanks to the broad scope of defense funding.

The need to keep up with corporate technology research (which was receiving the lion's share of defense contracts) also prompted many science labs to establish close relationships with industry.

===
Computing ===
The complex histories of computer science and computer engineering were shaped, in the first decades of digital computing, almost entirely by military funding.

Most of the basic component technologies for digital computing were developed through the course of the long-running Whirlwind-SAGE program to develop an automated radar shield.

Virtually unlimited funds enabled two decades of research that only began producing useful technologies by the end of the 50s; even the final version of the SAGE command and control system had only marginal military utility.

More so than with previously-established disciplines receiving military funding, the culture of computer science was permeated with a Cold War military perspective.

Indirectly, the ideas of computer science also had a profound effect on psychology, cognitive science and neuroscience through the mind-computer analogy.

===
Geosciences and astrophysics ===
The history of earth science and the history of astrophysics were also closely tied to military purposes and funding throughout the Cold War.

American geodesy, oceanography, and seismology grew from small sub-disciplines in into full-fledged independent disciplines as for several decades, virtually all funding in these fields came from the Department of Defense.

A central goal that tied these disciplines together (even while providing the means for intellectual independence) was the figure of the Earth, the model of the earth's geography and gravitation that was essential for accurate ballistic missiles.

In the 1960s, geodesy was the superficial goal of the satellite program CORONA, while military reconnaissance was in fact a driving force.

Even for geodetic data, new secrecy guidelines worked to restrict collaboration in a field that had formerly been fundamentally international; the Figure of the Earth had geopolitical significance beyond questions of pure geoscience.

Still, geodesists were able to retain enough autonomy and subvert secrecy limitations enough to make use of the findings of their military research to overturn some of the fundamental theories of geodesy.

Like geodesy and satellite photography research, the advent of radio astronomy had a military purpose hidden beneath official astrophysical research agenda.

Quantum electronics permitted both revolutionary new methods of analyzing the universe and—using the same equipment and technology—the monitoring of Soviet electronic signals.
Military interest in (and funding of) seismology, meteorology and oceanography was in some ways a result of the defense-related payoffs of physics and geodesy.

The immediate goal of funding in these fields was to detect clandestine nuclear testing and track fallout radiation, a necessary precondition for treaties to limit the nuclear weapon technology earlier military research had created.

In particular, the feasibility of monitoring underground nuclear explosions was crucial to the possibility of a comprehensive rather than Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

But the military-funded growth of these disciplines continued even when no pressing military goals were driving them; as with other natural sciences, the military also found value in having ‘scientists on tap’ for unforeseen future R&D needs.

===
Biological sciences ===
The biological sciences were also affected by military funding, but, with the exception of nuclear physics-related medical and genetic research, largely indirectly.

The most significant funding sources for basic research before the rise of the military-industrial-academic complex were philanthropic organizations such as the Rockefeller Foundation.

After World War II (and to some extent before), the influx of new industrial and military funding opportunities for the physical sciences prompted philanthropies to divest from physics research—most early work in high-energy physics and biophysics had been the product of foundation grants—and refocus on biological and medical research.

The social sciences also found limited military support from the 1940s to the 1960s, but much defense-minded social science research could be—and was—pursued without extensive military funding.

In the 1950s, social scientists tried to emulate the interdisciplinary organizational success of the physical sciences’ Manhattan Project with the synthetic behavioral science movement.

Social scientists actively sought to promote their usefulness to the military, researching topics related to propaganda (put to use in Korea), decision making, the psychological and sociological causes and effects of communism, and a broad constellation of other topics of Cold War significance.

By the 1960s, economists and political scientists offered up modernization theory for the cause of Cold War nation-building; modernization theory found a home in the military in the form of Project Camelot, a study of the process of revolution, as well as in the Kennedy administration’s approach to the Vietnam War.

Project Camelot was ultimately canceled because of the concerns it raised about scientific objectivity in the context of such a politicized research agenda; though natural sciences were not yet susceptible to implications of the corrupting influence of military and political factors, the social sciences were.

==
Historical debate ==
Historian Paul Forman, in his seminal 1987 article, proposed that not only had military funding of science greatly expanded the scope and significance of American physics, it also initiated "a qualitative change in its purposes and character."

Historians of science were beginning to turn to the Cold War relationship between science and the military for detailed study, and Forman's “distortionist critique” (as Roger Geiger has described it) served to focus the ensuing debates.

Forman and others (e.g., Robert Seidel, Stuart Leslie, and for the history of the social sciences, Ron Robin) view the influx of military money and the focus on applied rather than basic research as having had, at least partially, a negative impact on the course of subsequent research.

In turn, critics of the distortionist thesis, beginning with Daniel Kevles, deny that the military "seduced American physicists from, so to speak, a 'true basic physics'."

Kevles, as well as Geiger, instead view the effects of military funding relative to such funding simply being absent—rather than put to alternate scientific use.

Most recent scholarship has moved toward a tempered version of Forman's thesis, in which scientists retained significant autonomy despite the radical changes brought about by military funding.

== See also ==
History of weapons
Big Science
Funding of science
Historiography of science
History of radar
History of science and technology
History of technology
Military-industrial complex
Military science
Military technology
Military medicine
Military Wireless Museum in the Midlands


==
Notes and references ==
Military technology is the application of technology for use in warfare.
It comprises the kinds of technology that are distinctly military in nature and not civilian in application, usually because they lack useful or legal civilian applications, or are dangerous to use without appropriate military training.

The line is porous; military inventions have been brought into civilian use throughout history, with sometimes minor modification if any, and civilian innovations have similarly been put to military use.

Military technology is often researched and developed by scientists and engineers specifically for use in battle by the armed forces.
Many new technologies came as a result of the military funding of science.

Armament engineering is the design, development, testing and lifecycle management of military weapons and systems.
It draws on the knowledge of several traditional engineering disciplines, including mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, mechatronics, electro-optics, aerospace engineering, materials engineering, and chemical engineering.

==
History ==
This section is divided into the broad cultural developments that affected military technology.

===
Ancient technology ===
The first use of stone tools may have begun during the Paleolithic Period.
The earliest stone tools are from the site of Lomekwi, Turkana, dating from 3.3 million years ago.
Stone tools diversified through the Pleistocene Period, which ended ~12,000 years ago.

The earliest evidence of warfare between two groups is recorded at the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, where human skeletons with major traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees and hands, including an embedded obsidian bladelet on a skull, are evidence of inter-group conflict between groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers 10,000 years ago.
Humans entered the Bronze Age as they learned to smelt copper into an alloy with tin to make weapons.
In Asia where copper-tin ores are rare, this development was delayed until trading in bronze began in the third millennium BCE.
In the Middle East and Southern European regions, the Bronze Age follows the Neolithic period, but in other parts of the world, the Copper Age is a transition from Neolithic to the Bronze Age.
Although the Iron Age generally follows the Bronze Age, in some areas the Iron Age intrudes directly on the Neolithic from outside the region, with the exception of Sub-Saharan Africa where it was developed independently.
The first large-scale use of iron weapons began in Asia Minor around the 14th century BCE and in Central Europe around the 11th century BCE followed by the Middle East (about 1000 BCE) and India and China.
The Assyrians are credited with the introduction of horse cavalry in warfare and the extensive use of iron weapons by 1100 BCE.
Assyrians were also the first to use iron-tipped arrows.

=== Post-classical technology ===
The Wujing Zongyao (Essentials of the Military Arts), written by Zeng Gongliang, Ding Du, and others at the order of Emperor Renzong around 1043 during the Song dynasty illustrate the eras focus on advancing intellectual issues and military technology due to the significance of warfare between the Song and the Liao, Jin, and Yuan to their north.

The book covers topics of military strategy, training, and the production and employment of advanced weaponry.

Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbors to the north.
The flamethrower found its origins in Byzantine-era Greece, employing Greek fire (a chemically complex, highly flammable petrol fluid) in a device with a siphon hose by the 7th century.

The earliest reference to Greek Fire in China was made in 917, written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms.

In 919, the siphon projector-pump was used to spread the 'fierce fire oil' that could not be doused with water, as recorded by Lin Yu in his Wuyue Beishi, hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire
(see also Pen Huo Qi).
Lin Yu mentioned also that the 'fierce fire oil' derived ultimately from one of China's maritime contacts in the 'southern seas', Arabia Dashiguo.
In the Battle of Langshan Jiang in 919, the naval fleet of the Wenmu King from Wuyue defeated a Huainan army from the Wu state; Wenmu's success was facilitated by the use of 'fire oil' ('huoyou') to burn their fleet, signifying the first Chinese use of gunpowder in a battle.
The Chinese applied the use of double-piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder (with an upstroke and downstroke), lit at the end by a slow-burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame.
This device was featured in description and illustration of  the Wujing Zongyao military manuscript of 1044.
In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976, early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975.
Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy, but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction.

Although the destructive effects of gunpowder were described in the earlier Tang dynasty by a Daoist alchemist, the earliest developments of the gun barrel and the projectile-fire cannon were found in late Song China.
The first art depiction of the Chinese 'fire lance' (a combination of a temporary-fire flamethrower and gun) was from a Buddhist mural painting of Dunhuang, dated circa 950.
These 'fire-lances' were widespread in use by the early 12th century, featuring hollowed bamboo poles as tubes to fire sand particles (to blind and choke), lead pellets, bits of sharp metal and pottery shards, and finally large gunpowder-propelled arrows and rocket weaponry.

Eventually, perishable bamboo was replaced with hollow tubes of cast iron, and so too did the terminology of this new weapon change, from 'fire-spear' huo qiang to 'fire-tube' huo tong.

This ancestor to the gun was complemented by the ancestor to the cannon, what the Chinese referred to since the 13th century as the 'multiple bullets magazine erupter' bai zu lian zhu pao, a tube of bronze or cast iron that was filled with about 100 lead balls.
The earliest known depiction of a gun is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, dating to 1128,
that portrays a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, firing flames and a cannonball.
However, the oldest existent archaeological discovery of a metal barrel handgun is from the Chinese Heilongjiang excavation, dated to 1288.
The Chinese also discovered the explosive potential of packing hollowed cannonball shells with gunpowder.
Written later by Jiao Yu in his Huolongjing (mid-14th century), this manuscript recorded an earlier Song-era cast-iron cannon known as the 'flying-cloud thunderclap eruptor' (fei yun pi-li pao).
The manuscript stated that:
As noted before, the change in terminology for these new weapons during the Song period were gradual.
The early Song cannons were at first termed the same way as the Chinese trebuchet catapult.
A later Ming dynasty scholar known as Mao Yuanyi would explain this use of terminology and true origins of the cannon in his text of the Wubei Zhi, written in 1628:
The 14th-century Huolongjing was also one of the first Chinese texts to carefully describe to the use of explosive land mines, which had been used by the late Song Chinese against the Mongols in 1277, and employed by the Yuan dynasty afterwards.
The innovation of the detonated land mine was accredited to one Luo Qianxia in the campaign of defense against the Mongol invasion by Kublai Khan, Later Chinese texts revealed that the Chinese land mine employed either a rip cord or a motion booby trap of a pin releasing falling weights that rotated a steel flint wheel, which in turn created sparks that ignited the train of fuses for the land mines.

Furthermore, the Song employed the earliest known gunpowder-propelled rockets in warfare during the late 13th century, its earliest form being the archaic Fire Arrow.
When the Northern Song capital of Kaifeng fell to the Jurchens in 1126, it was written by Xia Shaozeng that 20,000 fire arrows were handed over to the Jurchens in their conquest.

An even earlier Chinese text of the Wujing Zongyao ("Collection of the Most Important Military Techniques"), written in 1044 by the Song scholars Zeng Kongliang and Yang Weide, described the use of three spring or triple bow arcuballista that fired arrow bolts holding gunpowder packets near the head of the arrow.
Going back yet even farther, the Wu Li Xiao Shi (1630, second edition 1664) of Fang Yizhi stated that fire arrows were presented to Emperor Taizu of Song (r. 960–976) in 960.

===
Modern technology ===


====
Armies ====
The Islamic gunpowder empires introduced numerous developed firearms, cannon and small arms.
During the period of Proto-industrialization, newly invented weapons were seen to be used in Mughal India.

Rapid development in military technology had a dramatic impact on armies and navies in the industrialized world in 1740-1914.
For land warfare, cavalry faded in importance, while infantry became transformed by the use of highly accurate more rapidly loading rifles, and the use of smokeless powder.
Machine guns were developed in the 1860s in Europe.
Rocket artillery and the Mysorean rockets, both pioneered by Indian Muslim Tipu Sultan, became more powerful as new high explosives (based on nitroglycerin) arrived during the Anglo-Mysore Wars, and the French introduced much more accurate rapid-fire field artillery.
Logistics and communications support for land warfare dramatically improved with use of railways and telegraphs.
Industrialization provided a base of factories that could be converted to  produce munitions, as well as uniforms, tents, wagons and essential supplies.
Medical facilities were enlarged and reorganized based on improved hospitals and the creation of modern nursing,  typified by Florence Nightingale in Britain during the Crimean War of 1854-56.
====
Naval ====
Naval warfare was transformed by many innovations, most notably the coal-based steam engine, highly accurate long-range naval guns, heavy steel armour for battleships, mines, and the introduction of the torpedo, followed by the torpedo boat and the destroyer.
Coal after 1900 was eventually displaced by more efficient oil, but meanwhile navies with an international scope had to depend on a network of coaling stations to refuel.
The British Empire provided them in abundance, as did the French Empire to a lesser extent.

War colleges developed, as military theory became a specialty; cadets and senior commanders were taught the theories of Jomini, Clausewitz and Mahan, And engaged in tabletop war games.
Around 1900, entirely new innovations such as submarines and airplanes appeared, and were quickly adapted to warfare by 1914.
The British HMS Dreadnought (1906) incorporated so much of the latest technology in weapons, propulsion and armour that it at a stroke made all other battleships obsolescent.

====
Organization and finance ====
New financial tools were developed to fund the rapidly increasing costs of warfare, such as popular bond sales and income taxes, and the funding of permanent research centers.

Many 19th century innovations were largely invented and promoted by lone individuals with small teams of assistants, such as David Bushnell and the submarine, John Ericsson and the battleship, Hiram Maxim and the machine gun, and Alfred Nobel and high explosives.
By 1900 the military began to realize that they needed to rely much more heavily on large-scale research centers, which needed government funding.

They brought in leaders of organized innovation such as Thomas Edison in the U.S. and chemist Fritz Haber of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute in Germany.

==
Postmodern technology ==
The postmodern stage of military technology emerged in the 1940s, and one with recognition thanks to the high priority given during the war to scientific and engineering research and development regarding nuclear weapons, radar, jet engines, proximity fuses, advanced submarines, aircraft carriers, and other weapons.
The high-priority continues into the 21st century.
It involves the military application of advanced scientific research regarding nuclear weapons, jet engines, ballistic and guided missiles, radar, biological warfare, and the use of electronics, computers and software.

===
Space ===
During the Cold War, the world's two great superpowers — the Soviet Union and the United States of America — spent large proportions of their GDP on developing military technologies.

The drive to place objects in orbit stimulated space research and started the Space Race.

In 1957, the USSR launched the first artificial satellite, Sputnik 1.

By the end of the 1960s, both countries regularly deployed satellites.
Spy satellites were used by militaries to take accurate pictures of their rivals' military installations.

As time passed the resolution and accuracy of orbital reconnaissance alarmed both sides of the iron curtain.

Both the United States and the Soviet Union began to develop anti-satellite weapons to blind or destroy each other's satellites.

Laser weapons, kamikaze style satellites, as well as orbital nuclear explosion were researched with varying levels of success.

Spy satellites were, and continue to be, used to monitor the dismantling of military assets in accordance with arms control treaties signed between the two superpowers.
To use spy satellites in such a manner is often referred to in treaties as "national technical means of verification".

The superpowers developed ballistic missiles to enable them to use nuclear weaponry across great distances.
As rocket science developed, the range of missiles increased and intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) were created, which could strike virtually any target on Earth in a timeframe measured in minutes rather than hours or days.

In order to cover large distances ballistic missiles are usually launched into sub-orbital spaceflight.

As soon as intercontinental missiles were developed, military planners began programmes and strategies to counter their effectiveness.

===
Mobilization ===
A significant portion of military technology is about transportation, allowing troops and weaponry to be moved from their origins to the front.
Land transport has historically been mainly by foot, land vehicles have usually been used as well, from chariots to tanks.

When conducting a battle over a body of water, ships are used.
There are historically two main categories of ships: those for transporting troops, and those for attacking other ships.

Soon after the invention of aeroplanes, military aviation became a significant component of warfare, though usually as a supplementary role.
The two main types of military aircraft are bombers, which attack land- or sea-based targets, and fighters, which attack other aircraft.

Military vehicles are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces.

List of military vehicles
List of armoured fighting vehicles
List of tanksMilitary aircraft includes any use of aircraft by a country's military, including such areas as transport, training, disaster relief, border patrol, search and rescue, surveillance, surveying, peacekeeping, and (very rarely) aerial warfare.

List of aircraft
List of aircraft weaponsWarships are watercraft for combat and transportation in and on seas and oceans.

Submarines
Complex masting and sail systems found on warships during the Age of Sail
List of historical ship and boat types
List of aircraft carriers
List of submarine classes


===
Defence ===
Fortifications are military constructions and buildings designed for defence in warfare.
They range in size and age from the Great Wall of China to a Sangar.

List of fortifications
List of forts


===
Sensors and communication ===
Sensors and communication systems are used to detect enemies, coordinate movements of armed forces and guide weaponry.
Early systems included flag signaling, telegraph and heliographs.

Laser guidance
Missile guidance
Norden Bombsight
Proximity fuse
Radar
Satellite guidance in guidance weapons


==
Future technology ==
The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is an agency of the United States Department of Defense responsible for the development of new technologies for use by the military.

DARPA leads the development of military technology in the United States and today, has dozens of ongoing projects; everything from humanoid robots, to bullets that are able to change path before reaching their target.
China has a similar agency.

===
Emerging territory ===
Current militaries continue to invest in new technologies for the future.
Such technologies include cognitive radar , 5g cellular networks, microchips, semiconductors, and large scale analytic engines.
Additionally, many militaries seek to improve current laser technology.
For example, Israeli Defense Forces utilize laser technology to disable small enemy machinery, but seek to move to more large scale capabilities in the coming years.
Militaries across the world continue to perform research on autonomous technologies which allow for increased troop mobility or replacement of live soldiers.
Autonomous vehicles and robots are expected to play a role in future conflicts; this has the potential to decrease loss of life in future warfare.
Observers of transhumanism note high rates of technological terms in military literature, but low rates for explicitly transhuman-related terms.
Today's hybrid style of warfare also calls for investments in information technologies.
Increased reliance on computer systems has incentivized nations to push for increased efforts at managing large scale networks and having access to large scale data.
New strategies of cyber and hybrid warfare includes, network attacks, media analysis, and media/ grass-roots campaigns on medias such as blog posts


====
Cyberspace ====
In 2011, the US Defense Department declared cyberspace a new domain of warfare; since then DARPA has begun a research project known as "Project X" with the goal of creating new technologies that will enable the government to better understand and map the cyber territory.

Ultimately giving the Department of Defense the ability to plan and manage large-scale cyber missions across dynamic network environments.

== See also ==
List of military inventions
List of emerging military technologies
Bellifortis, late medieval treatise on military technology.

Materiel


== References ==


==
Further reading ==
Andrade, Tonio.
The Gunpowder Age: China, military innovation, and the rise of the West in world history (Princeton UP, 2016).

Black, Jeremy.
Tools of War  (2007) covers 50 major inventions.
excerpt
Boot, Max.
War made new: technology, warfare, and the course of history, 1500 to today (Penguin, 2006).

Dupuy, Trevor N.
The evolution of weapons and warfare (1984), 350pp, cover 2000 BC to late 20th century.

Ellis, John.
The Social History of the Machine Gun (1986).

Gabriel, Richard A., and Karen S. Metz.
From Sumer to Rome: The Military capabilities of ancient armies (ABC-CLIO, 1991).

Hacker, Barton (2005).
"
The Machines of War: Western Military Technology 1850–2000".
History & Technology.
21 (3)
: 255–300.
doi:10.1080/07341510500198669.
S2CID 144113139.

Levy, Jack S (1984).
"
The offensive/defensive balance of military technology: A theoretical and historical analysis".
International Studies Quarterly.
28 (2)
: 219–238.
doi:10.2307/2600696.
JSTOR 2600696.

McNeill, William H.
The Pursuit of Power: Technology, Armed Force, and Society since A.D. 1000 (1984).

Parker, Geoffrey.
The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West (1988).

Steele, Brett D. and Tamara Dorland.
Heirs of Archimedes: Science & the Art of War through the Age of Enlightenment (2005)
397 pp.
Military history is a humanities discipline within the scope of general historical recording of armed conflict in the history of humanity, and its impact on the societies, cultures and economies thereof, as well as the resulting changes to local and international relationships.

Professional historians normally focus on military affairs that had a major impact on the societies involved as well as the aftermath of conflicts, while amateur historians and hobbyists often take a larger interest in the details of battles, equipment and uniforms in use.

The essential subjects of military history study are the causes of war, the social and cultural foundations, military doctrine on each side, the logistics, leadership, technology, strategy, and tactics used, and how these changed over time.
On the other hand, Just War Theory explores the moral dimensions of warfare, and to better limit the destructive reality caused by war, seeks to establish a doctrine of military ethics.

As an applied field, military history has been studied at academies and service schools because the military command seeks to not repeat past mistakes, and improve upon its current performance by instilling an ability in commanders to perceive historical parallels during a battle, so as to capitalize on the lessons learned from the past.

When certifying military history instructors
the Combat Studies Institute deemphasizes rote detail memorization and focuses on themes and context in relation to current and future conflict, using the motto
"Past is Prologue.
"The discipline of military history is dynamic, changing with development as much of the subject area as the societies and organisations that make use of it.
The dynamic nature of the discipline of military history is largely related to the rapidity of change the military forces, and the art and science of managing them, as well as the frenetic pace of technological development that had taken place during the period known as the Industrial Revolution, and more recently in the nuclear and information ages.

An important recent concept is the Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA) which attempts to explain how warfare has been shaped by emerging technologies, such as gunpowder.
It highlights the short outbursts of rapid change followed by periods of relative stability.

==
Popular versus academic military history ==
In terms of the history profession in major countries, military history is an orphan, despite its enormous popularity with the general public.
William H. McNeill points out:

This branch of our discipline flourishes in an intellectual ghetto.
The 144 books in question [published in 1968-78] fall into two distinct classes: works aimed at a popular readership, written by journalists and men of letters outside academic circles, and professional work nearly always produced within the military establishment....
The study of military history in universities remains seriously underdeveloped.
Indeed, lack of interest in and disdain for military history probably constitute one of the strangest prejudices of the profession.

==
Historiography of military history ==
Historiography is the study of the history and method of the discipline of history or the study of a specialised topic.
In this case, military history with an eye to gaining an accurate assessment of conflicts using all available sources.
For this reason military history is periodised, creating overlaying boundaries of study and analysis in which descriptions of battles by leaders may be unreliable due to the inclination to minimize mention of failure and exaggerate success.
Military historians use Historiographical analysis in an effort to allow an unbiased, contemporary view of records.
One military historian, Jeremy Black, outlined problems 21st-century military historians face as an inheritance of their predecessors:
Eurocentricity, a technological bias, a focus on leading military powers and dominant military systems, the separation of land from sea and recently air conflicts, the focus on state-to-state conflict, a lack of focus on political "tasking" in how forces are used.
If these challenges were not sufficient for the military historians, the limits of method are complicated by the lack of records, either destroyed or never recorded for its value as a military secret that may prevent some salient facts from being reported at all; scholars still do not know the exact nature of Greek fire for instance.
Researching Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom, for example, have presented unique challenges to historians due to records that were destroyed to protect classified military information, among other reasons.
Historians utilize their knowledge of government regulation and military organization, and employing a targeted and systematic research strategy to piece together war histories.
Despite these limits, wars are some of the most studied and detailed periods of human history.

Military historians have often compared organization, tactical and strategic ideas, leadership, and national support of the militaries of different nations.
In the early 1980s, historian Jeffrey Kimball studied the influence of a historian's political position on current events on interpretive disagreement regarding the causes of 20th century wars.

He surveyed the ideological preferences of 109 active diplomatic historians in the United States as well as 54 active military historians.
He finds that their current political views are moderately correlated with their historiographical interpretations.
A clear position on the left-right continuum regarding capitalism was apparent in most cases.

All groups agreed with the proposition, "historically, Americans have tended to view questions of their national security in terms of such extremes as good vs. evil."

Though the Socialists were split, the other groups agreed that "miscalculation and/or misunderstanding of the situation" had caused U.S. interventionism."

Kimball reports that:

Of historians in the field of diplomatic history, 7% are Socialist, 19% are Other, 53% are Liberal, 11% are None and 10% Conservative.
Of military historians, 0% are Socialist, 8% are Other, 35% are Liberal, 18% are None and 40% are Conservative.

===
Online resources ===
People interested in military history from all periods of time, and all subtopics, are increasingly turning to the Internet for many more resources than are typically available in nearby libraries.

Since 1993, one of the most popular sites, with over 4000 members (subscriptions are free) has been H-WAR, sponsored by the H-Net network based at Michigan State University.
H-War has six coeditors, and an academic advisory board that sets policy.

It sponsors daily moderated discussions of current topics, announcements of new publications and conferences, and reports on developments at conferences.
The H-Net family of lists has sponsored and published over 46,000 scholarly book reviews, thousands of which deal with books in military history broadly conceived.

Wikipedia itself has a very wide coverage of military history, with over 180,000 articles.
Its editors sponsor Wikipedia:
WikiProject Military history and encourage readers to join.

===
Military and war museums ===
Military museums specialize in military histories; they are often organized from a national point of view, where a museum in a particular country will have displays organized around conflicts in which that country has taken part.
They typically take a broad view of warfare's role in the nation's history.

They typically include displays of weapons and other military equipment, uniforms, wartime propaganda, and exhibits on civilian life during wartime, and decorations, among others.
A military museum may be dedicated to a particular or area, such as the Imperial War Museum Duxford for military aircraft, Deutsches Panzermuseum for tanks, the Lange Max Museum for the Western Front (World War I), the International Spy Museum for espionage, The National World War
I Museum for World War
I, the "D-Day Paratroopers Historical Center" (Normandy) for WWII airborne, or more generalist, such as the Canadian War Museum or the Musée de l'Armée.
For the Italian alpine wall one can find the most popular museum of bunkers in the small museum n8bunker at Olang / Kronplatz in the heard of the dolomites of South Tyrol.

The U.S. Army and the state National Guards operate 98 military history museums across the United States and three abroad.
Curators debate how or whether the goal of providing diverse representations of war, in terms of positive and negative aspects of warfare.

War is seldom presented as a good thing, but soldiers are heavily praised.
David Lowenthal has observed that in today's museums, "nothing seems too horrendous to commemorate".
Yet as Andrew Whitmarsh notes, "museums frequently portray a sanitised version of warfare."
The actual bomber that dropped the atomic bomb on Japan became the focus of an angry national controversy with veterans attacking curators and historians when the Smithsonian Institution planned to put its fuselage on public display in 1995.
The uproar led to cancellation of the exhibit.

==
Early historians ==
The documentation of military history begins with the confrontation between Sumer (current Iraq) and Elam (current Iran) c. 2700 BC near the modern Basra.
Other prominent records in military history are the Trojan War in Homer's Iliad (though its historicity has been challenged), The Histories by Herodotus (484 BC – 425 BC) who is often called the "father of history".
Next was Thucydides whose impartiality, despite being an Athenian, allowed him to take advantage of his exile to research the war from different perspectives by carefully examining documents and interviewing eyewitnesses.
An approach centered on the analysis of a leader was taken by Xenophon (430 BC – 355 BC) in Anabasis, recording the expedition of Cyrus the Younger into Anatolia.

The records of the Roman Julius Caesar (100 BC – 44 BC) enable a comparative approach for campaigns such as Commentarii de Bello Gallico and Commentarii de Bello Civili.

==
Technological evolution ==
The nature of warfare never changes, only its superficial manifestations.
Joshua and David, Hector and Achilles would recognize the combat that our soldiers and Marines have waged in the alleys of Somalia and Iraq.
The uniforms evolve, bronze gives way to titanium, arrows may be replaced by laser-guided bombs, but the heart of the matter is still killing your enemies until any survivors surrender and do your will.

New weapons development can dramatically alter the face of war, the cost of warfare, the preparations, and the training of soldiers and leaders.
A rule of thumb is that if your enemy has a potentially war winning weapon, you have to either match it or neutralize it.

===
Ancient era ===
Chariots originated around 2000 BC.
The chariot was an effective, fast weapon; while one man controlled the maneuvering of the chariot, a second bowman could shoot arrows at enemy soldiers.
These became crucial to the maintenance of several governments, including the New Egyptian Kingdom and the Shang dynasty and the nation states of the early to middle Zhou dynasty.
Some of the military unit types and technologies which were developed in the ancient world are:
Slinger
Hoplite
Auxiliaries
Infantry
Archery
Chariots
CavalryFor settled agrarian civilizations, the infantry became the core of military action.
The infantry started as opposing armed groups of soldiers underneath commanders.
The Greeks and early Romans used rigid, heavily armed phalanxes.
The Macedonians and Hellenistic states would adopt phalanx formations with sarissa pikemen.
The Romans would later adopt more flexible maniples from their neighbors which made them extremely successful in the field of battle.
The kingdoms of the Warring States in East Asia also adopted infantry combat, a transition from chariot warfare from centuries earlier.
Archers were a major component of many ancient armies, notably those of the Persians, Scythians, Egyptians, Nubians, Indians, Koreans, Chinese, and Japanese.

Cavalry became an important tool.
In the Sicilian Expedition, led by Athens in an attempt to subdue Syracuse, the well-trained Syracusan cavalry became crucial to the success of the Syracusans.
Macedonian Alexander the Great effectively deployed his cavalry forces to secure victories.
In battles such as the Battle of Cannae of the Second Punic War, and the Battle of Carrhae of the Roman-Persian Wars, the importance of the cavalry would be repeated.
There were also horse archers, who had the ability to shoot on horseback – the Parthians, Scythians, Mongols, and other various steppe people were especially fearsome with this tactic.
By the 3rd–4th century AD, heavily armored cavalry became widely adopted by the Parthians, Sasanians, Byzantines, Eastern Han dynasty and Three Kingdoms, etc.

The early Indo-Iranians developed the use of chariots in warfare.
The scythed chariot was later invented in India and soon adopted by the Persians.
War elephants were sometimes deployed for fighting in ancient warfare.
They were first used in India and later adopted by the Persians.
War elephants were also used in the Battle of the Hydaspes River, and by Hannibal in the Second Punic War against the Romans.

Naval warfare was often crucial to military success.
Early navies used sailing ships without cannons; often the goal was to ram the enemy ships and cause them to sink.
There was human oar power, often using slaves, built up to ramming speed.
Galleys were used in the 3rd millennium BC by the Cretans.
The Greeks later advanced these ships.
In 1210 BC, the first recorded naval battle was fought between Suppiluliuma II, king of the Hittites, and Cyprus, which was defeated.
In the Greco-Persian Wars, the navy became of increasing importance.

Triremes were involved in more complicated sea-land operations.
Themistocles helped to build up a stronger Greek navy, composed of 310 ships, and defeated the Persians at the Battle of Salamis, ending the Persian invasion of Greece.
In the First Punic War, the war between Carthage and Rome started with an advantage to Carthage because of their naval experience.
A Roman fleet was built in 261 BC, with the addition of the corvus that allowed Roman soldiers to board enemy ships.
The bridge would prove effective at the Battle of Mylae, resulting in a Roman victory.

The Vikings, in the 8th century AD, invented a ship propelled by oars with a dragon decorating the prow, hence called the Drakkar.
The 12th century AD Song Dynasty invented ships with watertight bulkhead compartments while the 2nd century BC Han dynasty invented rudders and sculled oars for their warships.

Fortifications are important in warfare.
Early hill-forts were used to protect inhabitants in the Iron Age.
They were primitive forts surrounded by ditches filled with water.

Forts were then built out of mud bricks, stones, wood, and other available materials.
Romans used rectangular fortresses built out of wood and stone.
As long as there have been fortifications, there have been contraptions to break in, dating back to the times of Romans and earlier.
Siege warfare is often necessary to capture forts.

===
Middle-ages ===
Some of the military unit types and technologies which were used in the medieval period are:
Artillery
Cataphract
Condottieri
Fyrd
Rashidun
Mobile guard
Mamluk
Janissary
Knight (see also
: Chivalry)
Crossbow
Pikeman
Samurai
Sipahi
TrebuchetBows and arrows were often used by combatants.
Egyptians shot arrows from chariots effectively.
The crossbow was developed around 500 BC in China, and was used a lot in the Middle Ages.
The English/Welsh longbow from the 12th century also became important in the Middle Ages.
It helped to give the English a large early advantage in the Hundred Years' War, even though the English were eventually defeated.
The Battle of Crécy and the Battle of Agincourt are excellent examples of how to destroy an enemy using a longbow.
It dominated battlefields for over a century.

===
Gunpowder ===
There is evidence for gunpowder evolving slowly from formulations by Chinese alchemists as early as the 4th century, at first as experiments for life force and metal transmutation, and later experiments as pyrotechnics and incendiaries.
By the 10th century, the developments in gunpowder led to many new weapons that were improved over time.
The Chinese used incendiary devices based on this in siege warfare against the Mongols starting in the mid 13th century.
"
Pots with wicks of flax or cotton were used, containing a combination of sulfur, saltpeter (potassium nitrate), aconitine, oil, resin, ground charcoal and wax."
Joseph Needham argued the Chinese were able to destroy buildings and walls using such devices.
Such experimentation was not present in Western Europe, where the combination of saltpeter, sulfur and charcoal were used exclusively for explosives and as a propellant in firearms.
What the Chinese often referred to as the "fire drug" arrived in Europe, fully fleshed out, as gunpowder.
Cannons were first used in Europe in the early 14th century, and played a vital role in the Hundred Years' War.
The first cannons were simply welded metal bars in the form of a cylinder, and the first cannonballs were made of stone.
By 1346, at the Battle of Crécy, the cannon had been used; at the Battle of Agincourt they would be used again.
The first infantry firearms, from fire lances to hand cannons, were held in one hand, while the explosive charge was ignited by a lit match or hot coal held in the other hand.
In the mid-15th century came the matchlock, allowing the gun to be aimed and fired while held steady with both hands, as used in the arquebus.
Starting about 1500, clever but complicated firing mechanisms were invented to generate sparks to ignite the powder instead of a lit match, starting with the wheel lock, snaplock, snaphance, and finally the flintlock mechanism, which was simple and reliable, becoming standard with the musket by the early 17th century.

At the beginning of the 16th century, the first European fire ships were used.
Ships were filled with flammable materials, set on fire, and sent to enemy lines.
This tactic was successfully used by Francis Drake to scatter the Spanish Armada at the Battle of Gravelines, and would later be used by the Chinese, Russians, Greeks, and several other countries in naval battles.

Naval mines were invented in the 17th century, though they were not used in great numbers until the American Civil War.
They were used heavily in the First and Second World Wars.
Air-deployed naval mines were used to mine the North Vietnamese port of Haiphong during the Vietnam War.
The Iraqi Navy of Saddam Hussein used naval mines extensively during the Tanker War, as part of the Iran–Iraq War.

The first navigable submarine was built in 1624 by Cornelius Drebbel, it could cruise at a depth of 15 feet (5 m).
However, the first military submarine was constructed in 1885 by Isaac Peral.
The Turtle was developed by David Bushnell during the American Revolution.
Robert Fulton then improved the submarine design by creating the Nautilus.
The Howitzer, a type of field artillery, was developed in the 17th century to fire high trajectory explosive shells at targets that could not be reached by flat trajectory projectiles.

Organizational changes resulting in better training and intercommunication, made the concept combined arms possible, allowing the use of infantry, cavalry, and artillery in a coordinated way.
Bayonets also became of wide usage to infantry soldiers.
Bayonet is named after Bayonne, France where it was first manufactured in the 16th century.
It is used often in infantry charges to fight in hand-to-hand combat.
General Jean Martinet introduced the bayonet to the French army.
They were used heavily in the American Civil War, and continued to be used in modern wars like the Invasion of Iraq.
Balloons were first used in warfare at the end of the 18th century.
It was first introduced in Paris of 1783; the first balloon traveled over 5 miles (8 km).
Previously military scouts could only see from high points on the ground, or from the mast of a ship.
Now they could be high in the sky, signalling to troops on the ground.
This made it much more difficult for troop movements to go unobserved.
At the end of the 18th century, iron-cased artillery rockets were successfully used militarily in India against the British by Tipu Sultan of the Kingdom of Mysore during the Anglo-Mysore Wars.
Rockets were generally inaccurate at that time, though William Hale, in 1844, was able to develop a better rocket.
The new rocket no longer needed the rocket stick, and had a higher accuracy.
In the 1860s there were a series of advancements in rifles.
The first repeating rifle was designed in 1860 by a company bought out by Winchester, which made new and improved versions.
Springfield rifles arrived in the mid-19th century also.
Machine guns arrived in the late 19th century.
Automatic rifles and light machine guns first arrived at the beginning of the 20th century.
In the later part of the 19th century, the self-propelled torpedo was developed.
The HNoMS Rap was the world's first torpedo boat.

===
Early guns and artillery ===
The fire lance, the predecessor of the gun, was invented in China between the tenth and eleventh century.

The barrel was originally designed out of bamboo shoots, later with metal.
Joseph Needham notes "all the long preparations and tentative experiments were made in China, and everything came to Islam and the West fully fledged, whether it was the fire lance or the explosive bomb, the rocket or the metal-barrel handgun and bombard.
"
By the 1320s Europe had guns, but scholars state that the exact time and method of migration from China remains a mystery.
Evidence of firearms is found in Iran and Central Asia in the late fourteenth century.

It was not until roughly 1442 that guns were referenced in India.

Reliable references to guns in Russia begins around 1382.An illustration of a "pot-shaped gun" found in the Holkham Hall Milemete manuscript dated to 1326 shows earliest advent of firearms in European history.
The illustration shows an arrow, set in the pot-shaped gun pointed directly at a structure.
Archaeological evidence of such "gun arrows" were discovered in Eltz Castle, "dated by relation to a historical event (a feud with the Archbishop of Trier in 1331-36 leading to a siege), seem to confirm again that this was at least one of the types of guns like the Milemete used in these very early examples.
"According to Peter Fraser Purton, the best evidence of the earliest gun in Europe is the Loshult gun, dated to the fourteenth century.
Discovered in 1861, the Loshult was made of bronze measured 11.8 inches in length.
A replica of the Loshult was created, using similar gunpowder compounds with present-day materials, to determine the effectiveness of the weapon.
The Gunpowder Research Group, who designed the recreation, found that at high elevations, the Loshult could fire as far as 1300 meters.

Though inaccurate, missing targets further than 200 meters, the Loshult could fire a range of projectiles such as arrows and shot.
It was determined that the Loshult could be effectively fired at ranks of soldiers and structures.

Written works from the Cabinet des Titres of the Imperial Library of Paris has found evidence of canons in France in 1338.

The works illustrate canons being used on-board ships at the Rouen during that time.

"...an iron Fire-arm, which was provided with forty-eight bolts, made of iron and freather; also one pound of saltpetre and half a pound of sulphur to make the powder propel arrows.
"Researchers have been unable to determine the sizes of these canons and others, outside the artifacts recovered.

Sir Henry Brackenbury was able to surmise the approximate size of these cannons by comparing receipts for both the firearms and the corresponding amounts of gunpowder purchased.

The receipts show a transaction for "25 Livres for 5 canons."

Brackenbury was able to deduce, when comparing the costs of the cannons and the gunpowder apportioned, that they each iron cannon weighed approximately 25 lbs, while the brass cannons weighed roughly 22 lbs.
Philip the Bold (1363-1404) is credited with creating the most effective artillery power in Europe in the late fourteenth century, effectively creating the Burgundian estate.

Philip's development of a large artillery army made the small country a reputable force against larger empires such as England and France.

Philip had achieved this by establishing a large scale artillery manufacturing economy in Burgundy.

Philip used his new cache of artillery to help the French capture an English-held fortress of Odruik.

The artillery used to take Odruik used cannonballs measuring to about 450 pounds.
Large artillery was a major contributing factor to the fall of Constantinople at the hands of Mehmed the Conqueror (1432-1481).

Having resigned his position as ruler due to youth and inexperience in 1446, Mehmed moved to the Ottoman capital of Manisa.

After his uncle, Murad II died in 1451, Mehmed once again became Sultan.

He turned his attention to claiming the Byzantine capital, Constantinople.

Mehmed, like Philip, started mass-producing cannons by enticing craftsmen to his cause with money and freedom.

For 55 days, Constantinople was bombarded with artillery fire, throwing cannonballs as large as 800 lbs at its walls.

On May 29, 1453, Constantinople fell into Ottoman control.

===
Early firearm tactics ===
As guns and artillery became more advanced and prevalent, so to did the tactics by which they were implemented.

According to Historian Michael Roberts "...a military revolution began with the broad adoption of firearms and artillery by late sixteenth-century European armies."

Infantry with firearms replaced cavalry.

Empires adapted their strongholds to withstand artillery fire.

Eventually drilling strategies and battlefield tactics were adapted for the evolution in firearms use.

In Japan, at the same time during the sixteenth-century, this military evolution was also taking hold.

These changes included a universal adoption of firearms, tactical developments for effective use, logistical restructuring within the military itself, and "the emergence of centralized and political and institutional relationships indicative of the early modern order.
"Tactically, beginning with Oda Nobunaga, the technique known as "volleying" or countermarch drills were implemented.

Volley fire is an organized implementation of firearms, where infantry are structured in ranks.

The ranks will alternate between loading and firing positions, allowing more consistent rates of fire and preventing enemies from taking over a position while members reload.

Historical evidence shows that Oda Nobunaga implemented his volley technique successfully in 1575, twenty years before evidence of such a technique is shown in Europe.

The first indications of the countermarch technique in Europe was by Lord William Louis of Nassau (1538-1574) in the mid 1590s.
Korea also seemed to be adapting the volley technique, earlier than even the Japanese.

"Koreans seem to have employed some kind of volley principle with guns by 1447, when the Korean King Sejong the Great instructed his gunners to shoot their 'fire barrels' in squads of five, taking turns firing and loading.
"This was on display during what Kenneth Swope called the First Great East Asian War, when Japan was trying to take control and subjugate Korea.
Toyotomi Hideyoshi (1537–1598) made a failed invasion of Korea, which lasted six years, eventually pushed back by the Koreans with the aid of Ming China.

Japan, using overwhelming firepower, had many early victories on the Korean peninsula's.

Though the Korean's had similar manpower, "the curtain of arrows thrown up by defenders was wiped out by (Japanese) gunfire.
"
After the Japanese were finally pushed back in 1598, sweeping military reforms took place in Korea, largely based on updating and implementing the volley technique with firearms.

It was Qi Jiguang, a Ming Chinese General that provided the original treatise, disseminated to Koreans, that aided in this venture.

In these manuals, Qi "...gave detailed instructions in the use of small group tactics, psychological warfare, and other 'modern' techniques."

Qi emphasized repetitive drilling, dividing men into smaller groups, separating the strong from weak.

Qi's ethos was one of synthesizing smaller groups, trained in various tactical formations, into larger companies, battalions and armies.

By doing this they could "operate as eyes, hands, and feet..." aiding to overall unit cohesion.

===
Modern technologies ===
At the start of the World Wars, various nations had developed weapons that were a surprise to their adversaries, leading to a need to learn from this, and alter how to combat them.
Flame throwers were first used in the First World War.
The French were the first to introduce the armored car in 1902.
Then in 1918, the British produced the first armored troop carrier.
Many early tanks were proof of concept but impractical until further development.
In World War I, the British and French held a crucial advantage due to their superiority in tanks; the Germans had only a few dozen A7V tanks, as well as 170 captured tanks.
The British and French both had several hundred each.
The French tanks included the 13 ton Schneider-Creusot, with a 75 mm gun, and the British had the Mark IV and Mark V tanks.
On December 17, 1903, the Wright Brothers performed the first controlled, powered, heavier-than-air flight; it went 39 meters (120 ft).
In 1907, the first helicopter flew, but it wasn't practical for usage.
Aviation became important in World War I, in which several aces gained fame.
In 1911 an aircraft took off from a warship for the first time.
Landings on a cruiser were another matter.
This led to the development of an aircraft carrier with a decent unobstructed flight deck.
Chemical warfare exploded into the public consciousness in World War I but may have been used in earlier wars without as much human attention.
The Germans used gas-filled shells at the Battle of Bolimov on January 3, 1915.
These were not lethal, however.
In April 1915, the Germans developed a chlorine gas that was highly lethal, and used it to moderate effect at the Second Battle of Ypres.
Gas masks were invented in matter of weeks, and poison gas proved ineffective at winning battles.
It was made illegal by all nations in the 1920s.
World War II gave rise to even more technology.
The worth of the aircraft carrier was proved in the battles between the United States and Japan like the Battle of Midway.
Radar was independently invented by the Allies and Axis powers.
It used radio waves to detect objects.
Molotov cocktails were invented by General Franco in the Spanish Civil War, directing the Nationalists to use them against Soviet tanks in the assault on Toledo.
The atomic bomb was developed by the Manhattan Project and dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945, quickly ending World War II.During the Cold War, the main powers engaged in a Nuclear arms race.
In the space race, both nations attempted to launch human beings into space to the moon.
Other technological advances centered on intelligence (like the spy satellite) and missiles (ballistic missiles, cruise missiles).
Nuclear submarine, invented in 1955.
This meant submarines no longer had to surface as often, and could run more quietly.
They evolved into becoming underwater missile platforms.

==
Periods of military history ==
The influence of technology on military history, and evident Eurocentrism are nowhere more pronounced than in the attempt by the military historians to divide their subject area into more manageable periods of analysis.
While general discipline of history subdivides history into Ancient history (Classical antiquity), Middle Ages (Europe, 4th century – 15th century), Early Modern period (Europe, 14th century – 18th century), Modern era (Europe, 18th century – 20th century), and the Post-Modern (USA, 1949–present), the periodisation below stresses technological change in its emphasis, particularly the crucial dramatic change during the Gunpowder warfare period.

Periodisation is not uniformly applied through time and space, affirming the claims of Eurocentrism from regional historians.
For example, what might be described as prehistoric warfare is still practised in a few parts of the world.
Other eras that are distinct in European history, such as the era of medieval warfare, may have little relevance in East Asia.

===
Ancient warfare ===
Much of what we know of ancient history is the history of militaries: their conquests, their movements, and their technological innovations.
There are many reasons for this.
Kingdoms and empires, the central units of control in the ancient world, could only be maintained through military force.
Due to limited agricultural ability, there were relatively few areas that could support large communities, so fighting was common.

Weapons and armor, designed to be sturdy, tended to last longer than other artifacts, and thus a great deal of surviving artifacts recovered tend to fall in this category as they are more likely to survive.
Weapons and armor were also mass-produced to a scale that makes them quite plentiful throughout history, and thus more likely to be found in archaeological digs.

Such items were also considered signs of prosperity or virtue, and thus were likely to be placed in tombs and monuments to prominent warriors.
And writing, when it existed, was often used for kings to boast of military conquests or victories.

Writing, when used by the common man, also tended to record such events, as major battles and conquests constituted major events that many would have considered worthy of recording either in an epic such as the Homeric writings pertaining to the Trojan War, or even personal writings.
Indeed, the earliest stories center on warfare, as war was both a common and dramatic aspect of life; the witnessing of a major battle involving many thousands of soldiers would be quite a spectacle, even today, and thus considered worthy both of being recorded in song and art, but also in realistic histories, as well as being a central element in a fictional work.

Lastly, as nation states evolved and empires grew, the increased need for order and efficiency lead to an increase in the number of records and writings.
Officials and armies would have good reason for keeping detailed records and accounts involving any and all things concerning a matter such as warfare that, in the words of Sun Tzu, was "a matter of vital importance to the state".
For all these reasons, military history comprises a large part of ancient history.

Notable militaries in the ancient world included the Egyptians, Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Ancient Greeks (notably the Spartans and Macedonians), Kushites, Indians (notably the Magadhas, Gangaridais, Gandharas and Cholas), Early Imperial Chinese (notably the Qin and Han Dynasties), Xiongnu Confederation, Ancient Romans, and Carthaginians.

The fertile crescent of Mesopotamia was the center of several prehistoric conquests.
Mesopotamia was conquered by the Sumerians, Akkadians, Babylonians, Assyrians and Persians.
Iranians were the first nation to introduce cavalry into their army.
Egypt began growing as an ancient power, but eventually fell to the Libyans, Nubians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines and Arabs.

The earliest recorded battle in India was the Battle of the Ten Kings.
The Indian epics Mahabharata and Ramayana are centered on conflicts and refer to military formations, theories of warfare and esoteric weaponry.
Chanakya's Arthashastra contains a detailed study on ancient warfare, including topics on espionage and war elephants.

Alexander the Great invaded Northwestern India and defeated King Porus in the Battle of the Hydaspes River.
The same region was soon re conquered by Chandragupta Maurya after defeating the Macedonians and Seleucids.
He also went on to conquer the Nanda Empire and unify Northern India.
Most of Southern Asia was unified under his grandson Ashoka the Great after the Kalinga War, though the empire collapsed not long after his reign.

In China, the Shang dynasty and Zhou dynasty had risen and collapsed.
This led to a Warring States period, in which several states continued to fight with each other over territory.
Philosopher-strategists such as Confucius and Sun Tzu wrote various manuscripts on ancient warfare (as well as international diplomacy).

The Warring States era philosopher Mozi (Micius) and his Mohist followers invented various siege weapons and siegecraft, including the Cloud Ladder (a four-wheeled, extendable ramp) to scale fortified walls during a siege of an enemy city.
The warring states were first unified by Qin Shi Huang after a series of military conquests, creating the first empire in China.

His empire was succeeded by the Han dynasty, which expanded into Central Asia, Northern China/Manchuria, Southern China, and present day Korea and Vietnam.
The Han came into conflict with settled people such as the Wiman Joseon, and proto-Vietnamese Nanyue.
They also came into conflict with the Xiongnu (Huns), Yuezhi, and other steppe civilizations.

The Han defeated and drove the Xiongnus west, securing the city-states along the silk route that continued into the Parthian Empire.
After the decline of central imperial authority, the Han Dynasty collapsed into an era of civil war and continuous warfare during the Three Kingdoms period in the 3rd century AD.

The Achaemenid Persian Empire was founded by Cyrus the Great after conquering the Median Empire, Neo-Babylonian Empire, Lydia and Asia Minor.
His successor Cambyses went on to conquer the Egyptian Empire, much of Central Asia, and parts of Greece, India and Libya.
The empire later fell to Alexander the Great after defeating Darius III.
After being ruled by the Seleucid dynasty, the Persian Empire was subsequently ruled by the Parthian and Sassanid dynasties, which were the Roman Empire's greatest rivals during the Roman-Persian Wars.

In Greece, several city-states rose to power, including Athens and Sparta.
The Greeks successfully stopped two Persian invasions, the first at the Battle of Marathon, where the Persians were led by Darius the Great, and the second at the Battle of Salamis, a naval battle where the Greek ships were deployed by orders of Themistocles and the Persians were under Xerxes I, and the land engagement of the Battle of Plataea.

The Peloponnesian War then erupted between the two Greek powers Athens and Sparta.
Athens built a long wall to protect its inhabitants, but the wall helped to facilitate the spread of a plague that killed about 30,000 Athenians, including Pericles.
After a disastrous campaign against Syracuse, the Athenian navy was decisively defeated by Lysander at the Battle of Aegospotami.

The Macedonians, underneath Philip II of Macedon and Alexander the Great, invaded Persia and won several major victories, establishing Macedonia as a major power.
However, following Alexander's death at an early age, the empire quickly fell apart.

Meanwhile, Rome was gaining power, following a rebellion against the Etruscans.
During the three Punic Wars, the Romans defeated the neighboring power of Carthage.
The First Punic War centered on naval warfare.
The Second Punic War started with Hannibal's invasion of Italy by crossing the Alps.
He famously won the encirclement at the Battle of Cannae.
However, after Scipio invaded Carthage, Hannibal was forced to follow and was defeated at the Battle of Zama, ending the role of Carthage as a power.

After defeating Carthage the Romans went on to become the Mediterranean's dominant power, successfully campaigning in Greece, (Aemilius Paulus decisive victory over Macedonia at the Battle of Pydna), in the Middle East (Lucius Licinius Lucullus, Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus), in Gaul (Gaius Julius Caesar) and defeating several Germanic tribes (Gaius Marius, Germanicus).
While Roman armies suffered several major losses, their large population and ability (and will) to replace battlefield casualties, their training, organization, tactical and technical superiority enabled Rome to stay a predominant military force for several centuries, utilizing well trained and maneuverable armies to routinely overcome the much larger "tribal" armies of their foes (see Battles of Aquae Sextiae, Vercellae, Tigranocerta, Alesia).

In 54 BC the Roman triumvir Marcus Licinius Crassus took the offensive against the Parthian Empire in the east.
In a decisive battle at Carrhae Romans were defeated and the golden Aquilae (legionary battle standards) were taken as trophies to Ctesiphon.
The battle was one of the worst defeats suffered by the Roman Republic in its entire history.

While successfully dealing with foreign opponents, Rome experienced numerous civil wars, notably the power struggles of Roman generals such as Marius and Sulla during the end of the Republic.
Caesar was also notable for his role in the civil war against the other member of the Triumvirate (Pompey) and against the Roman Senate.

The successors of Caesar – Octavian and Mark Anthony, also fought a civil war with Caesar's assassins (Senators Brutus, Cassius, etc.).
Octavian and Mark Anthony eventually fought another civil war between themselves to determine the sole ruler of Rome.
Octavian emerged victorious and Rome was turned into an empire with a huge standing army of professional soldiers.

By the time of Marcus Aurelius, the Romans had expanded to the Atlantic Ocean in the west and to Mesopotamia in the east and controlled Northern Africa and Central Europe up to the Black Sea.
However, Aurelius marked the end of the Five Good Emperors, and Rome quickly fell into decline.

The Huns, Goths, and other barbaric groups invaded Rome, which continued to suffer from inflation and other internal strifes.
Despite the attempts of Diocletian, Constantine I, and Theodosius I, western Rome collapsed and was eventually conquered in 476.
The Byzantine empire continued to prosper, however.
===
Medieval warfare ===
When stirrups came into use some time during the Dark Ages militaries were forever changed.
This invention coupled with technological, cultural, and social developments had forced a dramatic transformation in the character of warfare from antiquity, changing military tactics and the role of cavalry and artillery.

Similar patterns of warfare existed in other parts of the world.
In China around the 5th century armies moved from massed infantry to cavalry based forces, copying the steppe nomads.
The Middle East and North Africa used similar, if often more advanced, technologies than Europe.

In Japan the Medieval warfare period is considered by many to have stretched into the 19th century.
In Africa along the Sahel and Sudan states like the Kingdom of Sennar and Fulani Empire employed Medieval tactics and weapons well after they had been supplanted in Europe.

In the Medieval period, feudalism was firmly implanted, and there existed many landlords in Europe.
Landlords often owned castles to protect their territory.

The Islamic Arab Empire began rapidly expanding throughout the Middle East, North Africa, and Central Asia, initially led by Rashidun Caliphate, and later under the Umayyads.
While their attempts to invade Europe by way of the Balkans were defeated by Byzantium and Bulgaria, the Arabs expanded to the Iberian Peninsula in the west and the Indus Valley in the east.
The Abassids then took over the Arab Empire, though the Umayyads remained in control of Islamic Spain.

At the Battle of Tours, the Franks under Charles Martel stopped short a Muslim invasion.
The Abassids defeated the Tang Chinese army at the Battle of Talas, but were later defeated by the Seljuk Turks and the Mongols centuries later, until the Arab Empire eventually came to an end after the Battle of Baghdad in 1258.

In China, the Sui dynasty had risen and conquered the Chen Dynasty of the south.
They invaded Vietnam (northern Vietnam had been in Chinese control since the Han dynasty), fighting the troops of Champa, who had cavalry mounted on elephants.
After decades of economic turmoil and a failed invasion of Korea, the Sui collapsed and was followed by the Tang dynasty, who fought with various Turkic groups, the Tibetans of Lhasa, the Tanguts, the Khitans, and collapsed due to political fragmentation of powerful regional military governors (jiedushi).
The innovative Song dynasty followed next, inventing new weapons of war that employed the use of Greek Fire and gunpowder (see section below) against enemies such as the Jurchens.

The Mongols under Genghis Khan, Ögedei Khan, Möngke Khan, and Kublai Khan conquered most of Eurasia.
They took over China, Persia, Turkestan, and Russia.
After Kublai Khan took power and created the Yuan dynasty, the divisions of the empire ceased to cooperate with each other, and the Mongol Empire was only nominally united.

In New Zealand, prior to European discovery, oral histories, legends and whakapapa include many stories of battles and wars.
Māori warriors were held in high esteem.
One group of Polynesians migrated to the Chatham Islands, where they developed the largely pacifist Moriori culture.
Their pacifism left the Moriori unable to defend themselves when the islands were invaded by mainland Māori in the 1830s.

They proceeded to massacre the Moriori and enslave the survivors.
Warrior culture also developed in the isolated Hawaiian Islands.
During the 1780s and 1790s
the chiefs and alii were constantly fighting for power.
After a series of battles the Hawaiian Islands were united for the first time under a single ruler who would become known as Kamehameha I.


===
Gunpowder warfare ===
After gunpowder weapons were first developed in Song dynasty China (see also Technology of Song Dynasty), the technology later spread west to the Ottoman Empire, from where it spread to the Safavid Empire of Persia and the Mughal Empire of India.
The arquebus was later adopted by European armies during the Italian Wars of the early 16th century.

This all brought an end to the dominance of armored cavalry on the battlefield.
The simultaneous decline of the feudal system – and the absorption of the medieval city-states into larger states – allowed the creation of professional standing armies to replace the feudal levies and mercenaries that had been the standard military component of the Middle Ages.

In Africa, Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi, was the first African commander to use gunpowder on the continent in the Ethiopian–Adal War, that lasted for fourteen years (1529–1543).

The period spanning between the 1648 Peace of Westphalia and the 1789 French Revolution is also known as Kabinettskriege (Princes' warfare) as wars were mainly carried out by imperial or monarchics states, decided by cabinets and limited in scope and in their aims.
They also involved quickly shifting alliances, and mainly used mercenaries.

Over the course of the 18th-19th centuries all military arms and services underwent significant developments that included a more mobile field artillery,
the transition from use of battalion infantry drill in close order to open order formations and the transfer of emphasis from the use of bayonets to the rifle that replaced the musket, and virtual replacement of all types of cavalry with the universal dragoons, or mounted infantry.
===
Military Revolution ===
The Military Revolution is a conceptual schema for explaining the transformation of European military strategy, tactics and technology in the early modern period.
The argument is the dramatic advances in technology, government finance, and public administration transformed and modernized European armies, tactics, and logistics.
Since warfare was so central to the European state, the transformation at a major impact on modernizing government bureaucracies, taxation, and the national economy.
The concept was introduced by Michael Roberts in the 1950s as he focused on Sweden 1560–1660.
Roberts emphasized the introduction of muskets that could not be aimed at small targets, but could be very effective when fired in volleys by three ranks of infantry soldiers, with one firing while the other two ranks reloaded.

All three ranks march forward to demolish the enemy.
The infantry now had the firepower that had been reserved to the artillery, and had mobility that could rapidly advance in the battlefield, which the artillery lacked.
The infantry thereby surpassed the artillery in tactical maneuvering on the battlefield.

Roberts linked these advances with larger historical consequences, arguing that innovations in tactics, drill and doctrine by the Dutch and Swedes 1560–1660 led to a need for more and better trained troops and thus for permanent forces (standing armies).

Armies grew much larger and more expensive.
These changes in turn had major political consequences in the level of administrative support and the supply of money, men and provisions, producing new financial demands and the creation of new governmental institutions. "
Thus, argued Roberts, the modern art of war made possible—and necessary—the creation of the modern state".
In the 1990s the concept was modified and extended by Geoffrey Parker, who argued that developments in fortification and siege warfare caused the revolution.

The concept of a military revolution based upon technology has given way to models based more on a slow evolution in which technology plays a minor role to organization, command and control, logistics and in general non-material improvements.
The revolutionary nature of these changes was only visible after a long evolution that handed Europe a predominant place in warfare, a place that the industrial revolution would confirm.
The concept of a military revolution in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries has received a mixed reception among historians.
Noted military historians Michael Duffy and Jeremy Black have strongly criticised it as misleading, exaggerated and simplistic.

===
Industrial warfare ===
As weapons—particularly small arms—became easier to use, countries began to abandon a complete reliance on professional soldiers in favor of conscription.
Technological advances became increasingly important; while the armies of the previous period had usually had similar weapons, the industrial age saw encounters such as the Battle of Sadowa, in which possession of a more advanced technology played a decisive role in the outcome.

Conscription was employed in industrial warfare to increase the number of military personnel that were available for combat.
Conscription was notably used by Napoleon Bonaparte and the major parties during the two World Wars.

Total war was used in industrial warfare, the objective being to prevent the opposing nation to engage in war.

Napoleon was the innovator.
William Tecumseh Sherman's "March to the Sea" and Philip Sheridan's burning of the Shenandoah Valley during the American Civil War were examples.
On the largest scale the strategic bombing of enemy cities and industrial factories during World War II was total warfare.

===
Modern warfare ===
Since the 1940s, preparation for a major war has been based on technological arms races involving all sorts of new weapons systems, such as nuclear and biological, as well as computerized control systems, and the opening of new venues, such as seen in the Space race involving the United States, the Soviet Union, and more recently, China.
Modern war also saw the improvement of armored tank technology.
While tanks were present in the First World War, and the Second World War, armored warfare technology came to a head with the start of the Cold War.
Many of the technologies commonly seen on main battle tanks today, such as composite armor, high caliber cannons, and advanced targeting systems, would be developed during this time.
A distinctive feature since 1945 is the absence of wars between major powers—indeed the near absence of any traditional wars between established countries.
The major exceptions were the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, the Iran–Iraq War 1980-1988, and the Gulf War of 1990-91.

Instead actual fighting has largely been a matter of civil wars and insurgencies.

== See also ==


== Notes and references ==
==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
International Bibliography of Military History of the International Commission of Military History – from Brill.nl
H-WAR, daily discussion group for military historians – from Michigan State University Department of History, H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences Online
Web Sources for Military History – from AmericanHistoryProjects.com
The history of technology is the history of the invention of tools and techniques and is one of the categories of world history.
Technology can refer to methods ranging from as simple as stone tools to the complex genetic engineering and information technology that has emerged since the 1980s.
The term technology comes from the Greek word techne, meaning art and craft, and the word logos, meaning word and speech.
It was first used to describe applied arts, but it is now used to describe advancements and changes which affect the environment around us.
New knowledge has enabled people to create new things, and conversely, many scientific endeavors are made possible by technologies which assist humans in traveling to places they could not previously reach, and by scientific instruments by which we study nature in more detail than our natural senses allow.

Since much of technology is applied science, technical history is connected to the history of science.
Since technology uses resources, technical history is tightly connected to economic history.
From those resources, technology produces other resources, including technological artifacts used in everyday life.

Technological change affects, and is affected by, a society's cultural traditions.
It is a force for economic growth and a means to develop and project economic, political, military power and wealth.

==
Measuring technological progress ==
Many sociologists and anthropologists have created social theories dealing with social and cultural evolution.
Some, like Lewis H. Morgan, Leslie White, and Gerhard Lenski have declared technological progress to be the primary factor driving the development of human civilization.
Morgan's concept of three major stages of social evolution (savagery, barbarism, and civilization) can be divided by technological milestones, such as fire.
White argued the measure by which to judge the evolution of culture was energy.
For White, "the primary function of culture" is to "harness and control energy.
"
White differentiates between five stages of human development: In the first, people use the energy of their own muscles.
In the second, they use the energy of domesticated animals.
In the third, they use the energy of plants (agricultural revolution).
In the fourth, they learn to use the energy of natural resources: coal, oil, gas.
In the fifth, they harness nuclear energy.
White introduced a formula P
=E*T, where E is a measure of energy consumed, and T is the measure of the efficiency of technical factors using the energy.
In his own words, "culture evolves as the amount of energy harnessed per capita per year is increased, or as the efficiency of the instrumental means of putting the energy to work is increased".
Nikolai Kardashev extrapolated his theory, creating the Kardashev scale, which categorizes the energy use of advanced civilizations.

Lenski's approach focuses on information.
The more information and knowledge (especially allowing the shaping of natural environment)
a given society has, the more advanced it is.
He identifies four stages of human development, based on advances in the history of communication.
In the first stage, information is passed by genes.
In the second, when humans gain sentience, they can learn and pass information through experience.
In the third, the humans start using signs and develop logic.
In the fourth, they can create symbols, develop language and writing.
Advancements in communications technology translate into advancements in the economic system and political system, distribution of wealth, social inequality and other spheres of social life.
He also differentiates societies based on their level of technology, communication, and economy:
hunter-gatherer,
simple agricultural,
advanced agricultural,
industrial,
special (such as fishing societies).In economics, productivity is a measure of technological progress.
Productivity increases when fewer inputs (classically labor and capital but some measures include energy and materials) are used in the production of a unit of output.
Another indicator of technological progress is the development of new products and services, which is necessary to offset unemployment that would otherwise result as labor inputs are reduced.
In developed countries productivity growth has been slowing since the late 1970s; however, productivity growth was higher in some economic sectors, such as manufacturing.
For example, employment in manufacturing in the United States declined from over 30% in the 1940s to just over 10% 70 years later.
Similar changes occurred in other developed countries.
This stage is referred to as post-industrial.

In the late 1970s sociologists and anthropologists like Alvin Toffler (author of Future Shock), Daniel Bell and John Naisbitt have approached the theories of post-industrial societies, arguing that the current era of industrial society is coming to an end, and services and information are becoming more important than industry and goods.
Some extreme visions of the post-industrial society, especially in fiction, are strikingly similar to the visions of near and post-Singularity societies.

==
By period and geography ==
The following is a summary of the history of technology by time period and geography:


===
Prehistory ===


====
Stone Age ====
During most of the Paleolithic – the bulk of the Stone Age – all humans had a lifestyle which involved limited tools and few permanent settlements.
The first major technologies were tied to survival, hunting, and food preparation.
Stone tools and weapons, fire, and clothing were technological developments of major importance during this period.

Human ancestors have been using stone and other tools since long before the emergence of Homo sapiens approximately 200,000 years ago.
The earliest methods of stone tool making, known as the Oldowan "industry", date back to at least 2.3 million years ago, with the earliest direct evidence of tool usage found in Ethiopia within the Great Rift Valley, dating back to 2.5 million years ago.
This era of stone tool use is called the Paleolithic, or "Old stone age", and spans all of human history up to the development of agriculture approximately 12,000 years ago.

To make a stone tool, a "core" of hard stone with specific flaking properties (such as flint) was struck with a hammerstone.
This flaking produced sharp edges which could be used as tools, primarily in the form of choppers or scrapers.
These tools greatly aided the early humans in their hunter-gatherer lifestyle to perform a variety of tasks including butchering carcasses (and breaking bones to get at the marrow); chopping wood; cracking open nuts; skinning an animal for its hide, and even forming other tools out of softer materials such as bone and wood.
The earliest stone tools were irrelevant, being little more than a fractured rock.
In the Acheulian era, beginning approximately 1.65 million years ago, methods of working these stones into specific shapes, such as hand axes emerged.
This early Stone Age is described as the Lower Paleolithic.

The Middle Paleolithic, approximately 300,000 years ago, saw the introduction of the prepared-core technique, where multiple blades could be rapidly formed from a single core stone.
The Upper Paleolithic, beginning approximately 40,000 years ago, saw the introduction of pressure flaking, where a wood, bone, or antler punch could be used to shape a stone very finely.
The end of the last Ice Age about 10,000 years ago is taken as the end point of the Upper Paleolithic and the beginning of the Epipaleolithic / Mesolithic.
The Mesolithic technology included the use of microliths as composite stone tools, along with wood, bone, and antler tools.

The later Stone Age, during which the rudiments of agricultural technology were developed, is called the Neolithic period.
During this period, polished stone tools were made from a variety of hard rocks such as flint, jade, jadeite, and greenstone, largely by working exposures as quarries, but later the valuable rocks were pursued by tunneling underground, the first steps in mining technology.
The polished axes were used for forest clearance and the establishment of crop farming and were so effective as to remain in use when bronze and iron appeared.
These stone axes were used alongside a continued use of stone tools such as a range of projectiles, knives, and scrapers, as well as tools, made organic materials such as wood, bone, and antler.
Stone Age cultures developed music and engaged in organized warfare.
Stone Age humans developed ocean-worthy outrigger canoe technology, leading to migration across the Malay archipelago, across the Indian Ocean to Madagascar and also across the Pacific Ocean, which required knowledge of the ocean currents, weather patterns, sailing, and celestial navigation.

Although Paleolithic cultures left no written records, the shift from nomadic life to settlement and agriculture can be inferred from a range of archaeological evidence.
Such evidence includes ancient tools, cave paintings, and other prehistoric art, such as the Venus of Willendorf.
Human remains also provide direct evidence, both through the examination of bones, and the study of mummies.
Scientists and historians have been able to form significant inferences about the lifestyle and culture of various prehistoric peoples, and especially their technology.

===
Ancient ===


====
Copper and bronze Ages ====
Metallic copper occurs on the surface of weathered copper ore deposits and copper was used before copper smelting was known.

Copper smelting is believed to have originated when the technology of pottery kilns allowed sufficiently high temperatures.

The concentration of various elements such as arsenic increase with depth in copper ore deposits and smelting of these ores yields arsenical bronze, which can be sufficiently work hardened to be suitable for making tools.

Bronze is an alloy of copper with tin; the latter being found in relatively few deposits globally caused a long time to elapse before true tin bronze became widespread.
(
See: Tin sources and trade in ancient times)
Bronze was a major advance over stone as a material for making tools, both because of its mechanical properties like strength and ductility and because it could be cast in molds to make intricately shaped objects.

Bronze significantly advanced shipbuilding technology with better tools and bronze nails.

Bronze nails replaced the old method of attaching boards of the hull with cord woven through drilled holes.

Better ships enabled long-distance trade and the advance of civilization.

This technological trend apparently began in the Fertile Crescent and spread outward over time.
These developments were not, and still are not, universal.
The three-age system does not accurately describe the technology history of groups outside of Eurasia, and does not apply at all in the case of some isolated populations, such as the Spinifex People, the Sentinelese, and various Amazonian tribes, which still make use of Stone Age technology, and have not developed agricultural or metal technology.

====
Iron Age ====
Before iron smelting was developed the only iron was obtained from meteorites and is usually identified by having nickel content.

Meteoric iron was rare and valuable, but was sometimes used to make tools and other implements, such as fish hooks.

The Iron Age involved the adoption of iron smelting technology.
It generally replaced bronze and made it possible to produce tools which were stronger, lighter and cheaper to make than bronze equivalents.
The raw materials to make iron, such as ore and limestone, are far more abundant than copper and especially tin ores.
Consequently, iron was produced in many areas.

It was not possible to mass manufacture steel or pure iron because of the high temperatures required.

Furnaces could reach melting temperature but the crucibles and molds needed for melting and casting had not been developed.

Steel could be produced by forging bloomery iron to reduce the carbon content in a somewhat controllable way, but steel produced by this method was not homogeneous.

In many Eurasian cultures, the Iron Age was the last major step before the development of written language, though again this was not universally the case.

In Europe, large hill forts were built either as a refuge in time of war or sometimes as permanent settlements.
In some cases, existing forts from the Bronze Age were expanded and enlarged.
The pace of land clearance using the more effective iron axes increased, providing more farmland to support the growing population.

====
Mesopotamia ====
Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) and its peoples (Sumerians, Akkadians, Assyrians and Babylonians) lived in cities from c. 4000 BC, and developed a sophisticated architecture in mud-brick and stone, including the use of the true arch.
The walls of Babylon were so massive they were quoted as a Wonder of the World.
They developed extensive water systems; canals for transport and irrigation in the alluvial south, and catchment systems stretching for tens of kilometers in the hilly north.
Their palaces had sophisticated drainage systems.
Writing was invented in Mesopotamia, using the cuneiform script.
Many records on clay tablets and stone inscriptions have survived.
These civilizations were early adopters of bronze technologies which they used for tools, weapons and monumental statuary.
By 1200 BC they could cast objects 5 m long in a single piece.

Several of the six classic simple machines were invented in Mesopotamia.
Mesopotamians have been credited with the invention of the wheel.
The wheel and axle mechanism first appeared with the potter's wheel, invented in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) during the 5th millennium BC.
This led to the invention of the wheeled vehicle in Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium BC.
Depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk are dated between 3700 and 3500 BCE.
The lever was used in the shadoof water-lifting device, the first crane machine, which appeared in Mesopotamia circa 3000 BC.
and then in ancient Egyptian technology circa 2000 BC.
The earliest evidence of pulleys date back to Mesopotamia in the early 2nd millennium BC.The screw, the last of the simple machines to be invented, first appeared in Mesopotamia during the Neo-Assyrian period (911-609) BC.
The Assyrian King Sennacherib (704–681 BC) claims to have invented automatic sluices and to have been the first to use water screw pumps, of up to 30 tons weight, which were cast using two-part clay molds rather than by the 'lost wax' process.
The Jerwan Aqueduct (c. 688 BC) is made with stone arches and lined with waterproof concrete.
The Babylonian astronomical diaries spanned 800 years.
They enabled meticulous astronomers to plot the motions of the planets and to predict eclipses.

The earliest evidence of water wheels and watermills date back to the ancient Near East in the 4th century BC, specifically in the Persian Empire before 350 BCE, in the regions of Mesopotamia (Iraq) and Persia (Iran).
This pioneering use of water power constituted the first human-devised motive force not to rely on muscle power (besides the sail).

====
Egypt ====
The Egyptians, known for building pyramids centuries before the creation of modern tools, invented and used many simple machines, such as the ramp to aid construction processes.
Historians and archaeologists have found evidence that the pyramids were built using three of what is called the Six Simple Machines, from which all machines are based.
These machines are the inclined plane, the wedge, and the lever, which allowed the ancient Egyptians to move millions of limestone blocks which weighed approximately 3.5 tons (7,000 lbs.)
each into place to create structures like the Great Pyramid of Giza, which is 481 feet (146.7 meters) high.
They also made writing medium similar to paper from papyrus, which Joshua Mark states is the foundation for modern paper.
Papyrus is a plant (cyperus papyrus) which grew in plentiful amounts in the Egyptian Delta and throughout the Nile River Valley during ancient times.
The papyrus was harvested by field workers and brought to processing centers where it was cut into thin strips.
The strips were then laid out side by side perpendicularly then covered in plant resin and the second layer of strips was laid on horizontally, then pressed together until the sheet was dry.
The sheets were then joined together to form a roll and later used for writing.
Egyptian society made several significant advances during dynastic periods in many areas of technology.
According to Hossam Elanzeery, they were the first civilization to use timekeeping devices such as sundials, shadow clocks, and obelisks and successfully leveraged their knowledge of astronomy to create a calendar model that society still uses today.
They developed shipbuilding technology that saw them progress from papyrus reed vessels to cedar wood ships while also pioneering the use of rope trusses and stem-mounted rudders.
The Egyptians also used their knowledge of anatomy to lay the foundation for many modern medical techniques and practiced the earliest known version of neuroscience.
Elanzeery also states that they used and furthered mathematical science, as evidenced in the building of the pyramids.
Ancient Egyptians also invented and pioneered many food technologies that have become the basis of modern food technology processes.
Based on paintings and reliefs found in tombs, as well as archaeological artifacts, scholars like Paul T Nicholson believe that the Ancient Egyptians established systematic farming practices, engaged in cereal processing, brewed beer and baked bread, processed meat, practiced viticulture and created the basis for modern wine production, and created condiments to complement, preserve and mask the flavors of their food.

====
Indus Valley ====
The Indus Valley Civilization, situated in a resource-rich area (in modern Pakistan and northwestern India), is notable for its early application of city planning, sanitation technologies, and plumbing.
Indus Valley construction and architecture, called 'Vaastu Shastra', suggests a thorough understanding of materials engineering, hydrology, and sanitation.

====
China ====
The Chinese made many first-known discoveries and developments.
Major technological contributions from China include early seismological detectors, matches, paper, Helicopter rotor, Raised-relief map, the double-action piston pump, cast iron, water powered blast furnace bellows, the iron plough, the multi-tube seed drill, the wheelbarrow, the parachute, the compass, the rudder, the crossbow, the South Pointing Chariot and gunpowder.

China also developed deep well drilling, which they used to extract brine for making salt.

Some of these wells, which were as deep as 900 meters, produced natural gas which was used for evaporating brine.
Other Chinese discoveries and inventions from the Medieval period include block printing, movable type printing, phosphorescent paint, endless power chain drive and the clock escapement mechanism.
The solid-fuel rocket was invented in China about 1150, nearly 200 years after the invention of gunpowder (which acted as the rocket's fuel).
Decades before the West's age of exploration, the Chinese emperors of the Ming Dynasty also sent large fleets on maritime voyages, some reaching Africa.

====
Hellenistic Mediterranean ====
The Hellenistic period of Mediterranean history began in the 4th century BC with Alexander's conquests, which led to the emergence of a Hellenistic civilization representing a synthesis of Greek and Near-Eastern cultures in the Eastern Mediterranean region, including the Balkans, Levant and Egypt.
With Ptolemaic Egypt as its intellectual center and Greek as the lingua franca, the Hellenistic civilization included Greek, Egyptian, Jewish, Persian and Phoenician scholars and engineers who wrote in Greek.
Hellenistic engineers of the Eastern Mediterranean were responsible for a number of inventions and improvements to existing technology.
The Hellenistic period saw a sharp increase in technological advancement, fostered by a climate of openness to new ideas, the blossoming of a mechanistic philosophy, and the establishment of the Library of Alexandria in Ptolemaic Egypt and its close association with the adjacent museion.
In contrast to the typically anonymous inventors of earlier ages, ingenious minds such as Archimedes, Philo of Byzantium, Heron, Ctesibius, and Archytas remain known by name to posterity.

Ancient agriculture, as in any period prior to the modern age the primary mode of production and subsistence, and its irrigation methods, were considerably advanced by the invention and widespread application of a number of previously unknown water-lifting devices, such as the vertical water-wheel, the compartmented wheel, the water turbine, Archimedes' screw, the bucket-chain and pot-garland, the force pump, the suction pump, the double-action piston pump and quite possibly the chain pump.
In music, the water organ, invented by Ctesibius and subsequently improved, constituted the earliest instance of a keyboard instrument.
In time-keeping, the introduction of the inflow clepsydra and its mechanization by the dial and pointer, the application of a feedback system and the escapement mechanism far superseded the earlier outflow clepsydra.

Innovations in mechanical technology included the newly devised right-angled gear, which would become particularly important to the operation of mechanical devices.
Hellenistic engineers also devised automata such as suspended ink pots, automatic washstands, and doors, primarily as toys, which however featured new useful mechanisms such as the cam and gimbals.

The Antikythera mechanism, a kind of analogous computer working with a differential gear, and the astrolabe both show great refinement in astronomical science.

In other fields, ancient Greek innovations include the catapult and the gastraphetes crossbow in warfare, hollow bronze-casting in metallurgy, the dioptra for surveying, in infrastructure the lighthouse, central heating, a tunnel excavated from both ends by scientific calculations, and the ship trackway.
In transport, great progress resulted from the invention of the winch and the odometer.

Further newly created techniques and items were spiral staircases, the chain drive, sliding calipers and showers.

====
Roman Empire ====
The Roman Empire expanded from Italia across the entire Mediterranean region between the 1st century BC and 1st century AD.
Its most advanced and economically productive provinces outside of Italia were the Eastern Roman provinces in the Balkans, Asia Minor, Egypt, and the Levant, with Roman Egypt in particular being the wealthiest Roman province outside of Italia.
The Roman Empire developed an intensive and sophisticated agriculture, expanded upon existing iron working technology, created laws providing for individual ownership, advanced stone masonry technology, advanced road-building (exceeded only in the 19th century), military engineering, civil engineering, spinning and weaving and several different machines like the Gallic reaper that helped to increase productivity in many sectors of the Roman economy.
Roman engineers were the first to build monumental arches, amphitheatres, aqueducts, public baths, true arch bridges, harbours, reservoirs and dams, vaults and domes on a very large scale across their Empire.
Notable Roman inventions include the book (Codex), glass blowing and concrete.
Because Rome was located on a volcanic peninsula, with sand which contained suitable crystalline grains, the concrete which the Romans formulated was especially durable.
Some of their buildings have lasted 2000 years, to the present day.

In Roman Egypt, the inventor Hero of Alexandria was the first to experiment with a wind-powered mechanical device (see Heron's windwheel) and even created the earliest steam-powered device (the aeolipile), opening up new possibilities in harnessing natural forces.
He also devised a vending machine.
However, his inventions were primarily toys, rather than practical machines.

====
Inca, Maya, and Aztec ====
The engineering skills of the Inca and Maya were great, even by today's standards.
An example of this exceptional engineering is the use of pieces weighing upwards of one ton in their stonework placed together so that not even a blade can fit into the cracks.
Inca villages used irrigation canals and drainage systems, making agriculture very efficient.
While some claim that the Incas were the first inventors of hydroponics, their agricultural technology was still soil based, if advanced.

Though the Maya civilization did not incorporate metallurgy or wheel technology in their architectural constructions, they developed complex writing and astronomical systems, and created beautiful sculptural works in stone and flint.
Like the Inca, the Maya also had command of fairly advanced agricultural and construction technology.
The Maya are also responsible for creating the first pressurized water system in Mesoamerica, located in the Maya site of Palenque.
The main contribution of the Aztec rule was a system of communications between the conquered cities and the ubiquity of the ingenious agricultural technology of chinampas.
In Mesoamerica, without draft animals for transport (nor, as a result, wheeled vehicles), the roads were designed for travel on foot, just as in the Inca and Mayan civilizations.
The Aztec, subsequently to the Maya, inherited many of the technologies and intellectual advancements of their predecessors: the Olmec (see Native American inventions and innovations).

===
Medieval to early modern ===
One of the most significant development of the Medieval era was the development of economies where water and wind power were more significant than animal and human muscle power.
Most water and wind power was used for milling grain.

Water power was also used for blowing air in blast furnace, pulping rags for paper making and for felting wool.

The Domesday Book recorded 5,624 water mills in Great Britain in 1086, being about one per thirty families.

====
East Asia ====


====
Indian subcontinent ====


====
Islamic world ====
The Muslim caliphates united in trade large areas that had previously traded little, including the Middle East, North Africa, Central Asia, the Iberian Peninsula, and parts of the Indian subcontinent.
The science and technology of previous empires in the region, including the Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Persian, Hellenistic and Roman empires, were inherited by the Muslim world, where Arabic replaced Syriac, Persian and Greek as the lingua franca of the region.
Significant advances were made in the region during the Islamic Golden Age (8th-16th centuries).

The Arab Agricultural Revolution occurred during this period.
It was a transformation in agriculture from the 8th to the 13th century in the Islamic region of the Old World.
The economy established by Arab and other Muslim traders across the Old World enabled the diffusion of many crops and farming techniques throughout the Islamic world, as well as the adaptation of crops and techniques from and to regions outside it.
Advances were made in animal husbandry, irrigation, and farming, with the help of new technology such as the windmill.
These changes made agriculture much more productive, supporting population growth, urbanisation, and increased stratification of society.

Muslim engineers in the Islamic world made wide use of hydropower, along with early uses of tidal power, wind power, fossil fuels such as petroleum, and large factory complexes (tiraz in Arabic).
A variety of industrial mills were employed in the Islamic world, including fulling mills, gristmills, hullers, sawmills, ship mills, stamp mills, steel mills, and tide mills.
By the 11th century, every province throughout the Islamic world had these industrial mills in operation.
Muslim engineers also employed water turbines and gears in mills and water-raising machines, and pioneered the use of dams as a source of water power, used to provide additional power to watermills and water-raising machines.
Many of these technologies were transferred to medieval Europe.
Wind-powered machines used to grind grain and pump water, the windmill and wind pump, first appeared in what are now Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan by the 9th century.
They were used to grind grains and draw up water, and used in the gristmilling and sugarcane industries.
Sugar mills first appeared in the medieval Islamic world.
They were first driven by watermills, and then windmills from the 9th and 10th centuries in what are today Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iran.
Crops such as almonds and citrus fruit were brought to Europe through Al-Andalus, and sugar cultivation was gradually adopted across Europe.
Arab merchants dominated trade in the Indian Ocean until the arrival of the Portuguese in the 16th century.

The Muslim world adopted papermaking from China.
The earliest paper mills appeared in Abbasid-era Baghdad during 794–795.
The knowledge of gunpowder was also transmitted from China via predominantly Islamic countries, where formulas for pure potassium nitrate were developed.
The spinning wheel was invented in the Islamic world by the early 11th century.
It was later widely adopted in Europe, where it was adapted into the spinning jenny, a key device during the Industrial Revolution.
The crankshaft was invented by Al-Jazari in 1206, and is central to modern machinery such as the steam engine, internal combustion engine and automatic controls.
The camshaft was also first described by Al-Jazari in 1206.Early programmable machines were also invented in the Muslim world.
The first music sequencer, a programmable musical instrument, was an automated flute player invented by the Banu Musa brothers, described in their Book of Ingenious Devices, in the 9th century.
In 1206, Al-Jazari invented programmable automata/robots.
He described four automaton musicians, including two drummers operated by a programmable drum machine, where the drummer could be made to play different rhythms and different drum patterns.
The castle clock, a hydropowered mechanical astronomical clock invented by Al-Jazari, was an early programmable analog computer.
In the Ottoman Empire, a practical impulse steam turbine was invented in 1551 by Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf in Ottoman Egypt.
He described a method for rotating a spit by means of a jet of steam playing on rotary vanes around the periphery of a wheel.
Known as a steam jack, a similar device for rotating a spit was also later described by John Wilkins in 1648.

====
Medieval Europe ====
While medieval technology has been long depicted as a step backwards in the evolution of Western technology, a generation of medievalists (like the American historian of science Lynn White) stressed from the 1940s onwards
the innovative character of many medieval techniques.
Genuine medieval contributions include for example mechanical clocks, spectacles and vertical windmills.
Medieval ingenuity was also displayed in the invention of seemingly inconspicuous items like the watermark or the functional button.
In navigation, the foundation to the subsequent age of exploration was laid by the introduction of pintle-and-gudgeon rudders, lateen sails, the dry compass, the horseshoe and the astrolabe.

Significant advances were also made in military technology with the development of plate armour, steel crossbows and cannon.
The Middle Ages are perhaps best known for their architectural heritage:
While the invention of the rib vault and pointed arch gave rise to the high rising Gothic style, the ubiquitous medieval fortifications gave the era the almost proverbial title of the 'age of castles'.

Papermaking, a 2nd-century Chinese technology, was carried to the Middle East when a group of Chinese papermakers were captured in the 8th century.
Papermaking technology was spread to Europe by the Umayyad conquest of Hispania.
A paper mill was established in Sicily in the 12th century.
In Europe the fiber to make pulp for making paper was obtained from linen and cotton rags.
Lynn Townsend White Jr. credited the spinning wheel with increasing the supply of rags, which led to cheap paper, which was a factor in the development of printing.

====
Renaissance technology ====
Before the development of modern engineering, mathematics was used by artisans and craftsmen, such as millwrights, clock makers, instrument makers and surveyors.

Aside from these professions, universities were not believed to have had much practical significance to technology.
A standard reference for the state of mechanical arts during the Renaissance is given in the mining engineering treatise De re metallica (1556), which also contains sections on geology, mining and chemistry.

De
re metallica was the standard chemistry reference for the next 180 years.

Among the water powered mechanical devices in use were ore stamping mills, forge hammers, blast bellows, and suction pumps.

Due to the casting of cannon, the blast furnace came into widespread use in France in the mid 15th century.

The blast furnace had been used in China since the 4th century BC.The invention of the movable cast metal type printing press, whose pressing mechanism was adapted from an olive screw press, (c. 1441)
lead to a tremendous increase in the number of books and the number of titles published.

Movable ceramic type had been used in China for a few centuries and woodblock printing dated back even further.
The era is marked by such profound technical advancements like linear perceptivity, double shell domes or Bastion fortresses.
Note books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied.
Architects and engineers were inspired by the structures of Ancient Rome, and men like Brunelleschi created the large dome of Florence Cathedral as a result.
He was awarded one of the first patents ever issued in order to protect an ingenious crane he designed to raise the large masonry stones to the top of the structure.
Military technology developed rapidly with the widespread use of the cross-bow and ever more powerful artillery, as the city-states of Italy were usually in conflict with one another.
Powerful families like the Medici were strong patrons of the arts and sciences.
Renaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement.

====
Age of Exploration ====
An improved sailing ship, the (nau or carrack), enabled the Age of Exploration with the European colonization of the Americas, epitomized by Francis Bacon's New Atlantis.
Pioneers like Vasco da Gama, Cabral, Magellan and Christopher Columbus explored the world in search of new trade routes for their goods and contacts with Africa, India and China to shorten the journey compared with traditional routes overland.
They produced new maps and charts which enabled following mariners to explore further with greater confidence.
Navigation was generally difficult, however, owing to the problem of longitude and the absence of accurate chronometers.
European powers rediscovered the idea of the civil code, lost since the time of the Ancient Greeks.

==== Pre-Industrial Revolution ====
The stocking frame, which was invented in 1598, increased a knitter's number of knots per minute from 100 to 1000.Mines were becoming increasingly deep and were expensive to drain with horse powered bucket and chain pumps and wooden piston pumps.
Some mines used as many as 500 horses.
Horse-powered pumps were replaced by the Savery steam pump (1698) and the Newcomen steam engine (1712).

===
Industrial Revolution (1760–1830s) ===
The revolution was driven by cheap energy in the form of coal, produced in ever-increasing amounts from the abundant resources of Britain.
The British Industrial Revolution is characterized by developments in the areas of textile machinery, mining, metallurgy and transport the steam engine and the invention of machine tools.

Before invention of machinery to spin yarn and weave cloth, spinning was done using the spinning wheel and weaving was done on a hand-and-foot-operated loom.
It took from three to five spinners to supply one weaver.
The invention of the flying shuttle in 1733 doubled the output of a weaver, creating a shortage of spinners.
The spinning frame for wool was invented in 1738.
The spinning jenny, invented in 1764, was a machine that used multiple spinning wheels; however, it produced low quality thread.
The water frame patented by Richard Arkwright in 1767, produced a better quality thread than the spinning jenny.
The spinning mule, patented in 1779 by Samuel Crompton, produced a high quality thread.
The power loom was invented by Edmund Cartwright in 1787.

In the mid 1750s the steam engine was applied to the water power-constrained iron, copper and lead industries for powering blast bellows.
These industries were located near the mines, some of which were using steam engines for mine pumping.
Steam engines were too powerful for leather bellows, so cast iron blowing cylinders were developed in 1768.
Steam powered blast furnaces achieved higher temperatures, allowing the use of more lime in iron blast furnace feed.
(
Lime rich slag was not free-flowing at the previously used temperatures.)
With a sufficient lime ratio, sulfur from coal or coke fuel reacts with the slag so that the sulfur does not contaminate the iron.
Coal and coke were cheaper and more abundant fuel.
As a result, iron production rose significantly during the last decades of the 18th century.
Coal converted to coke fueled higher temperature blast furnaces and produced cast iron in much larger amounts than before, allowing the creation of a  range of structures such as The Iron Bridge.
Cheap coal meant that industry was no longer constrained by water resources driving the mills, although it continued as a valuable source of power.

The steam engine helped drain the mines, so more coal reserves could be accessed, and the output of coal increased.
The development of the high-pressure steam engine made locomotives possible, and a transport revolution followed.
The steam engine which had existed since the early 18th century, was practically applied to both steamboat and railway transportation.
The Liverpool and Manchester Railway, the first purpose built railway line, opened in 1830, the Rocket locomotive of Robert Stephenson being one of its first working locomotives used.

Manufacture of ships' pulley blocks by all-metal machines at the Portsmouth Block Mills in 1803 instigated the age of sustained mass production.
Machine tools used by engineers to manufacture parts began in the first decade of the century, notably by Richard Roberts and Joseph Whitworth.
The development of interchangeable parts through what is now called the American system of manufacturing began in the firearms industry at the U.S Federal arsenals in the early 19th century, and became widely used by the end of the century.

===
Second Industrial Revolution (1860s–1914) ===
The 19th century saw astonishing developments in transportation, construction, manufacturing and communication technologies originating in Europe.
After a recession at the end of the 1830s and a general slowdown in major inventions, the Second Industrial Revolution was a period of rapid innovation and industrialization that began in the 1860s or around 1870 and lasted until World War I.
It included rapid development of chemical, electrical, petroleum, and steel technologies connected with highly structured technology research.

Telegraphy developed into a practical technology in the 19th century to help run the railways safely.
Along with the development of telegraphy was the patenting of the first telephone.
March 1876 marks the date that Alexander Graham Bell officially patented his version of an "electric telegraph".
Although Bell is noted with the creation of the telephone, it is still debated about who actually developed the first working model.
Building on improvements in vacuum pumps and materials research, incandescent light bulbs became practical for general use in the late 1870s.
This invention had a profound effect on the workplace because factories could now have second and third shift workers.
Shoe production was mechanized during the mid 19th century.
Mass production of sewing machines and agricultural machinery such as reapers occurred in the mid to late 19th century.
Bicycles were mass-produced beginning in the 1880s.
Steam-powered factories became widespread, although the conversion from water power to steam occurred in England earlier than in the U.S.
Ironclad warships were found in battle starting in the 1860s, and played a role in the opening of Japan and China to trade with the West.

=== 20th century ===
Mass production brought automobiles and other high-tech goods to masses of consumers.
Military research and development sped advances including electronic computing and jet engines.
Radio and telephony greatly improved and spread to larger populations of users, though near-universal access would not be possible until mobile phones became affordable to developing world residents in the late 2000s and early 2010s.

Energy and engine technology improvements included nuclear power, developed after the Manhattan project which heralded the new Atomic Age.
Rocket development led to long range missiles and the first space age that lasted from the 1950s with the launch of Sputnik to the mid-1980s.

Electrification spread rapidly in the 20th century.
At the beginning of the century electric power was for the most part only available to wealthy people in a few major cities such as New York, London, Paris, and Newcastle upon Tyne, but by the time the World Wide Web was invented in 1990 an estimated 62 percent of homes worldwide had electric power, including about a third of households in the rural developing world.

Birth control also became widespread during the 20th century.
Electron microscopes were very powerful by the late 1970s and genetic theory and knowledge were expanding, leading to developments in genetic engineering.

The first "test tube baby" Louise Brown was born in 1978, which led to the first successful gestational surrogacy pregnancy in 1985 and the first pregnancy by ICSI in 1991, which is the implanting of a single sperm into an egg.
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis was first performed in late 1989 and led to successful births in July 1990.
These procedures have become relatively common.

The massive data analysis resources necessary for running transatlantic research programs such as the Human Genome Project and the Large Electron–Positron Collider led to a necessity for distributed communications, causing Internet protocols to be more widely adopted by researchers and also creating a justification for Tim Berners-Lee to create the World Wide Web.

Vaccination spread rapidly to the developing world from the 1980s onward due to many successful humanitarian initiatives, greatly reducing childhood mortality in many poor countries with limited medical resources.

The US National Academy of Engineering, by expert vote, established the following ranking of the most important technological developments of the 20th century:


===
21st century ===
In the early 21st century research is ongoing into quantum computers, gene therapy (introduced 1990), 3D printing (introduced 1981), nanotechnology (introduced 1985), bioengineering/biotechnology, nuclear technology, advanced materials (e.g., graphene), the scramjet and drones (along with railguns and high-energy laser beams for military uses), superconductivity, the memristor, and green technologies such as alternative fuels (e.g., fuel cells, self-driving electric and plug-in hybrid cars), augmented reality devices and wearable electronics, artificial intelligence, and more efficient and powerful LEDs, solar cells, integrated circuits, wireless power devices, engines, and batteries.

Perhaps the greatest research tool built in the 21st century is the Large Hadron Collider, the largest single machine ever built.
The understanding of particle physics is expected to expand with better instruments including larger particle accelerators such as the LHC and better neutrino detectors.
Dark matter is sought via underground detectors and observatories like LIGO have started to detect gravitational waves.

Genetic engineering technology continues to improve, and the importance of epigenetics on development and inheritance has also become increasingly recognized.
New spaceflight technology and spacecraft are also being developed, like the Boeing's Orion and SpaceX's Dragon 2.
New, more capable space telescopes, such as the James Webb Telescope, to be launched to orbit in late 2021, and the Colossus Telescope are being designed.
The International Space Station was completed in the 2000s, and NASA and ESA plan a human mission to Mars in the 2030s.
The Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) is an electro-magnetic thruster for spacecraft propulsion and is expected to be tested in 2015.

Breakthrough Initiatives, together with famed physicist Stephen Hawking, plan to send the first ever spacecraft to visit another star, which will consist of numerous super-light chips driven by Electric propulsion in the 2030s, and receive images of the Proxima Centauri system, along with, possibly, the potentially habitable planet Proxima Centauri b, by midcentury.2004 saw the first crewed commercial spaceflight when Mike Melvill crossed the boundary of space on June 21, 2004.

==
By type ==


===
Biotechnology ===
Timeline of agriculture and food technology
Timeline of biotechnology


===
Civil engineering ===
Civil engineering
Architecture and building construction
Bridges, harbors, tunnels, dams
Surveying, instruments and maps, cartography, urban engineering, water supply and sewerage


===
Communication ===


===
Computing ===


===
Consumer technology ===


===
Electrical engineering ===
Timeline of electrical and electronic engineering


===
Energy ===
===
Materials science ===
Timeline of materials technology
Metallurgy


===
Measurement ===
History of time in the United States
Timeline of time measurement technology


===
Medicine ===


===
Military ===
Military history#Technological evolution
Category:Military history – articles on history of specific technologies


===
Nuclear ===
Manhattan Project
Atomic Age
Nuclear testing
Nuclear arms race
===
Science and technology ===


===
Transport ===


==
See also ==
Related history
Related disciplines
Related subjects


==
References ==


==
Further reading ==


==
External links ==
Electropaedia on the History of Technology
MIT 6.933J –
The Structure of Engineering Revolutions.
From MIT OpenCourseWare, course materials (graduate level) for a course on the history of technology through a Thomas Kuhn-ian lens.

Concept of Civilization Events.
From Jaroslaw Kessler, a chronology of "civilizing events".

Ancient and Medieval City Technology
Society for the History of Technology
The Bundeswehr Military History Museum (German:
Militärhistorisches Museum der Bundeswehr (MHMBw)) is the military museum of the German Armed Forces, the Bundeswehr, and one of the major military history museums in Germany.
It is located in a former military arsenal in the Albertstadt which is part of Dresden.

After a long history of switching titles and approaches to military history, the museum was re-opened in 2011 with a new internal and external concept.

The museum focuses on the human aspects of war, while also showcasing the evolution of German military technology.

==
Architecture ==
The original building, the armory, was built between 1873-1876 and became a museum in 1897.
Originally the Saxon armory and museum, the building has served as a Nazi museum, a Soviet museum and an East German museum which reflected the region's shifting social and political positions over the last 135 years.
In 1989, the museum was closed because the newly unified German state was unsure how the museum would fit into the history being created.
By 2001, feelings regarding the museum had shifted and an architectural competition was held for an extension which would cause visitors to reconsider the way they think about war.

Before opening in October 2011 as the Bundeswehr Military History Museum, the building underwent six years of extensive construction.
Using the design of architect Daniel Libeskind, the Neo-Classicist facade on the historic arsenal has been interrupted.
Libeskind added a transparent arrowhead to the façade of the building, creating, according to the Dresden Tourism board, "an outwardly visible expression of innovation".
This new element is also reflected in the logo of the museum.
Libeskind's studio states that "the openness and transparency of the new façade, representing the openness of democratic society, contrasts with the rigidity of the existing building, which represents the severity of the authoritarian past".
The silver arrowhead protrudes from the center of the traditional Neo-Classical building and provides a five story, 98 foot high viewing platform which overlooks the city.
The platform provides views of modern Dresden while pointing towards the area where the fire bombings of Dresden began.
The redesigned Dresden Museum of Military history has become the main museum of the German Armed Forces.
The building itself is 14,000 square meters and has an inside and outside exhibition area of about 20,000 square meters, making it Germany's largest museum.
In every aspect, the museum is designed to alter the public's perception of war.

==
Museum history ==
The original armory building was completed in 1876 as an armory for Kaiser Wilhelm I.
The Arsenal main building in the center of Dresden's Albert City served as an armory for roughly twenty years, until it was transformed into a museum in 1897.
Since then, the main building of the arsenal has housed the Royal Arsenal Collection, the Royal Saxon Army Museum, and in 1923 became the Saxon Army Museum.

After 1938, the museum became the Army Museum of the Wehrmacht, and in 1972 the Army Museum of the GDR.
Seven months before the reunification of Germany, the museum was renamed the Military History Museum in Dresden.
On February 13 and 14, 1945, British bomber planes commenced an air attack against Dresden, creating a vast firestorm below.

During the first phase, 244 Lancaster bombers dropped high explosive and incendiary bombs aimed at the center of the city.

American B-17 bombers followed the next morning, to destroy the city's railroad marshaling yards.

While much of the city was in ruins, the Bundeswehr's main military museum and most of the other military buildings in the Albertstadt survived the bombing of Dresden because of its location on the city's outskirts.

The building withstood World War II attacks on Germany and continued to be used as a military museum until it was closed in 1989.
It re-opened again in 2011 and provided a new way of presenting military history.
The exhibition concept and design was developed by HG Merz.

==
Inside the museum ==
The museum has made an effort to distance itself from the usual presentations of military history.

Instead of glorifying war and armies, the museum tries to present the causes and consequences of war and violence.

The focus is placed on the human component of war, on the hopes, fears, passion, courage, memories and aspirations of those involved.
The museum seeks to inform visitors about the military history while encouraging them to ask questions and seek new answers.
Visitors can go through the museum through two approaches: thematic sections, and a chronological tour.

Additionally, the museum showcases the history of Military Technology, Handguns, Uniforms and Insignia, Order, Art, an Image Archive, Records, and a Library.

The museum houses a vast collection of military history, from technology and handguns to artistic renderings of war.

Traditionally, military museums focus primarily on weapons technology and the glamorous representation of national armed forces; they impress visitors by shows of military power and display wars in isolation from other historic events.

The Bundeswehr Military History Museum has made an effort to be a different kind of military museum.

It displays war and the military as being interwoven in the general history of a nation, and showcases the ramifications of war in the political, cultural and social history.

The focus, instead of being on the greater good or the military whole, is always on the individual who exercises violence or suffers from it.

Eleven themed tours are offered and three chronologies: 1300-1914, 1914-1945 and 1945-today.
Among historically significant items displayed is the ship's bell from SMS Schleswig-Holstein, a pre-dreadnought battleship that fired what are generally regarded as the first shots of World War II (in Europe) when on Sept. 1, 1939, it shelled Polish positions at Westerplatte in the then-
Free City of Danzig.

===
Military Technology ===
In the Military Technology section of the museum, objects are displayed which have been assigned to three main groups.
These are: Large Equipment and ammunition, Device and Equipment, and Scale-based Replicas and Models.

Over 800 land, air and sea vehicles, along with over 1,000 guns, hand guns, rockets and flamethrowers have been collected for the museum.

Additionally, this section includes a large collection of military space technology.

While the collection in this section focuses on devices used by the military, with over 45,000 objects belonging to the military, there are also witness accounts to accompany the display.

Witnesses describe the life and suffering of civilians during wartime.

===
Firearms ===
The valuable and extensive collection of firearms is considered one of the most important collections in Germany's museum landscape.

This is especially due to the large proportion of Saxon weapons on display.

Included in the museum are 4,250 firearms spanning from rifles, carbines and machine guns, as well as 3,250 handguns such as pistols and revolvers that make up the collection of Feuerwaffen.

Additionally, several experimental weapons are included in the collection.

There are also cutting and stabbing weapons in this section.

The collection includes roughly 1,700 sabers, swords and broadswords; almost 1,100 bayonets, 800 daggers, 400 Faschinenmesser and 400 polearms.

===
Uniforms ===
Military uniforms are influenced by the politics of the time, along with culture, ideology, and the economy.

Examining the story of uniforms helps one understand the thinking of a certain era.

Within the Bundeswehr Military History Museum, the display of uniforms is considered one of the most meaningful exhibitions.

This section includes mostly German uniforms, especially those from the late 19th Century to present due to the state of preservation.

Also included are some uniforms, insignia and regalia of foreign forces, particularly of other European nations.

These are also used to represent allies to the German state in exhibitions.

The collection includes almost 70,000 field uniforms.

In addition to outerwear, underwear, shoes, headgear, and military equipment are on display, along with badges, musical instruments and banners.

One remarkable piece within the collection is the Spencer jacket from 1805 which belonged to Queen Louise, the "Sissi Prussia", mother of the first German Emperor Wilhelm I.


===
Art ===
Along with relics of military history, the museum contains a fairly extensive art collection, the foundation of which was laid in 1857 by Officer Ludwig Georg von Wurmb who brought together images depicting the history of the Royal Saxon Army.

Nearly 1,100 paintings, 500 sculptures, 12,000 drawings and prints have been added to the early collection by an eclectic group of artists including Jacques Callog, William Campenhausen, Max Liebermann, Lea Grundig and Bernhard Heisig.

All the pieces include the theme of war and military.

===
Image archive ===
The image archive houses
a collection of preserved paper photographs, pictures, photo postcards, photo albums, picture negatives, and slides of German and international military history.

Nearly one million artifacts are housed in this section which focuses on everyday life of the German armed forces.

The images archive the formation, equipment and training of armed forces past and present.

While professional images are showcased, so are amateur photographers from both World War.

Particularly noteworthy in this section are photographs of Dresden by Willy Rossner and Soviet war photographer G. Samsonov.

===
Records ===
The records collection showcases the written history of the military from the 17th Century to the present.

Almost 150,000 objects which reference the military are held in the collection.

These include the personal documents of soldiers such as military passports, diaries, or letters and provide a comprehensive review of military life.

Emphasis is placed on the collection of posters, cards, leaflets, newspapers and magazines.

There is also an audio component of this section which plays extensive interviews with eyewitnesses to military life.

These give personal perspective into the political communication strategies and social values of the times in which they occurred.

=== Library/Technical Information Center ===
The museum library not only serves as a way to showcase the museum collection, but is also a center for research, scientific work, and teaching.

It includes over 45,000 documents, including 1,000 historic and valuable books and magazines.

The books range from subjects of military affairs, general history, military history, military technology, hand and fire weapons, medals, uniforms, photography and art, and conservation efforts.

Inside the library are 36,000 volumes of monographs from 1851 to the present,
1,000 rare books from the 16th century to 1850, about 7,500 service regulations from the Prussian and Saxon army, as well as newspapers and magazines both past and present.
Use of the library is available to military personnel and library employees.

Non-military members are granted access to the reading room if they apply ahead of time via telephone or through written application.

===
Gallery ===

		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


=
=
See also ==
Deutsches Panzermuseum, German tank museum in Munster.

==
Bibliography ==
Pieken, Gorch; Rogg, Matthias (2012).

The Bundeswehr Museum of Military History (Militärhistorisches Museum der Bundeswehr) - Exhibition Guide - .
Dresden, Sandstein-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-95498-000-0.

Stapfer, Hans-Heiri (1991).
"
In a 'New' Country".
Air Enthusiast.
No.
44.
pp.
57–61.
ISSN 0143-5450.

Van Uffelen, Chris.
Contemporary Museums - Architecture, History, Collections, Braun Publishing, 2010, ISBN 978-3-03768-067-4,
pages 232-233.
==
References ==


==
External links ==
Militärhistorisches Museum der
Bundeswehr Dresden
Picture gallery (in German)
Prize for Military History (Förderpreis für Militärgeschichte und Militärtechnikgeschichte) is an award recognising achievements in the fields of military history and history of military technology.
The prize is bestowed by the German Ministry of Defence every two years.

==
History ==
From 1992 to 2012, the prize was awarded under the name Werner Hahlweg Prize.
From 1969 until his retirement in 1978, the German historian Werner Hahlweg (1912–1989) held a professorship in Military History and Military Sciences at the University of Münster.
In his will, he bequeathed funds to go towards a science award for military history.
The prize was administered by the Federal Office of Defense Technology and Procurement in Koblenz (now Federal Office of Bundeswehr Equipment, Information Technology and In-Service Support, part of the German Ministry of Defence).
After it had become known in 2012 that the prize's namesake, Hahlweg, had joined the SS in June 1933 and the Nazi Party in 1936, the Ministry of Defence decided to suspend the prize.
It was reinstituted in 2017 under a new name and continues to be awarded every two years.

==
Advisory board ==
As of 2018, the advisory board includes Michael Epkenhans (Center for Military History and Social Sciences of the Bundeswehr), Marian Füssel (University of Göttingen), Johannes Hürter (Institute of Contemporary History (Munich)), and Brendan Simms (Oxford University), among others.
It is chaired by the historian Sönke Neitzel (University of Potsdam).

==
Recipients ==
1992:
Dieter Storz; Christian Lankes;
Christian Hartmann
1994:
Olaf Rose; Ralf Pröve;
Karl-Klaus Weber
1996:
Axel F. Gablik; Michael Sikora; Sönke Neitzel; Gerhard Quaas
1998:
Lutz Budraß; Oliver Gnad; Lothar Walmrath
2000: Matthias Rogg; Frank Becker (historian) and Martin Rink; Carola Vogel and Michael Busch (historian)
2002: Rainer Leng; Markus Pöhlmann and Brigitte Biwald;
Christian Th.
Müller
2004:
Uwe Tresp; Elmar Heinz; Klaus-Jürgen Bremm and Klaus Jochen Arnold
2006:
Jörn Leonhard; Stefan Kroll; Werner Benecke and Frank Pauli
2008: Oliver Stein; Eckard Michels and Christian Ortner; Philipp Münch
2010: Tanja Bührer; Rüdiger Bergien and Christian Kehrt; Martin Clauss and Wencke Meteling
2012: Christoph Nübel; Jens Westemeier; Florian Seiller and Jürgen Kilian
2017: Flavio Eichmann; Carmen Winkel and Takuma W. Melber; Peter Keller and Jonas Friedrich


==
See also ==
List of history awards


==
References ==
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to technology: collection of tools, including machinery, modifications, arrangements and procedures used by humans.
Engineering is the discipline that seeks to study and design new technology.
Technologies significantly affect human as well as other animal species' ability to control and adapt to their natural environments.

== Components of technology ==
Knowledge
Engineering
Process
Science
Skill
Tools
Utensil
Equipment
Invention
Machinery
Structures (buildings, roads, bridges, canals, dams, etc.)

Man-made systems (see system)
Infrastructure
Public utility
==
Branches of technology ==
Aerospace – flight or transport above the surface of the Earth.

Space exploration – the physical investigation of the space more than 100 km above the Earth by either manned or unmanned spacecraft.

Applied physics – physics which is intended for a particular technological or practical use.
It is usually considered as a bridge or a connection between "pure" physics and engineering.

Agriculture – cultivation of plants, animals, and other living organisms.

Fishing – activity of trying to catch fish.
Fish are normally caught in the wild.
Techniques for catching fish include hand gathering, spearing, netting, angling and trapping.

Fisheries – a fishery is an entity engaged in raising or harvesting fish which is determined by some authority to be a fishery.
According to the FAO, a fishery is typically defined in terms of the "people involved, species or type of fish, area of water or seabed, method of fishing, class of boats, purpose of the activities or a combination of the foregoing features".

Fishing industry –  industry or activity concerned with taking, culturing, processing, preserving, storing, transporting, marketing or selling fish or fish products.
It is defined by the FAO as including recreational, subsistence and commercial fishing, and the harvesting, processing, and marketing sectors.

Forestry – art and science of tree resources, including plantations and natural stands.
The main goal of forestry is to create and implement systems that allow forests to continue a sustainable provision of environmental supplies and services.

Organic gardening and farming
Sustainable agriculture
Communication –
Books –
Telecommunication – the transfer of information at a distance, including signaling, telegraphy, telephony, telemetry, radio, television, and data communications.

Radio – Aural or encoded telecommunications.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

Technology of television –
Television broadcasting – Visual and aural telecommunications.

Computing – any goal-oriented activity requiring, benefiting from, or creating computers.
Computing includes designing and building hardware and software systems; processing, structuring, and managing various kinds of information; doing scientific research on and with computers; making computer systems behave intelligently; creating and using communications and entertainment media; and more.

Computer engineering –  discipline that integrates several fields of electrical engineering and computer science required to develop computer systems, from designing individual microprocessors, personal computers, and supercomputers, to circuit design.

Computers – general purpose devices that can be programmed to carry out a finite set of arithmetic or logical operations.
Since a sequence of operations can be readily changed, computers can solve more than one kind of problem.

Computer science – the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and of practical techniques for their implementation and application in computer systems.

Artificial intelligence – intelligence of machines and the branch of computer science that aims to create it.

Natural language processing –
Object recognition –
in computer vision, this is the task of finding a given object in an image or video sequence.

Cryptography – the technology to secure communications in the presence of third parties.

Human-computer interaction
Information technology – the acquisition, processing, storage and dissemination of vocal, pictorial, textual and numerical information by a microelectronics-based combination of computing and telecommunications.

Software engineering – the systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Programming – the process of designing, writing, testing, debugging, and maintaining the source code of computer programs.

Software development – development of a software product, which entails computer programming (process of writing and maintaining the source code),
but also encompasses a planned and structured process from the conception of the desired software to its final manifestation.

Web design and web development –
C++ – one of the most popular programming languages with application domains including systems software, application software, device drivers, embedded software, high-performance server and client applications, and entertainment software such as video games.

Perl – high-level, general-purpose, interpreted, dynamic programming language.

Used for text processing, CGI scripting, graphics programming, system administration, network programming, finance, bioinformatics, and more.

Software – one or more computer programs and data held in the storage of the computer for one or more purposes.
In other words, software is a set of programs, procedures, algorithms and its documentation concerned with the operation of a data processing system.

Free software – software that can be used, studied, and modified without restriction.

Search engines – information retrieval systems designed to help find information stored on a computer system.

Internet – the global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP).

World Wide Web –
Computer industry
Apple Inc. – manufacturer and retailer of computers, hand-held computing devices, and related products and services.

Google – Google Inc. and its Internet services including Google Search.

Construction – building or assembly of any physical structure.

Design – the art and science of creating the abstract form and function for an object or environment.

Architecture – the art and science of designing buildings.

Electronics – Electronics comprises the physics, engineering, technology and applications that deal with the emission, flow and control of electrons in vacuum and matter.

Energy –
In physics, energy is the quantitative property that must be transferred to an object in order to perform work on, or to heat, the object.

Energy development – ongoing effort to provide abundant, efficient, and accessible energy resources through knowledge, skills, and construction.

Energy storage – the storage of a form of energy that can then be used later.

Nuclear technology – the technology and application of the spontaneous and induced reactions of atomic nuclei.

Wind energy – wind energy is the use of wind to provide the mechanical power through wind turbines to turn electric generators and traditionally to do other work, like milling or pumping.

Solar energy – Solar energy is radiant light and heat from the Sun that is harnessed using a range of ever-evolving technologies such as solar heating, photovoltaics, solar thermal energy, solar architecture, molten salt power plants and artificial photosynthesis.

Engineering – the application of science, mathematics, and technology to produce useful goods and systems.

Chemical engineering – the technology and application of chemical processes to produce useful materials.

Computer engineering – Computer engineering (CE) is a branch of engineering that integrates several fields of computer science and electronic engineering required to develop computer hardware and software.

Control engineering – Control engineering or control systems engineering is an engineering discipline that applies automatic control theory to design systems with desired behaviors in control environments.

Electrical engineering – the technology and application of electromagnetism, including electricity, electronics, telecommunications, computers, electric power, magnetics, and optics.

Climate engineering –  the large-scale manipulation of a specific process central to controlling Earth
’s climate for the purpose of obtaining a specific benefit.

Software engineering – the technology and application of a systematic approach to the development, operation, maintenance, and retirement of computer software.

Firefighting – act of extinguishing fires.
A firefighter fights fires to prevent destruction of life, property and the environment.
Firefighting is a professional technical skill.

Forensic science – application of a broad spectrum of sciences to answer questions of interest to a legal system.
This may be in relation to a crime or a civil action.

Health
Biotechnology – applied biology that involves the use of living organisms and bioprocesses in engineering, technology, medicine and other fields requiring bioproducts.

Ergonomics – the study of designing equipment and devices that fit the human body, its movements, and its cognitive abilities.

Hydrology – The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.

Industry – production of an economic good or service.

Automation – use of machinery to replace human labor.

Industrial machinery –
Machines – devices that perform or assist in performing useful work.

Manufacturing – use of machines, tools and labor to produce goods for use or sale.
The term may refer to a range of human activity, from handicraft to high tech, but is most commonly applied to industrial production, in which raw materials are transformed into finished goods on a large scale.

Robotics – deals with the design, construction, operation, structural disposition, manufacture and application of robots.

Object recognition
Information science –
Cartography – the study and practice of making maps.
Combining science, aesthetics, and technique, cartography builds on the premise that reality can be modeled in ways that communicate spatial information effectively.

Library science – technology related to libraries and the information fields.

Military science – the study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.

Mining – extraction of mineral resources from the earth.

Nanotechnology –
The study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale.
Generally, nanotechnology deals with structures sized between 1 and 100 nanometre in at least one dimension, and involves developing materials or devices possessing at least one dimension within that size.

Prehistoric technology – technologies that emerged before recorded history (i.e., before the development of writing).

Quantum technology  –
Sustainability – capacity to endure.
In ecology, the word describes how biological systems remain diverse and productive over time.
Long-lived and healthy wetlands and forests are examples of sustainable biological systems.
For humans, sustainability is the potential for long-term maintenance of well being, which has environmental, economic, and social dimensions.

Transport – the transfer of people or things from one place to another.

Rail transport –
means of conveyance of passengers and goods by way of wheeled vehicles running on rail tracks consisting of steel rails installed on sleepers/ties and ballast.

Vehicles – mechanical devices for transporting people or things.

Automobiles – human-guided powered land-vehicles.

Bicycles – human-powered land-vehicles with two or more wheels.

Motorcycles – single-track, engine-powered, motor vehicles.
They are also called motorbikes, bikes, or cycles.

Vehicle components
Tires – ring-shaped coverings that fit around wheel rims


==
Technology by region ==
Science and technology in Africa
Science and technology in Algeria
Science and technology in Angola
Science and technology in Morocco
Science and technology in South Africa
Science and technology in Asia
Science and technology in Bangladesh
Science and technology in China
Science and technology in India
Science and technology in Indonesia
Science and technology in Iran
Science and technology in Israel
Science and technology in Japan
Science and technology in Malaysia
Science and technology in Pakistan
Science and technology in the Philippines
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Turkey
Science and technology in Europe
Science and technology in Albania
Science and technology in Belgium
Science and technology in Brussels
Science and technology in Flanders
Science and technology in Wallonia
Science and technology in Bulgaria
Science and technology in France
Science and technology in Germany
Science and technology in Hungary
Science and technology in Iceland
Science and technology in Italy
Science and technology in Portugal
Science and technology in Romania
Science and technology in Russia
Science and technology in Spain
Science and technology in Switzerland
Science and technology in Ukraine
Science and technology in the United Kingdom
Science and technology in North America
Science and technology in Canada
Science and technology in the United States
Science and technology in Jamaica
Science and technology in South America
Science and technology in Argentina
Science and technology in Colombia
Science and technology in Venezuela


==
History of technology ==
History of technology
Timelines of technology
Man vs. Technology
Technology museum –


===
History of technology by period ===
Prehistoric technology (outline)
Control of fire by early humans
Ancient technology – c. 800 BCE – 476 CE
Ancient Egyptian technology –
Obelisk making technology in ancient Egypt –
Ancient Greek technology – c. 800 BCE – 146 BCE
Ancient Roman technology – c. 753 BCE – 476 CE
Science and technology of the Han dynasty – 206 BCE – 220
CE
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty – 618–907
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
960–1279 CE
Medieval technology – 5th to 15th century
Byzantine technology – 5th to 15th century
Islamic Golden Age – 8th to 13th century
Science and technology in the Ottoman Empire – 14th to 20th century
Industrial revolution – 18th to 19th century
Second Industrial Revolution – 1820–1914
Technology during World War I – 1914–1918
Technology during World War II – 1939–1945
Allied technological cooperation during World War II –
American military technology during World War II –
German military technology during World War II –
1970s in science and technology
1980s in science and technology
1990s in science and technology
2000s in science and technology
2010s in science and technology


====
Technological ages ====
Stone Age –
Bronze Age –
Iron Age –
The Renaissance –
Industrial Age –
Information Age –


===
Media about the history of technology ===
Connections – documentary television series and 1978 book ("Connections" based on the series) created, written and presented by science historian James Burke.
It took an interdisciplinary approach to the history of science and invention and demonstrated how various discoveries, scientific achievements, and historical world events were built from one another successively in an interconnected way to bring about particular aspects of modern technology.
There were 3 seasons produced, and they aired in 1978, 1994, and 1997.

The Day the Universe Changed –
documentary television series written and presented by science historian James Burke, originally broadcast in 1985 by the BBC.
The series' primary focus is on the effect of advances in science and technology on western society in its philosophical aspects.
Ran for one season, in 1986.
===
History of technology by region ===
History of science and technology in the Mediterranean
Ancient Greek technology –
Ancient Roman technology –
Timeline of Polish science and technology –
History of science and technology in Africa –
History of science and technology in Asia
History of science and technology in China –
Science and technology of the Han dynasty –
Science and technology of the Tang dynasty –
Science and technology of the Song dynasty –
History of science and technology in the People's Republic of China –
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinent –
Science and technology in ancient India –
History of science and technology in Korea –
Science and Technology in the Ottoman Empire –
Science and technology in the Soviet Union –
History of science and technology in North America
United States technological and industrial history –
History of science and technology in Mexico –
Technological and industrial history of Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 20th-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of 21st-century Canada –
Technological and industrial history of the People's Republic of China –
Technological and industrial history of the United States –


===
History of technology by field ===
History of invention
History of aerospace
History of artificial intelligence
History of agriculture
History of agricultural science
History of architecture, timeline
History of biotechnology
History of cartography
History of chemical engineering
History of communication
History of computing, timeline
History of computer science
History of computing hardware
History of the graphical user interface
History of hypertext, timeline
History of the Internet, Internet phenomena
History of the World Wide Web
History of operating systems
History of programming languages,
timeline
History of software engineering
History of electrical engineering
History of energy development
History of engineering
History of industry
History of library and information science
History of microscopy
History of manufacturing
History of the factory
History of mass production
History of materials science, timeline
History of measurement
History of medicine
History of motor and engine technology
History of military science
History of transport, timeline
History of biotechnology –
Timeline of biotechnology –
History of display technology –
History of film technology –
History of information technology auditing –
History of military technology –
History of nanotechnology –
History of science and technology –
History of web syndication technology –
Timeline of agriculture and food technology –
Timeline of clothing and textiles technology –
Timeline of communication technology –
Timeline of diving technology –
Timeline of heat engine technology –
Timeline of hypertext technology –
Timeline of lighting technology –
Timeline of low-temperature technology –
Timeline of materials technology –
Timeline of medicine and medical technology –
Timeline of microscope technology –
Timeline of motor and engine technology –
Timeline of particle physics technology –
Timeline of photography technology –
Timeline of rocket and missile technology –
Timeline of telescope technology –
Timeline of telescopes, observatories, and
observing technology –
Timeline of temperature and pressure measurement technology –
Timeline of time measurement technology –
Timeline of transportation technology –


==
Hypothetical technology ==
Potential technology of the future includes:
Hypothetical technology –
Femtotechnology – hypothetical term used in reference to structuring of matter on the scale of a femtometer, which is 10−15 m.
This is a smaller scale in comparison to nanotechnology and picotechnology which refer to 10−9 m and 10−12 m respectively.
Work in the femtometer range involves manipulation of excited energy states within atomic nuclei (see nuclear isomer) to produce metastable (or otherwise stabilized) states with unusual properties.

==
Philosophy of technology ==
Philosophy of technology –
Appropriate technology –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Jacques Ellul –
Paradigm –
Posthumanism –
Precautionary principle –
Singularitarianism –
Techno-progressivism –
Technocentrism –
Technocracy –
Technocriticism –
Technological determinism –
Technological evolution –
Technological nationalism –
Technological singularity –
Technology readiness level –
Technorealism –
Theories of technology –
Transhumanism –


==
Management of technology ==
Human enhancement –
Science and technology –
Strategy of Technology –
Technology management –
Technology integration –
Technology intelligence –
Technology life cycle –
Technology roadmap –


===
Advancement of technology ===
DARPA
Emerging technologies
List of emerging technologies
Horizon scanning
Hypothetical technology
Innovation
Invention
Inventor
Research and development
Technological superpowers
Technological transitions
==
Politics of technology ==
Politics and technology

AI takeover
Accelerating change
Format war
Information privacy
IT law
PEST analysis
Robot rights
Technological singularity
Technological sovereignty


==
Economics of technology ==
Energy accounting
Nanosocialism
Post-scarcity economy
Technocracy
Technocapitalism
Technological diffusion
Technology acceptance model
Technology lifecycle
Technology transfer


==
Technology education ==
Technology education


==
Technology organizations ==


===
Science and technology think tanks ===
Applied
Biomathematics
Battelle Memorial Institute
Cicada 3301
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
Edge Foundation,
Inc.
Eudoxa
Federation of American Scientists
Free Software Foundation
GTRI Office of Policy Analysis and Research
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation
Institute for Science and International Security
Institute for the Encouragement of Scientific Research and Innovation of Brussels
Keck Institute for Space Studies
Kestrel Institute
Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology
Moore Center for Theoretical Cosmology and Physics
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
Piratbyrån
RAND Corporation
Regional Center for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Res4Med
Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason and Science
Swecha
Wau Holland Foundation


==
Technology media ==
For historical treatments, see Media about the history of technology, aboveTechnology journalism –


===
Books on technology ===
Engines of Creation –


===
Technology periodicals ===
Engadget –
TechCrunch –
Wired –


===
Websites ===
The Verge


===
Fictional technology ===
Fictional technology –
In Death technology –
Technology in Star Trek –
Technology in Star Wars –
Technology in science fiction –
Technology of Robotech –
List of technology in the Dune universe –


==
Persons influential in technology ==
List of engineers
List of inventors
List of scientists


==
See also ==
Outline of applied science


==
Further reading ==
Ambrose, Stanley H. (2 March 2001). "
Paleolithic Technology and Human Evolution" (PDF).
Science.
291 (5509)
: 1748–53.
Bibcode:2001Sci...
291.1748A.
doi:10.1126/science.1059487.
PMID 11249821.
S2CID 6170692.
Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007.
Retrieved 10 March 2007.

Huesemann, M.H., and J.A. Huesemann (2011).
Technofix:
Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment, New Society Publishers, ISBN 0865717044.

Kremer, Michael (1993). "
Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990".
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
108 (3): 681–716.
doi:10.2307/2118405.
JSTOR 2118405..
Kevin Kelly.
What Technology Wants.
New York, Viking Press, 14 October 2010, hardcover, 416 pages.
ISBN 978-0670022151
Mumford, Lewis.
(
2010).
Technics and Civilization.
University of Chicago Press, ISBN 0226550273.

Rhodes, Richard.
(
2000).
Visions of Technology: A Century of Vital Debate about Machines, Systems, and the Human World.
Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0684863111.

Teich, A.H. (2008).
Technology and the Future.
Wadsworth Publishing, 11th edition, ISBN 0495570524.

Wright, R.T. (2008).
Technology.
Goodheart-Wilcox Company, 5th edition, ISBN 1590707184.

==
References ==


==
External links ==
Technology newsBBC on technology
Bloomberg on technology
MIT Technology Review
New York Times technology section
Wired

Acoustic resonance technology –
Advanced steam technology –
Applications of nanotechnology –
Architectural technology –
Assisted reproductive technology –
Assistive technology –
Assistive technology and sports –
Automatic box-opening technology –
Barcode technology in healthcare –
Baseball telecasts technology –
Bead probe technology –
Beam lead technology –
Bio-fermentation technology –
Biomedical technology –
Biotechnology –
Biotechnology in pharmaceutical manufacturing –
Bleeding edge technology –
Braille technology –
Brain technology –
CASY cell counting technology –
Calm technology –
Ceramic mixing technology –
BOINC client–server technology –
Chirotechnology –
Circuit rider (technology) –
Civic technology –
Clean coal technology –
Clean technology –
Close coupled field technology –
Clothing technology –
Coal upgrading technology –
Community technology –
Computer technology for developing areas –
Construction collaboration technology –
Contesting technology –
Cultural technology –
Cycling probe technology –
Cytotechnology –
DNA nanotechnology –
Dance technology – application of modern information technology in activities related to dance: in dance education, choreography, performance, and research.

Demand flow technology –
Design technology –
Digital newspaper technology –
Digital scent technology –
Domestic technology –
Downhole oil–water separation technology –
Dual-use technology –
Dynamic video memory technology –
Ecotechnology –
Educational technology –
Electric transportation technology –
Electrical engineering technology –
Electrofluidic display technology –
Electron beam technology –
Electrothermal-chemical technology –
Enabling technology –
Energy applications of nanotechnology –
Energy security and renewable technology –
Energy technology –
Entertainment technology –
Environmental biotechnology –
Environmental technology –
Expandable tubular technology –
Field-induced polymer electroluminescent technology –
Food technology –
Frame technology (software engineering) –
G-Technology –
General purpose technology –
Genetic use restriction technology –
Germinal choice technology –
Gerontechnology –
Goal-line technology –
Green nanotechnology –
Greenfish recirculation technology –
Group technology –
Gustatory technology –
Haptic technology –
Headspace technology –
Health information technology –
Health technology –
Heart nanotechnology –
High-technology swimwear fabric –
Holiday lighting technology –
Honda advanced technology –
Human performance technology –
Hurdle technology –
Hybridoma technology –
Hyper-interactive teaching technology –
Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention –
Imaging technology –
Immersive technology –
Induction plasma technology –
Industrial technology –
Information and communications technology –
Information and communications technology in Kosovo –
Information processing technology and aging –
Information technology –
Intelligent Interweaving technology –
Internet services technology –
IsaKidd refining technology –
Keyboard technology –
Language technology –
Large-screen television technology –
Lithic technology –
Logovisual technology –
Low carbon technology –
Low technology –
Marine technology –
Mature technology –
Mechanical engineering technology –
Media technology –
Membrane technology –
Metamaterials surface antenna technology –
Microblade technology –
Microtechnology –
Military technology –
Mobile technology –
Molecular nanotechnology –
Music instrument technology –
Music technology –
NX technology –
Nana technology –
Nanobiotechnology –
Nanotechnology –
Near-infrared signature management technology –
Neurotechnology –
Non-profit technology –
Nuclear technology –
Omniview technology –
Open-source-appropriate technology –
Orphaned technology –
Orthodontic technology –
Particle technology –
Performance acceleration technology –
Persuasive technology –
Phage-ligand technology –
Pharmacopeia biotechnology –
Phonetic search technology –
Photoimageable thick-film technology –
Phytotechnology –
Picotechnology –
Plasma deep drilling technology –
Point-to-point laser technology –
Positioning technology –
Presentation technology –
Primatte chromakey technology –
Process analytical technology –
Pull technology –
Pulsion technology –
Pumpable ice technology –
Push technology –
Quantum technology –
Radio access technology –
Rapid transit technology –
Reproductive technology –
Resolution enhancement technology –
Rotary technology –
Rubber technology –
Search engine technology –
Self-drying concrete technology –
Semantic technology –
Site-specific recombinase technology –
Social technology –
Soft energy technology –
Space technology –
Speech technology –
Stealth technology –
Subsea (technology) –
Surface-mount technology –
Suspension array technology –
Tamper-evident technology –
Telepresence technology –
Tennis technology –
Terahertz spectroscopy and technology –
Terotechnology –
Thick film technology –
Thick-film dielectric electroluminescent technology –
Through-hole technology –
Time release technology –
Travel technology –
Trenchless technology –
Use of technology in treatment of mental disorders –
Vehicle safety technology –
Video sensor technology –
Visual technology –
Wearable technology –
Wet nanotechnology –
Wire rope spooling technology –
Workflow technology –
X-Wind technology –
Xpress technology –
Advanced technology –
Appropriate technology –
Alternative technology –
Antechnology –
Al Gore and information technology –
Assistive technology service provider –
Best available technology –
Biotechnology and genetic engineering in Bangladesh –
Biotechnology consulting –
Biotechnology industry in China –
Brazilian science and technology –
Buddhist influences on print technology –
Bullying in information technology –
Chief technology officer –
Community technology center –
Comparison of display technology –
Competitions and prizes in biotechnology –
Consumer adoption of technological innovations –
Corporate governance of information technology –
Counterparty (technology) –
Critique of technology –
Democratization of technology –
Differential technological development –
Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions –
Drexler–Smalley
debate on molecular nanotechnology –
Economic and Technological Development Zones –
Educational technology in Saudi Arabia –
Ethics of technology –
Environmental impact of nanotechnology –
Etiquette in technology –
Fail-safes in nanotechnology –
Feminism and technology –
Glossary of legal terms in technology –
Goans in science and technology –
Health impact of nanotechnology –
Health technology assessment –
Hydrogen energy vision and technology roadmap –
Impact of nanotechnology –
Industrial applications of nanotechnology –
Information technology architecture –
Information technology audit –
Information technology consulting –
Information technology controls –
Information technology in Bangladesh –
Information technology in India –
Information technology in Morocco –
Information technology in Pakistan –
Information technology management –
Information technology operations –
Information technology outsourcing –
Information technology planning –
Information technology security audit –
Information technology specialist –
Instrumental conception of technology –
Investment-specific technological progress –
List of DNA nanotechnology research groups –
List of United States technological universities –
List of advertising technology companies –
List of archaic technological nomenclature –
List of atheists in science and technology –
List of biotechnology companies –
List of computer technology code names –
List of cultural, intellectual, philosophical and technological revolutions –
List of information technology acronyms –
List of institutions using the term "institute of technology" or "polytechnic" –
List of nanotechnology organizations –
List of philosophers of technology –
List of science and technology articles by continent –
List of steam technology patents –
List of technology centers –
List of the largest information technology companies –
Marx's notebooks on the history of technology –
Medical technology assessment –
Mobile technology in Africa –
Muslim women in science and technology –
Nanotechnology education –
Nanotechnology in fiction –
Next generation of display technology –
Operations and technology management –
Participatory technology development –
Radio and television technology in Turkey –
Regulation of nanotechnology –
Religious response to assisted reproductive technology –
Response time (technology) –
Science, technology and society –
Science, technology, society and environment education –
Sexism in the technology industry –
Social construction of technology –
Social shaping of technology –
Societal impact of nanotechnology –
Technological alliance –
Technological apartheid –
Technological applications of superconductivity –
Technological change –
Technological convergence –
Technological determinism –
Technological dualism –
Technological escalation –
Technological evolution –
Technological fix –
Technological history of the Roman military –
Technological innovation system –
Technological momentum –
Technological nationalism –
Technological paradigm –
Technological rationality –
Technological revolution –
Technological self-efficacy –
Technological singularity –
Technological somnambulism –
Technological studies –
Technological theory of social production –
Technological transitions –
Technological unemployment –
Technological utopianism –
Technology acceptance model –
Technology adoption lifecycle –
Technology alignment –
Technology and Construction Court –
Technology and Culture –
Technology and Entertainment Software –
Technology and Livelihood Education –
Technology and society –
Technology and the Character of Contemporary Life:
A Philosophical Inquiry –
Technology assessment –
Technology aware design –
Technology brokering –
Technology company –
Technology demonstration –
Technology doping –
Technology dynamics –
Technology education –
Technology evangelist –
Technology for Improved Learning Outcomes –
Technology for peace –
Technology forecasting –
Technology fusion –
Technology gap –
Technology governance –
Technology policy –
Technology readiness level –
Technology roadmap –
Technology scouting –
Technology shock –
Technology stack –
Technology strategy –
Technology support net –
Technology trajectory –
Technology-enhanced active learning –
Technology transfer –
Technology transfer in computer science –
Technology treadmill –
Technology tree –
Unified theory of acceptance and use of technology –
The Beatles' recording technology –Technology CAD –
Techno-lodge
Techno-organic virus
Techno-progressivism
Techno-thriller
Technoavia
Technobabble
Technobots
Technoboy
Technocapitalism
Technocentrism
Technoclash
Technocosmos
Technocracy
Technocracy movement
Technocrane
Technocriticism
Technoculture
Technodelic
Technodiktator
Technodon
Technodrome
Technoethics
Technoetic
Technofile
Technoflash
Technogaianism
Technogamia
Technogel
Technogenesis
Technographic segmentation
Technogym
Technogypsie
Technolangue/Easy
Technoliberalism
Technolibertarianism
Technologic
Technologie
Technologist
Technomage
Technomancer
Technomancy
Technomarket
Technomate
Technometrics
Technomimetics
Technomyrmex
Technomyrmex albipes
Technomyrmex gorgona
Technopaganism
Technoparade
Technopark
Technophilia
Technophobia
Technophoby
Technopol
Technopole
Technopolis
Technopoly
Technoport
Technopromexport
Technora
Technorama
Technorati
Technorealism
Technoromanticism
Technos
Technos
acxel
Technosaurus
Technoscience
Technoself
Technoseum
Technosexual
Technosignature
Technosoft
Technosol
Technosphere
Technostress
Technostructure
Technothlon
Technotise
Technotronic
Technovore
Technozion
The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to military science:
Military science – study of the technique, psychology, practice and other phenomena which constitute war and armed conflict.
It strives to be a scientific system that if properly employed, will greatly enhance the practitioner's ability to prevail in an armed conflict with any adversary.
To this end, it is unconcerned whether that adversary is an opposing military force, guerrillas or other irregulars, or any adversary who knows of or utilizes military science in response.

==
Topics within military science ==
Military organization
Military education and training
Military history
Military geography
Military technology and equipment
Military strategy and doctrine
Intelligence cycle management
Foreign policy analysis
Diplomacy
== Types of military technology ==
Weapon
Armour – protective clothing intended to defend its wearer from intentional harm in combat and military engagements, typically associated with soldiers
Artillery – large caliber weapons firing projectiles one at a time.

Artillery pieces are crew serviced weapons that provide direct or indirect trajectories for the shell
Medieval siege weaponry
Fortifications – military constructions and buildings designed for defense in warfare–
Martial arts – also known as fighting systems, martial arts are bodies of codified practices or traditions of training for unarmed and armed combat, usually without the use of guns and other modern weapons–
Mêlée – hand-to-hand combat or mano-a-mano; weapons commonly used in mêlée include swords, clubs, spears, axes, or fists: almost any tool with which one can hit someone else
Military vehicles – are land combat or transportation vehicles, excluding rail-based, which are designed for or in significant use by military forces
Armoured fighting vehicle
Armoured personnel carrier
Tank
Military aviation and military aircraft – Military aviation include such areas as transport, bombing, surveillance, and aerial warfare
Military communications – the transmission medium that links military components on the battlefield
Communications
Military engineer
Military robots – autonomous or remote-controlled devices designed for military applications
Unmanned Ground Vehicles
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicles
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles
Military thought and planning –
military tactics, strategy, and doctrine
Military doctrine – level of military planning between national strategy and unit-level
Military strategy – collective name for planning the conduct of warfare
Military tactics – collective name for methods of engaging and defeating an enemy in battle
Military unit – an organization within an armed force.
It may consist of any number of soldiers, ships, vehicles, or aircraft.
Armies, navies, and air forces, are organised hierarchically into groups of various sizes for functional, tactical and administrative purposes
Military rank
Comparative military ranks
Munitions – often defined as a synonym for ammunition.
A slightly broader definition would include bombs, missiles, warheads, and mines
Bullet
Missile
Bomb
Mine
Landmine
Naval mine
Naval warfare – combat in and on seas and oceans
Navy
Naval ship
Submarine
Small arms and firearms
– a firearm is a kinetic energy weapon that fires either a single or multiple projectiles propelled at high velocity by the gases produced by action of the rapid confined burning of a propellant


==
Military by region ==
List of militaries by country
List of air forces
List of armies by country
List of navies
List of military special forces units
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army


==
History of military science and technology ==
Military history
===
By historical period ===
Prehistoric warfare
Ancient warfare
Medieval warfare
Gunpowder warfare
Industrial warfare
Total war
Irregular warfare
Modern warfare
===
By battlespace ===
Air power history
History of aerial warfare
Army history
History of land warfare
History of information warfare
History of espionage
Nuclear espionage
Atomic spies
History of surveillance
Naval history
History of naval warfare
History of space warfare
===
By terrain ===
History of arctic warfare
History of cyber-warfare
History of desert warfare
History of jungle warfare
History of mountain warfare
History of urban warfare


===
By weapon technology ===
History of armoured warfare
History of artillery
History of biological warfare
History of cavalry
History of chemical warfare
History of electronic warfare
History of infantry
History of mechanized warfare
History of sea-based and land-based mine warfare
History of nuclear warfare
History of nuclear weapons
History of psychological warfare
History of radiological warfare
History of ski warfare
History of submarine warfare


===
History of military tactics ===
History of amphibious warfare
History of asymmetric warfare
History of attrition warfare
History of cavalry tactics
History of conventional warfare
History of fortification
History of guerrilla warfare
History of hand to hand combat
History of invasion
History of joint warfare
History of maneuver warfare
Siege warfare
Total warfare
Trench warfare
History of unconventional warfare


===
History of military strategy ===
History of economic warfare
History of grand strategy
History of operational warfare


==
General military science and technology concepts ==
Aircraft
Bomber
Fighter aircraft
Aircraft carrier
Air superiority
Basic training
Battlespace
Defense
Draft
Exchange officer
Maginot line
Militaria
Military Aid to the Civil Power
Military Aid to the Civil Community
Military academy
Military courtesy
Military fiat
Military history
Military incompetence
Military logistics
Junta
Military organization
Military rule (disambiguation)
Military science
Military tactics
Military technology and equipment
Mutually assured destruction (MAD)
Napalm
Nuclear missile
SLBM
ICBM
MIRV
Tactical nuclear weapon
Radar
Recruiting
Sonar
Strategic Bombing
Troop density
War crime (list)
Crimes against humanity
Genocide
Mass murder
War rape


==
Influential military strategists ==
Following are examples from throughout history of prominently influential military strategists:

Cyrus the Great
Sun Tzu – Chinese military general, strategist, and philosopher during the Zhou dynasty's Spring and Autumn Period.
He is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War, an extremely influential ancient Chinese book on military strategy.

Sun Bin
Chanakya
Alexander the Great
Chandragupta Maurya
Hannibal
Qin Shi Huang
Julius Caesar
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa
Zhuge Liang
Khalid ibn al-Walid
Genghis Khan
Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden
Frederick the Great
Napoleon Bonaparte
Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington
Gebhard Leberecht von Blücher
Antoine-Henri Jomini
Nathan Bedford Forrest
Carl von Clausewitz – German-Prussian soldier and military theorist who stressed the psychological and political aspects of war.
His ideas have been widely influential in military theory and have had a strong influence on German military thought specifically.

Robert E. Lee
Ulysses S. Grant
William Tecumseh Sherman
Helmuth von Moltke
the Elder
Alfred von Schlieffen
Hans Delbrück
Alfred Thayer Mahan
Ferdinand Foch
Giulio Douhet
Billy Mitchell
J. F. C. Fuller
B. H. Liddell Hart
Hans von Seeckt
Heinz Guderian
Erwin Rommel
Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke
Bernard Montgomery,
1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein
George Marshall
Dean Acheson


==
Military science and technology lists ==
List of countries by military expenditures
List of countries by number of active troops
List of countries by size of armed forces
List of countries without an army
List of air forces
List of navies
List of armies
List of battles


==
See also ==
Outline of war
Military science fiction


==
External links ==
Collection of military handbooks etc.
The military history of Japan covers a vast time-period of over three millennia - from the Jōmon (c. 1000 BC) to the present day.
After a long period of clan warfare until the 12th century, there followed feudal wars that culminated in military governments known as the  Shogunate.
Japanese history records that a military class and the Shōgun ruled Japan for 676 years - from 1192 until 1868.
The Shōgun and the samurai warriors stood near the apex of the Japanese social structure - only the aristocratic nobility nominally outranked them.

The sakoku policy effectively closed Japan from foreign influences for 212 years - from 1641 to 1853.
Feudal militarism transitioned to imperialism in the 19th century after the arrival of Admiral Perry in 1853 and the elevation of Emperor Meiji in 1868.

Western colonial powers and their  imperialist policies impacted on Japan's outlook and led to  Japanese colonialism and rampant imperialism (c. 1895-1945) until Japan's defeat in World War II.
The 1947 Japanese Constitution prohibits Japan from offensively using war against other nations.
This led to the establishment of the Japan Self-Defense Forces in 1954.
The U.S.–Japan Alliance (1951 onwards) requires the United States of America to protect Japan and to conduct offensive duties.
In 2015 the Constitution was reinterpreted to allow collective self-defense of Japan's allies.

Japan has a long military tradition with extensive militarism.
As of 2015 Japan had the  fourth most-powerful military in the world.

As of 1954 the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) consist of the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF), Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) and Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF).
The  Prime Minister is the commander-in-chief of the Japan Self-Defense Forces.
Military authority runs from the Prime Minister to the cabinet-level Minister of Defense of the  Japanese Ministry of Defense.
The Prime Minister and Minister of Defense are advised by the Chief of Staff, Joint Staff, who heads the Joint Staff (統合幕僚監部, Tōgō Bakuryō Kanbu).
The Chief of Staff, Joint Staff, is the highest-ranking military officer in the Japan Self-Defense Forces, and is the head of the Operational Authority over the JSDF, executing orders of the Minister of Defense with directions from the Prime Minister.

==
Prehistoric and Ancient Japan ==


===
Jōmon period (c. 14,000–1000 BC) ===
The Jōmon were the first settlers of the Japanese archipelago.
The Jōmon period is the time in Japanese prehistory between c. 14,000–1000 BCE during which Japan was inhabited by a hunter-gatherer culture, which reached a considerable degree of sedentism and cultural complexity.
The name "cord-marked" was first applied by the American scholar Edward S. Morse, who discovered sherds of pottery in 1877 and subsequently translated it into Japanese as jōmon.
The pottery style characteristic of the first phases of Jōmon culture was decorated by impressing cords into the surface of wet clay and is generally accepted to be among the oldest in East Asia and the world.
Near the end of the Jōmon period (c. 1000 BC), villages and towns became surrounded by moats and wooden fences due to increasing violence within or between communities.
Battles were fought with weapons like the sword, sling, spear, bow and arrow.
Some human remains were found with arrow wounds.

===
Yayoi period (1000 BC – 300 AD) ===
The Yayoi period is the Iron Age era of Japan from 1000 BC to 300 AD.
Japan transitioned to a settled agricultural society.
There was a big influx of farmers from the Asian continent to Japan.
The Yayoi culture flourished from southern Kyūshū to northern Honshū.
The rapid increase of roughly four million people in Japan between the Jōmon and Yayoi periods are partially due to migration and due to a shift from a hunter-gatherer to an agricultural diet with the introduction of rice cultivation.
Bronze goods and bronze-making techniques from the Asian mainland reached the Japanese archipelago as early as the 3rd century BC.
It is believed that bronze and, later, iron implements and weapons were introduced to Japan near the end of this time (and well into the early Yamato period).
Archaeological findings suggest that bronze and iron weapons were not used for war until later, starting at the beginning of the Yamato period, as the metal weapons found with human remains do not show wear consistent with use as weapons.
The transition from the Jōmon to Yayoi, and later to the Yamato period, is likely to have been characterized by violent struggle as the natives were displaced and assimilated by the invaders with their vastly superior military technology.
The most well-regarded theory is that present-day Yamato Japanese are descendants of both the Indigenous Jōmon people and the immigrant Yayoi people.
Around this time, San Guo Zhi first referred to the nation of "Wa (Japan)".
According to this work, Wa was "divided into more than 100 tribes", and for some 70 or 80 years there were many disturbances and wars.
About 30 communities had been united by a sorceress-queen named Himiko.
She sent an emissary named Nashime (ja:難升米, Nashonmi in Chinese) with a tribute of slaves and cloth to Daifang in China, establishing diplomatic relations with Cao Wei (the Chinese kingdom of Wei).
==
Classical Japan ==
By the end of the 4th century, the Yamato clan was well established on the Nara plain with considerable control over the surrounding areas.
The Five kings of Wa sent envoys to China to recognize their dominion of the Japanese Islands.
The Nihon Shoki states that the Yamato were strong enough to have sent an army against the powerful northern Korean state of Goguryeo (of the Three Kingdoms of Korea).
Yamato Japan had close relations with the southwestern Korean kingdom of Baekje.
In 663, Japan, supporting Baekje, was defeated by the allied forces of Tang China and the southeastern Korean kingdom of Silla, at the Battle of Hakusonko in the Korean peninsula.
As a result, the Japanese were banished from the peninsula.
To defend the Japanese archipelago, a military base was constructed in Dazaifu, Fukuoka, on Kyushu.

===
Yamato period (250–710 AD) ===
This period is divided into the Kofun and Asuka period.
Ancient Japan had close ties with the Gaya confederacy and Baekje on the Korean Peninsula.
Gaya, where there was an abundance of naturally occurring iron, exported abundant quantities of iron armor and weapons to Wa, and there may have even been a Japanese military post there with Gaya and Baekje cooperation..
According to the Gwanggaeto Stele, Silla and Baekje were client states of Japan.
The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences investigated the stele and reported that it reads, "Silla and Baekje were client states of Japan".
In 552, the ruler of Baekje appealed to Yamato for help against its enemies, the neighboring Silla.
Along with his emissaries to the Yamato court, the Baekje king sent bronze images of Buddha, some Buddhist scriptures, and a letter praising Buddhism.
These gifts triggered a powerful burst of interest in Buddhism.

In 663, near the end of the Korean Three Kingdoms period, the Battle of Baekgang (白村江) took place.
The Nihon Shoki records that Yamato sent 32,000 troops and 1,000 ships to support Baekje against the Silla-Tang force.
However, these ships were intercepted and defeated by a Silla-Tang fleet.
Baekje, without aid and surrounded by Silla and Tang forces on land, collapsed.
Silla, now viewing Wa Japan as a hostile rival, prevented Japan from having any further meaningful contact with the Korean Peninsula until a far later time.
The Japanese then turned directly to China.

===
Nara period (710–794 AD) ===
In many ways, the Nara period was the beginning of Japanese culture as we know it today.
It was in this period that Buddhism, the Chinese writing system, and a codified system of laws made their appearance.
The country was unified and centralized, with basic features of the later feudal system.
Succession disputes were prevalent during this period, just as in most of the later periods.

Much of the discipline, weapons, and armor of the samurai came to be during this period, as techniques of mounted archery, swordsmanship, and spear fighting were adopted and developed.

The Nara period saw the appointment of the first Sei-i Tai-shōgun, Ōtomo no Otomaro by the Emperor in 794 CE.
The shōgun was the military dictator of Japan with near absolute power over territories via the military.
Otomaro was declared "Sei-i Taishōgun" which means "Barbarian-subduing Great General".
Emperor Kanmu granted the second title of Sei-i Tai-shōgun to Sakanoue no Tamuramaro for subduing the Emishi in northern Honshu.

===
Heian period (794–1185 AD) ===
The Heian Period marks a crucial shift, away from a state that was united in relative peace against outside threats to one that did not fear invasion and, instead, focused on internal division and clashes between ruling factions of samurai clans, over political power and control of the line of succession to the Chrysanthemum Throne.

With the exception of the Mongol invasions of the 13th century, Japan did not face a considerable outside threat until the arrival of Europeans in the 16th century.
Thus, pre-modern Japanese military history is largely defined not by wars with other states, but by internal conflicts.
The tactics of the samurai of this period involved archery and swordsmanship.
Nearly all duels and battles began with an exchange of arrow fire and then hand-to-hand combat with swords and daggers.

The Imperial family struggled against the control of the Fujiwara clan, which almost exclusively monopolized the post of regent (Sesshō and Kampaku).
Feudal conflicts over land, political power, and influence eventually culminated in the Genpei War (1180–1185).
This was a national civil war between the two most powerful clans: the Taira and Minamoto clans.
They fought for control over the declining Imperial Court in Kyoto.
Each side had a large number of smaller allied clans.
The Battle of Dan-no-Ura was a major naval battle between these clans on April 25, 1185.
Minamoto had a fleet of 300 ships and Taira had 400 to 500 ships.
It resulted in a decisive victory for the Minamoto clan and the destruction of the Taira clan.
The end of the Genpei War brought the end of the Heian period and the beginning of the Kamakura period.

==
Feudal Japan ==
This period is marked by the departure from relatively small or medium-sized clan-like battles, to massive clashes of clans over the control of Japan.
The establishment of the Kamakura shogunate coincided with the ascendancy of the samurai class over the aristocratic nobility kuge (公家) of the Imperial Court.
The Shogunates were military governments and de facto rulers of Japan.
They dominated Japanese politics for nearly seven hundred years (1185–1868), subverting the power of the Emperor as a figurehead and the Imperial Court in Kyoto.

In the Kamakura period, Japan successfully repulsed the Mongol invasions, and this saw a large growth in the size of military forces, with samurai as an elite force and as commanders.
Following roughly fifty years of bitter fighting over control of the Imperial succession, the Muromachi period, under the Ashikaga shogunate, saw a brief period of peace as the power of the traditional systems of administration by the Imperial Court gradually declined.
Later, the position of the provincial governors and other officials under the shogunate slowly gave way into a new class of daimyōs (feudal lords) in the early 11th century.
The Daimyō were protected by samurai and they dominated Japan's internal politics.
This brought the Japanese archipelago into a period of 150 years of fractious disunity and war.
===
Kamakura period (1185–1333) ===
Before the establishment of the Kamakura shogunate, civil power in Japan was primarily held by the ruling emperors and their regents.
The regents were typically appointed from the ranks of the imperial court and the aristocratic clans that vied there.
Military affairs were handled under the auspices of the civil government.
After defeating their main rival the Taira clan, the Minamoto clan established the Kamakura shogunate.
Minamoto
no Yoritomo seized power from the central government and the aristocracy and established a feudal system based in Kamakura.
The samurai gained political power over the aristocratic nobility (kuge) of the Imperial Court in Kyoto.
Emperor Go-Toba and the aristocracy remained the de jure rulers.
In 1192, Yoritomo was awarded the title of Sei-i Taishōgun by Emperor Go-Toba.
The political system that Yoritomo developed with a succession of shōguns as the head became known as a shogunate.
This brought a period of peace.
The battles fought during this period mainly consisted of agents of the Minamoto suppressing rebellions.
Yoritomo's wife's family, the Hōjō, seized power from the Kamakura shōguns.
When Yoritomo's sons and heirs were assassinated, the shōgun himself became a hereditary figurehead.
Real power rested with the Hōjō regents.
The Kamakura shogunate lasted for almost 150 years, from 1192 to 1333.
The Mongol invasions of Japan (1274 and 1281) were the most important wars of the Kamakura period and defining events in Japanese history.

Japan's remote location makes it secure against invaders from the Asian continent.
The Japanese archipelago is surrounded by vast seas and has rugged, mountainous terrain with steep rivers.
Kyushu is closest to the southernmost point of the Korean peninsula with a distance of 190 km (120 mi).
That's almost 6 times farther away than from England to France 33.3 km (20.7 mi).
Throughout history, Japan was never fully invaded nor colonized by foreigners.
Japan only surrendered once after World War
II.Gorō
Nyūdō Masamune (五郎入道正宗, Priest Gorō Masamune, c.1264–1343), is recognized as Japan's greatest swordsmith.
He created the finest swords and daggers (called tachi and tantō), in the Soshu tradition.

====
First Mongol Invasion (1274) ====
In the 13th century, the Mongols conquered and controlled China under the Yuan dynasty.
Subsequently, they attempted to invade Japan twice.
In early October 1274, the Battle of Bun'ei began with a combined force of Mongols and Koreans.
They arrived on ships and seized the Japanese islands Tsushima, Iki island, Hirato island, Taka and Nokono.
The Mongols slaughtered the inhabitants of Tsushima and about 1000 Japanese soldiers were killed on Iki island.
When the Mongols arrived on Japan's mainland of Kyushu they encountered the first real Japanese army.
During the Battle of Akasaka the Japanese won with a surprise attack by the forces of Kikuchi Takefusa.
The second victory was at the Battle of Torikai-Gata where the samurai of Takezaki Suenaga and Shiraishi Michiyasu killed 3,500 Mongols.
The Mongol army and Hong Dagu withdrew to their ships towards the Yuan Dynasty.
The Japanese army conducted night attacks and killed as many soldiers as they could.
On the night of October 19, a typhoon caused one-third of their returning ships to sink and many Mongol soldiers drowned.
This typhoon was called the Kamikaze which means 'divinely conjured wind'.

====
Second Mongol Invasion (1281) ====
The Kamakura shogunate anticipated a second invasion so they constructed walls and fortresses along the shore and gathered forces to defend it.
The second Mongol invasion was the largest naval invasion in history until D-Day.
In the spring of 1281, Kublai Khan sent two separate forces.
An impressive 900 ships containing 40,000 Yuan troops set out from Masan, Korea, while an even larger force of 100,000 sailed from southern China in 3,500 ships.
The Mongols planned an overwhelming coordinated attack by the combined imperial Yuan fleets.
The Chinese fleet of the Yuan was delayed by difficulties in provisioning and manning their large number of ships.
This culminated in the Battle of Kōan.
The Eastern Route Army arrived at Hakata Bay in Kyushu on June 21, 1281.
They proceeded without the larger southern force.
Waves of samurai responded and prevented the Mongols from forming a beachhead.
The samurai used a harassment tactic by boarding the Yuan ships with small boats at night.
They killed many of the Yuan forces in the bay and the samurai left before dawn.
This caused the Yuan to retreat to Tsushima.
During the next few weeks up to 3000 Yuan were killed in close quarters.
On July 16, the first of the Southern force ships arrived.
By August 12, the two fleets were ready to attack Japan.
However, on August 15 a major typhoon (kamikaze) struck the Tsushima Strait.
It lasted two full days and destroyed most of the Yuan fleet.
Over 4,000 ships were destroyed in the storm; 80 percent of the Yuan soldiers drowned or were killed by samurai on the beaches.
The loss of ships was so great that "a person could walk across from one point of land to another on a mass of wreckage".
The equipment, tactics, and military attitudes of the samurai and their Mongol opponents differed greatly, and while both invasions failed miserably, their impact on developments and changes in samurai battle were quite significant.
The samurai remained attached to ideas of single combat, that of honorable battle between individual warriors, and to certain ritual elements of battle, such as a series of archery exchanges conducted before entering into hand-to-hand fighting.
The Mongols, of course, knew nothing of Japanese conventions, and were arguably much more organized in their strike tactics.
They did not select individual opponents with whom to conduct honorable duels, but rode forth on horseback, with various forms of gunpowder weapons and the famous Mongol bow, charging into enemy lines and killing as many as they could without regard to Japanese conceptions of protocol.
Though archery and mounted combat were central to Japanese warfare at this time as well, the Mongols remain famous even today for their prowess in these matters.
The ways that samurai tactics and attitudes were affected by these experiences are difficult to ascertain, but they were certainly significant.
====
Kusunoki Masashige ====
One of the greatest samurai was Kusunoki Masashige.
He lived during the Kamakura period and represents the ideal of samurai loyalty.
Kusunoki fought against the Kamakura shogunate in the Genkō War (1331–1333) to restore power to Emperor Go-Daigo.
Kusunoki was also a brilliant tactician and strategist.
The defense of two key Loyalist fortresses at Akasaka, the Siege of Akasaka, and Chihaya, the Siege of Chihaya, helped enable Emperor Go-Daigo to briefly regain power.
In 1333, Go-Daigo rewarded Kusunoki with governorship of Settsu Province and Kawachi Province.
The Meiji government posthumously gave Kusunoki the highest decoration of Senior First Rank in 1880.
Kusunoki "stands in the history of his country as the ideal figure of a warrior, compact of civil and military virtues in a high degree."

===
Muromachi period (1336–1467) ===
The shogunate fell in the wake of the 1331 Genkō War, an uprising against the shogunate organized by the Emperor Go-Daigo.
After a brief period under true Imperial rule, the Ashikaga shogunate was established in 1336, and a series of conflicts known as the Nanboku-chō wars began.
For over fifty years, the archipelago became embroiled in disputes over control of Imperial succession, and thus over the country.

Battles grew larger in this period, and were less ritualized.
Though single combats and other elements of ritual and honorable battle remained, organized strategies and tactics under military commanders began to emerge, along with a greater degree of organization of formations and divisions within armies.
It was in this period, as well, that weaponsmithing techniques emerged, creating so-called "Japanese steel" blades, flexible yet extremely hard and sharp.
The katana, and myriad similar or related blade weapons, appeared at this time and would dominate Japanese arms, relatively unchanged, through the mid-20th century.
As a result, it was also during this period that the shift of samurai from being archers to swordsmen began in a significant way.

===
Sengoku period (1467–1603) ===
The Sengoku Period is marked by social upheaval, political intrigue and near-constant military conflict.
Less than a century after the end of the Nanboku-chō Wars, peace under the relatively weak Ashikaga shogunate was disrupted by the outbreak of the Ōnin War (1467–1477).
This was a civil war between the Ashikaga shogunate and numerous daimyō.
The ancient capital of Kyoto was converted into a battlefield and a heavily fortified city that suffered severe destruction.

The authority of both the shogunate and the Imperial Court had weakened, and provincial Governors (shugo) and other local samurai leaders emerged as the daimyōs, who battled each other, religious factions (e.g. the Ikkō-ikki), and others for land and power for the next 150 years or so.
The period has come to be called the Sengoku period, after the Warring States period in ancient Chinese history.
Over one hundred domains clashed and warred throughout the archipelago, as clans rose and fell, boundaries shifted, and some of the largest battles in all of global pre-modern history were fought.

A great many developments and significant events took place during this period, ranging from advances in castle design to the advent of the cavalry charge, the further development of campaign strategies on a grand scale, and the significant changes brought on by the introduction of firearms.
The composition of the army changed, with masses of ashigaru, footsoldiers armed with long lances (yari), archers, and, later, gunners serving alongside mounted samurai.
Naval battles likewise consisted of little more than using boats to move troops within range of bow or arquebus, and then into hand-to-hand fighting.

The long-standing rivalry between the daimyo Takeda Shingen of Kai Province and Uesugi Kenshin of Echigo Province are legendary.
The Battles of Kawanakajima between the armies of Shingen and Kenshin (1553–1564) are one of the most cherished tales in Japanese military history and the epitome of Japanese chivalry and romance.
They're mentioned in epic literature, woodblock printing and movies.
In the first conflict between Shingen and Kenshin they were very cautious, only committing themselves to indecisive skirmishes.
There were a total of five engagements at Kawanakajima.
Only the fourth battle was a serious, all-out battle between the two.
During the fourth battle, Kenshin's forces cleared a path through the Takeda troops and Kenshin engaged Shingen in single combat.
Kenshin attacked Shingen with his sword while Shingen defended with his Japanese war fan (tessen).
Both lords lost many men in this fight, and Shingen in particular lost two of his main generals, Yamamoto Kansuke and his younger brother Takeda Nobushige.
After the death of Shingen, Tokugawa Ieyasu borrowed heavily from Shingen's governmental and military innovations after he had taken leadership of Kai Province during Toyotomi Hideyoshi's rise to power.
Many of these designs were used by the Tokugawa shogunate.

The Hōjō clan, in and around the Kantō region, were among the first to establish networks of satellite castles, and the complex use of these castles both for mutual defense and coordinated attacks.
The Takeda, under Takeda Shingen, developed the Japanese equivalent of the cavalry charge.
Though debate continues today as to the force of his charges, and the appropriateness of comparing them to Western cavalry charges, it is evident from contemporary sources that it was a revolutionary development, and powerful against defenders unused to it.
The Battles of the Sengoku period of particular interest or significance are too numerous to list here.
Suffice to say this period saw a myriad of strategic and tactical developments, and some of the longest sieges and largest battles in the history of the early modern world.

====
Azuchi–Momoyama period (1568–1600) ====
This was the final phase of the Sengoku period.
It's named for the increasingly important castle-cities, is marked by the introduction of firearms, after contact with the Portuguese, and a further push towards all-out battle, away from individual combats and concepts of personal honor and bravery.

The arquebus was introduced to Japan in 1543, by Portuguese on board a Chinese ship that crashed upon the tiny island of Tanegashima in the southernmost parts of the Japanese archipelago.
Though the weapon's introduction was not seen to have particularly dramatic effects for several decades, by the 1560s thousands of gunpowder weapons were in use in Japan, and began to have revolutionary effects upon Japanese tactics, strategy, army compositions, and castle architecture.

The 1575 Battle of Nagashino, in which about 3,000 arquebusiers led by Oda Nobunaga cut down charging ranks of thousands of samurai, remains one of the chief examples of the effect of these weapons.
Highly inaccurate, and taking a long time to reload, arquebusses, or hinawa-jū (火縄銃) as they are called in Japanese, did not win battles on their own.
Oda Nobunaga, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and other commanders developed tactics that honed arquebus use to the greatest advantage.
At Nagashino, Nobunaga's gunners hid behind wooden barricades, embedded with large wooden spikes to ward off cavalry, and took turns firing volleys and reloading.

As in Europe, the debilitating effects of wet (and therefore largely useless) gunpowder were decisive in a number of battles.
But, one of the key advantages of the weapon was that unlike bows, which required years of training largely available only to the samurai class, guns could be used by relatively untrained footmen.
Samurai stuck to their swords and their bows, engaging in cavalry or infantry tactics, while the ashigaru wielded the guns.
Some militant Buddhist factions began to produce firearms in foundries normally employed to make bronze temple bells.
In this manner, the Ikkō-ikki, a group of monks and lay religious zealots, turned their Ishiyama Honganji cathedral-fortress into some of the most well-defended fortresses in the country.
The ikki and a handful of other militant religious factions thus became powers unto themselves, and fought fierce battles against some of the chief generals and samurai clans of the archipelago.

Though civil strife continued to rage as it had for the previous century, the battles growing larger and more tactically complex, it was at this time that the many "warring states" began to be united.
There were 3 powerful daimyō who unified the Japanese archipelago.
In the second half of the 16th century, Japan was first fully unified by daimyō Oda Nobunaga and then by Toyotomi Hideyoshi.
The third daimyō who unified Japan was Tokugawa Ieyasu after the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600.
This resulted in 268 years of uninterrupted rule by the Tokugawa clan.
With an ambition to conquer China's Ming Dynasty, Toyotomi Hideyoshi requested passage through the Korean peninsula from the King of Joseon.
Upon being refused, Hideyoshi launched invasions of Korea with an army of 158,800 soldiers between 1592 and 1598.
The Japanese army quickly captured several major cities from the unprepared Joseon kingdom including the capital, causing the king to retreat and request military aid from China.
With the arrival of the Chinese army, the joint Chinese-Korean troops pushed the Japanese army down to the southeast of the Korean peninsula where a military stalemate was established by 1594.
Concurrently, the "Righteous Army" of Korean civilians waged guerilla warfare and Admiral Yi Sun-sin repeatedly disrupted the Japanese supply lines at sea.
After Hideyoshi's death, the Council of Five Elders ordered the remaining Japanese forces in Korea to retreat.

The Battle of Sekigahara was the last major battle of the Sengoku period on October 21, 1600.
This was a huge battle between the forces loyal to Toyotomi Hideyori versus Tokugawa Ieyasu.
Hideyori's Western Army consisted of many clans from Western Japan with a total of 120,000 men.
The Eastern Army was 75,000 men strong with clans from Eastern Japan.
The decisive victory of the Eastern Army solidified the rule of Tokugawa Ieyasu.
In 1603, Ieyasu was appointed with the title of shōgun by Emperor Go-Yōzei.
This made Ieyasu the nominal ruler of the whole country of Japan.
The Tokugawa shogunate was the last shogunate until the Meiji Restoration in 1867.

==
Early modern period ==


===
Edo period (1603–1867) ===
This period was one of relative peace under the authority of the Tokugawa shogunate, a forced peace that was maintained through a variety of measures that weakened the daimyōs and ensured their loyalty to the shogunate.
Since 1660, Japan had 200 years of peace with no major domestic or foreign conflicts.
The Tokugawa peace was ruptured only rarely and briefly prior to the violence that surrounded the Meiji Restoration of the 1860s.

The lack of warfare caused the samurai to increasingly become courtiers, bureaucrats, and administrators rather than warriors.
The conduct of samurai served as role model behavior for the other social classes.

Miyamoto Musashi was one of the most famous Japanese swordsman, philosopher, strategist, writer and rōnin who lived from 1584 to 1645.
He became the Kensei (sword saint) of Japan.
He had a unique double-bladed swordsmanship (Nito-Ichi-ryū) and an undefeated record in 61 duels.
He wrote the classic Japanese martial arts literature
The Book of Five Rings and Dokkōdō
(The Path of Aloneness).The Tokugawa Shogunate enforced the policy of Sakoku ("closed country"), which prohibited most foreign contact and trade between 1641 and 1853.
Under the policy, most foreign nationals were barred from entering Japan and common Japanese people couldn't leave.
By restricting the daimyōs' ability to trade with foreign ships coming to Japan or pursue trade opportunities overseas, the Tokugawa shogunate could ensure none would become powerful enough to challenge its supremacy.

The Siege of Osaka, which took place in 1614–1615, was essentially the last gasp for Toyotomi Hideyori, heir to Hideyoshi, and an alliance of clans and other elements who opposed the shogunate.
A samurai battle on a grand scale, in terms of strategy, scale, methods employed, and the political causes behind it, this is widely considered the final conflict of the Sengoku period.

Outside of the siege of Osaka, and the later conflicts of the 1850s to 1860s, violence in the Edo period was restricted to small skirmishes in the streets, peasant rebellions, and the enforcement of maritime restrictions.
Social tension in the Edo period brought a number of rebellions and uprisings, the largest of which was the 1638 Shimabara Rebellion.
In the far north of the country, the island of Hokkaido was inhabited by Ainu villagers and Japanese settlers.
In 1669, an Ainu leader led a revolt against the Matsumae clan who controlled the region, and it was the last major uprising against Japanese control of the region.
It was put down in 1672.
In 1789, another Ainu revolt, the Menashi–Kunashir Rebellion, was crushed.

The Bakumatsu were the final years of the Tokugawa Shogunate and the isolationist Sakoku policy between 1853 and 1867.
The appearance of gunboat diplomacy in Japan in the 1850s, and the forced so-called "opening of Japan" by Western forces, underscored the weakness of the shogunate and led to its collapse.
Though the actual end of the shogunate and establishment of an Imperial Western-style government was handled peacefully, through political petitions and other methods, the years surrounding the event were not entirely bloodless.
Following the formal termination of the shogunate, the Boshin War (戊辰戦争, Boshin Sensō, "War of the Year of the Yang Earth Dragon") was fought in 1868–1869 between the Tokugawa army and a number of factions of nominally pro-Imperial forces.

==
Modern period ==
Since the first visit of Commodore Perry to Edo Bay in July 1853, Japan lacked industrial and military power to prevent western coercion with unequal treaties that took advantage of Japan.
Japan had antiquated and decentralized military forces.
The feudal lords were pressured into signing multiple treaties with the Americans known as “The Unequal Treaties”.
Thereafter in 1853 six island fortifications with cannon batteries were built at Odaiba in Edo Bay by Egawa Hidetatsu for the Tokugawa shogunate.
The purpose was to protect Edo from another American incursion.
Thereafter Industrial developments started in order to build modern cannons.
A reverbatory furnace was established by Egawa Hidetatsu in Nirayama to cast cannons.
It was completed in 1857.Japan was determined to avoid the fate of other Asian countries which were colonized by western imperial powers.
The Japanese people and the government with Emperor Meiji realized that in order to preserve the independence of Japan it had to modernize to become an equal of the western colonial powers.
In 1868 Tokugawa Yoshinobu resigned which ended the Tokugawa dynasty and the last shogunate.
The Meiji Restoration restored practical abilities and the political system under Emperor Meiji.
This caused enormous change in Japan's political and social structure from the late Edo Period to the early Meiji Period.
Japan set out to "gather wisdom from all over the world" and embarked on an ambitious program of military, social, political, and economic reforms.
Japan quickly transformed in one generation from an isolated feudal society to a modern industrialized nation state and an emerging great power.
After a long period of peace, Japan quickly rearmed and modernized by importing western weapons, then manufacturing them domestically, and finally by manufacturing weapons of Japanese design.
Japan was the first non-European country to industrialize.
During the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905), Japan became the first modern Asian nation to win a war against a European nation.
In 1902, it became the first Asian nation to sign a mutual defense pact with a European nation, Britain.

Japan was influenced by Western imperialism in Asia which caused Japan to participate as a colonial power.
Japan was the last major power to enter the race for global colonization.
It expanded rapidly, with colonial acquisitions, from 1895 till 1942.
The Empire of Japan was one of the largest in history.
It included colonies in Manchuria, China, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, Indochina, Burma and many Pacific islands.
In 1937, Japan had one-sixth the industrial capacity than the USA.
The Japanese industry was dependent on the shipment of raw materials from Japan's overseas territories and foreign imports.
A series of increasingly stringent economic embargoes on raw materials by the United States such as the Japanese Oil Embargo (1940–1941) pushed the Empire of Japan into conflict with the United States.

===
Meiji era (1868–1912) ===


====
Modern army established ====
In the mid-19th century Japan didn't have a unified national army.
The country consisted of feudal domains (han) with the Tokugawa shogunate (bakufu) in overall control since 1603.
The bakufu army was a large force, but only one among others.
The Shogunate's efforts to control the nation depended upon the cooperation of its vassal Daimyos' armies.
From 1867, Japan requested various Western military missions in order to help Japan to modernize its armed forces.
The first foreign military mission in Japan was held by France in 1867.

On June 29, 1869 Emperor Meiji founded a Shinto shrine called Tōkyō Shōkonsha in Kudan, Tokyo (present-day Chiyoda, Tokyo).
It was established in the wake of the Boshin War (1868–1869) to honor those who died for the Emperor.
It was renamed to Yasukuni Shrine by the Emperor in 1879 which literally means "Pacifying the Nation".

The Emperor wrote a poem “I assure those of you who fought and died for your country that your names will live forever at this shrine in Musashino.”
The Yasukuni Shrine commemorates the honor and achievements of the millions of men, women, children and pets who died in service of Japan from the Boshin War to the First Indochina War (1946–1954).
Later the shrine would include the worship of all who died serving in wars involving Japan since 1853 such as the Taishō and Shōwa period.
In 1871, the politicians Iwakura Tomomi and Ōkubo Toshimichi led the organization of a national army.
It consisted exclusively of 10,000 strong samurai.
Ōkubo was also a samurai of Satsuma and he was one of the Three Great Nobles of the Restoration and one of the main founders of modern Japan.
In 1873, the Imperial government asked the newly appointed War Minister Yamagata Aritomo (山縣 有朋, June 14, 1838 – February 1, 1922) to organize a national army for Japan.
So Yamagata convinced the government and enacted a conscription law in 1873 which established the new Imperial Japanese Army.
The law established military service for males of all classes, for a duration of 3 years, with an additional 4 years in the reserve.
Yamagata modernized and modeled it after the Prussian Army.
Duke Yamagata Aritomo was born in a lower ranked samurai family from Hagi.
He was a field marshal in the Imperial Japanese Army and twice Prime Minister of Japan.
He was one of the main architects of the military and political foundations of early modern Japan.
Yamagata Aritomo is regarded as the father of Japanese militarism.
The principal officer training school for the Imperial Japanese Army was established as the Heigakkō in Kyoto in 1868.
It was renamed in 1874 to the Imperial Japanese Army Academy
(陸軍士官学校, Rikugun Shikan Gakkō) and relocated to Ichigaya, Tokyo.
The second Army Academy was built by the second French Military Mission to Japan.
The inauguration was in 1875.
This was an important Military Academy for Japanese Army officers.
It is on the same ground as the modern Japan Ministry of Defense.
The second French Military Mission also helped reorganize the Imperial Japanese Army, and establish the first draft law (January 1873).
Some members of the mission became some of the first western students of Japanese martial arts in history.
Such as Étienne de Villaret  and Joseph Kiehl
were members of the dojo of Sakakibara Kenkichi and learned Jikishinkage-ryu.
Captain Jules Brunet, initially a French artillery advisor of the Japanese central government, eventually took up arms alongside the Shōgun Tokugawa Yoshinobu's army against the Imperial troops during the Boshin War.

Class distinctions were mostly eliminated during modernization to create a representative democracy.
The samurai lost their status as the only class with military privileges.
However, during the Meiji period, most leaders in Japanese society (politics, business and military) were ex-samurai or descendants of samurai.
They shared a set of values and outlooks that supported Japanese militarism.
Thus the military class that began with the samurai in 1192 CE continued to rule Japan.

The Constitution of the Empire of Japan was enacted on November 29, 1890.
It was a form of mixed constitutional and absolute monarchy.
The Emperor of Japan was legally the supreme leader, and the Cabinet were his followers.
The Prime Minister would be elected by a Privy Council.
In reality, the Emperor was head of state but the Prime Minister was the actual head of government.

==== Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895) ====
The Sino-Japanese War was fought against the forces of the Qing dynasty of China in the Korean Peninsula, Manchuria, and the coast of China.
It was the first major conflict between Japan and an overseas military power in modern times.

The conflict was primarily over influence in Korea.
After more than six months of unbroken successes by Japanese land and naval forces and the loss of the port of Weihaiwei, the Qing government sued for peace in February 1895.

The war demonstrated the failure of the Qing dynasty's attempts to modernize its military and fend off threats to its sovereignty, especially when compared with Japan's successful Meiji Restoration.
For the first time, regional dominance in East Asia shifted from China to Japan; The prestige of the Qing Dynasty, along with the classical tradition in China, suffered a major blow.
The Qing's loss of Korea as a tributary state sparked an unprecedented public outcry.
Throughout most of history Korea was a tributary state and vassal state of multiple Chinese dynasties.
Japan's victory of the First Sino-Japanese War put Korea completely under Japanese control.
Korea became a Japanese vassal state.

The Treaty of Shimonoseki (下関条約, Shimonoseki Jyoyaku) signed between Japan and China ended the war.
Through this treaty, Japan forced China to open ports for international trade and cede the southern portion of China's Liaoning province as well as the island of Taiwan to Japan.
China also had to pay a war indemnity of 200 million Kuping taels.
As a result of this war, Korea ceased to be a tributary state of China, but fell into Japan's sphere of influence.
However, many of the material gains from this war were lost by Japan due to the Triple Intervention.
Korea was fully annexed by Japan with the Japan–Korea Treaty of 1910 signed by Ye Wanyong, Prime Minister of Korea, and Terauchi Masatake, who became the first Japanese Governor-General of Korea.
====
Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1895) ====
The Japanese occupation of Taiwan was strongly resisted by various interests on the island, and was only completed after a full-scale military campaign requiring the commitment of the Imperial Guards Division and most of the 2nd and 4th Provincial Divisions.
The campaign began in late May 1895 with a Japanese landing at Keelung, on the northern coast of Taiwan, and ended in October 1895 with the Japanese capture of Tainan, the capital of the self-styled Republic of Formosa.
The Japanese defeated regular Chinese and Formosan formations relatively easily but their marching columns were often harassed by guerillas.

The Japanese responded with brutal reprisals, and sporadic resistance to their occupation of Taiwan continued until 1902.

====
The Boxer Rebellion ====
The Eight-Nation Alliance was an international military coalition set up in response to the Boxer Rebellion in the Qing Empire of China.
The eight nations were the Empire of Japan, the Russian Empire, the British Empire, the French Third Republic, the United States, the German Empire, the Kingdom of Italy and the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
In the summer of 1900, when the extra-jurisdictional international legations in Beijing came under attack by Boxer rebels supported by the Qing government, the coalition dispatched their armed forces, in the name of "humanitarian intervention", to defend their respective nations' citizens, as well as a number of Chinese Christians who had taken shelter in the legations.
The incident ended with a coalition victory and the signing of the Boxer Protocol.

==== Russo-Japanese War ====

Following the First Sino-Japanese War, and the humiliation of the forced return of the Liaotung peninsula to China under Russian pressure (the "Triple Intervention"), Japan began to build up its military strength in preparation for further confrontations.
Japan promulgated a ten-year naval build-up program, under the slogan "Perseverance and determination" (Jp:臥薪嘗胆, Gashinshoutan),  in which it commissioned 109 warships, for a total of 200,000 tons, and increased its Navy personnel from 15,100 to 40,800.

These dispositions culminated with the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905).
The battleship Mikasa was the flagship of admiral Tōgō Heihachirō.
At the Battle of Tsushima, the Mikasa with Admiral Tōgō led the Combined Fleet of the Imperial Japanese Navy into what has been called "the most decisive naval battle in history".
The Russian fleet was almost completely annihilated: out of 38 Russian ships, 21 were sunk, 7 captured,
6 disarmed, 4,545 Russian servicemen died and 6,106 were taken prisoner.
On the other hand, the Japanese only lost 117 men and 3 torpedo boats.
This overwhelming victory made admiral Tōgō one of Japan's greatest naval heroes.

The Japanese victory in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905 marks the emergence of Japan as a major military power.
Japan demonstrated that it could apply Western technology, discipline, strategy, and tactics effectively.
The war concluded with the Treaty of Portsmouth.
The complete victory of the Japanese military surprised world observers.
The consequences transformed the balance of power in East Asia.

The Battle of Yalu River was the first major land battle during the Russo-Japanese War from 30 April to 1 May 1904.
It was also the first victory in decades of an Asian power over a European power.
It marked Russia's inability to match Japan's military prowess.
Western powers viewed Japan's victory over Russia as the emergence of a new Asian regional power.
With the Russian defeat, some scholars have argued that the war had set in motion a change in the global world order with the emergence of Japan as not only a regional power, but rather, the main Asian power.

===
Taishō era and World War
I (1912–1926) ===
The Empire of Japan was a member of the Allies during World War I.
As an ally of Great Britain, Japan declared war on Germany in 1914.
Japan quickly seized the German island colonies the Mariana Islands, Caroline Islands and Marshall Islands in the Pacific.

The Japanese seaplane carrier Wakamiya conducted the world's first successful naval-launched air raids on 5 September 1914 and during the first months of World War I from Kiaochow Bay off Tsingtao.
On 6 September 1914 was the very first air-sea battle in history.
A Farman aircraft launched by Wakamiya attacked the Austro-Hungarian cruiser Kaiserin Elisabeth and the German gunboat Jaguar off Tsingtao.
Four seaplanes bombarded German land targets.
The Germans surrendered on 6 November 1914.During
the Russian Civil War the Allied Powers intervened in Russia.
The Empire of Japan sent the largest military force of 70,000 soldiers to the eastern region.
They supported anti-communist White forces in Russia.
The Allied Powers withdrew in 1920.
The Japanese military stayed until 1925 following the signing of the Soviet–Japanese Basic Convention.
A small group of Japanese cruisers and destroyers also participated in various missions in the Indian Ocean and Mediterranean Sea.

In 1921, during the Interwar period, Japan developed and launched the Hōshō, which was the first purpose-designed aircraft carrier in the world.
Japan subsequently developed a fleet of aircraft carriers that was second to none.
===
Shōwa era and World War II (1926–1945) ===
Already controlling the area along the South Manchuria Railroad, Japan's Kwantung Army further invaded Manchuria (Northeast China) in 1931, following the Mukden Incident, in where Japan claimed to have had territory attacked by the Chinese.
By 1937, Japan had annexed territory north of Beijing and, following the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, a full-scale invasion of China began.
Japanese military superiority over a weak and demoralized Chinese Republican army allowed for swift advances down the eastern coast, leading to the fall of Shanghai and Nanjing (Nanking, then capital of the Republic of China)
the same year.
The Chinese suffered greatly in both military and civilian casualties.
An estimated 300,000 civilians were killed during the first weeks of Japanese occupation of Nanjing, during the Nanking Massacre.

In September 1940, Germany, Italy, and Japan became allies under the Tripartite Pact.
Germany, which had previously trained and supplied the Chinese army, halted all Sino-German cooperation, and recalled its military advisor (Alexander von Falkenhausen).
In July 1940, the U.S. banned the shipment of aviation gasoline to Japan, while Imperial Japanese Army invaded French Indochina and occupied its naval and air bases in September 1940.

In April 1941, the Empire of Japan and the Soviet Union signed a neutrality pact and Japan increased pressure on the Vichy French and Dutch colonies in Southeast Asia to cooperate in economic matters.
Following Japan's refusal to withdraw from the Republic of China (with the exclusion of Manchukuo) and Indochina; the United States, Great Britain, and the Netherlands imposed an embargo (July 22, 1941) on gasoline, while shipments of scrap metal, steel, and other materials had virtually ceased.
Meanwhile, American economic support to China began to increase.

Hideki Tojo was a politician and general of the Imperial Japanese Army.
Politically, he was a fascist, nationalist, and militarist.
Tojo served as Prime Minister of the Empire of Japan during most of the Pacific War (his tenure being October 17, 1941 to July 22, 1944).
Tojo supported a preventive war against the United States.
Isoroku Yamamoto was the most famous military commander.
He was a Fleet Admiral of the Imperial Japanese Navy and the commander-in-chief of the Combined Fleet during World War II.
Isoroku's extensive naval career started when he served on the armored cruiser Nisshin during the Russo-Japanese War (1904–1905).
He oversaw many naval operations such as the attack on Pearl Harbor, Battle of the Java Sea, Battle of the Coral Sea and the Battle of Midway.
He became an exalted naval hero.
Hiroyoshi Nishizawa was arguably the most successful Japanese flying ace of the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service with an estimated 120 to 150 victories.
Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and against several other countries on December 7–8, 1941, the United States, United Kingdom, and other Allies declared war.
The Second Sino-Japanese War became part of the global conflict of World War II.
Japanese forces initially experienced great success against Allied forces in the Pacific and Southeast Asia, capturing Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaya, Singapore, the Dutch East Indies, the Philippines, and many Pacific Islands.
They also undertook major offensives in Burma and launched air and naval attacks against Australia.
The Allies turned the tide of war at sea in mid-1942, at the Battle of Midway.
Japanese land forces continued to advance in the New Guinea and Solomon Islands campaigns but suffered significant defeats or were forced to retreat at the battles of Milne Bay, the Kokoda Track, and Guadalcanal.
The Burma campaign turned, as the Japanese forces suffered catastrophic losses at Imphal and Kohima, leading to the greatest defeat in Japanese history up to that point.
From 1943 onwards, hard-fought campaigns at the battles of Buna-Gona, the Tarawa, the Philippine Sea, Leyte Gulf, Iwo Jima, Okinawa, and others resulted in horrific casualties, mostly on the Japanese side, and produced further Japanese retreats.
Very few Japanese ended up in POW camps.
This may have been due to Japanese soldiers' reluctance to surrender.
The Battle of Okinawa was the bloodiest battle of the Pacific War.
The total number of casualties shocked American military strategists.
This made them apprehensive to invade Japan's main islands, because it would result in a very high death toll.
The brutality of the conflict is exemplified by US troops taking body parts from dead Japanese soldiers as "war trophies" or "war souvenirs" and Japanese cannibalism.
During the Pacific War, some units of the Imperial Japanese Army engaged in war crimes.
This was in particular the mistreatment of prisoners of war and civilians.
Between 1937 and 1945, approximately 7,357,000 civilians died due to military activity in the Republic of China.
Mistreatment of Allied prisoners of war through forced labour and brutality received extensive coverage in the west.
During that period there were significant underlying cultural differences, because according to Bushido it was cowardly and shameful to surrender to the enemy.
Thus soldiers who surrendered had relinquished their honor and didn't deserve respect or basic treatment.
Fred Borch explained:

As Japan continued its modernization in the early 20th century, her armed forces became convinced that success in battle would be assured if Japanese soldiers, sailors, and airmen had the "spirit" of Bushido. ...
The result was that the Bushido code of behavior "was inculcated into the Japanese soldier as part of his basic training.
"
Each soldier was indoctrinated to accept that it was the greatest honor to die for the Emperor
and it was cowardly to surrender to the enemy. ...
Bushido therefore explains why the Japanese in the NEI so mistreated POWs in their custody.
Those who had surrendered to the Japanese—regardless of how courageously or honorably they had fought—merited nothing but contempt; they had forfeited all honor and literally deserved nothing.
Consequently, when the Japanese murdered POWs by shooting, beheading, and drowning, these acts were excused since they involved the killing of men who had forfeited all rights to be treated with dignity or respect.
While civilian internees were certainly in a different category from POWs, it is reasonable to think that there was a "spill-over" effect from the tenets of Bushido.

The Japanese government has been criticized for inadequate acknowledgement of the suffering caused during World War II in history teaching in its schools which caused international protest.
However, many Japanese officials such as Prime Ministers, Emperors, Chief Cabinet Secretaries and Minister for Foreign Affairs made more than 50 war apology statements from 1950 to 2015.
Japan also paid billions of dollars in war reparations for 23 years from 1955 till 1977.
Other countries have exploited the war guilt to boost nationalism and hostility against Japan.
For example, the Chinese Communist Party uses patriotism as a tool to alleviate social discontent over internal problems.
The Jiang Zemin government chose patriotism as a way to counterbalance the decline in socialist ideology.
This caused patriotism to be fostered through the Chinese educational system with an anti Japanese nature.
The anti-Japan protests in China in April 2005 were mostly young people with nationalist views.
The Chinese police force stood by idly during the violent protests.
On August 6 and August 9, 1945, the U.S. dropped two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
An estimated 150,000–246,000 people died as a direct result of these two bombings.
Japan didn't have nuclear weapon technology
so this new type of atomic bomb was a surprise.
Hiroshima was totally unprepared.
69% of Hiroshima's buildings were destroyed and 6% damaged.
At this time, on August 8, the Soviet Union entered the war against Japan.

Japan surrendered on August 15, 1945, and a formal Instrument of Surrender was signed on September 2, 1945, on the battleship USS Missouri in Tokyo Bay.
The surrender was accepted, from a Japanese delegation led by Mamoru Shigemitsu, by General Douglas MacArthur, as Supreme Allied Commander, along with representatives of each Allied nation.
A separate surrender ceremony between Japan and China was held in Nanking on September 9, 1945.

Throughout history Japan has never been fully invaded nor conquered by a foreign power.
Japan also never capitulated to a foreign power, thus Japan was unwilling to surrender.
However, Japan couldn't counter the destructive nuclear bombs of America.
So the Japanese thought it was better to accept the humiliating Potsdam Declaration and rebuild Japan rather than continue fighting with millions of casualties and decades of guerrilla warfare.
On August 15, 1945, a broadcast of a recorded speech of Emperor Shōwa was released to the public.
The last sentence is indicative: it is according to the dictates of time and fate that We have resolved to pave the way for a grand peace for all the generations to come by enduring the unendurable and suffering what is unsufferable.

Following the surrender, Douglas MacArthur established bases in Japan to oversee the postwar development of the country.
This period in Japanese history is known as the Occupation, when for the first time in history Japan was occupied by a foreign power.
U.S. President Harry Truman officially proclaimed an end to hostilities on December 31, 1946.
As the de facto military ruler of Japan, Douglas MacArthur's influence was so great that he was dubbed the Gaijin Shōgun (外人将軍).
The Allies (led by the United States) repatriated millions of ethnic Japanese from colonies and military camps throughout Asia.
This largely eliminated the Japanese Empire and restored the independence of its conquered territories.
Upon adoption of the 1947 constitution, Japan became the State of Japan (Nihon Koku, 日本国).
The Empire of Japan was dismantled and all overseas territories were lost.
Japan was reduced to the territories that were traditionally within the Japanese cultural sphere pre-1895: the four main islands (Honshu, Hokkaido, Kyushu, and Shikoku), the Ryukyu Islands, and the Nanpō Islands.
The Kuril Islands also historically belong to Japan.
The Kuril Islands were first inhabited by the Ainu people and then controlled by the Japanese Matsumae clan in the Edo Period.
However, the Kuril Islands weren't included due to a dispute with the Soviet Union.

Over the course of the war, Japan displayed many significant advances in military technology, strategy, and tactics.
Among them were the Yamato-class battleship, aircraft carrier innovation (e.g. Hōshō), the Sen-Toku submarine bomber carriers, Mitsubishi Zero fighters, Kamikaze bombers, type 91 torpedo, Nakajima Kikka, Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka, Kaiten human torpedoes and the Kairyū-class submarine.

==
Contemporary period ==


===
Shōwa era (Post-war) (1945–1989) ===
Post World War II, Japan was deprived of any military capability after signing the surrender agreement in 1945.
The U.S. occupation forces were fully responsible for protecting Japan from external threats.
Japan only had a minor police force for domestic security.
Japan was under the sole control of the United States.
This was the only time in Japanese history that it was occupied by a foreign power.
Unlike the occupation of Germany, other countries such as the Soviet Union had almost zero influence in Japan.
West Germany was allowed to write its own constitution under supervision of the Allies.
West Germany was at the forefront of the Cold War and wasn't required to include a pacifist clause in their constitution.
Meanwhile, general Douglas MacArthur had near complete control over Japanese politics.
Japan's 1947 constitution was mostly written by the United States and under the guidelines of General Douglas MacArthur.
This changed Japan's previous authoritarian system of quasi-absolute monarchy to a form of liberal democracy with a parliamentary-based political system.
The constitution guarantees civil and human rights.
The Emperor changed to a symbolic status as "the symbol of the State and of the unity of the people."
Douglas MacArthur included Article 9 which says Japan forever renounces war as an instrument for settling international disputes and declares that Japan will never again maintain "land, sea, or air forces or other war potential.
"
Japan became a pacifist country since September 1945.
The trauma of World War II produced strong pacifist sentiments among the nation.

There were growing external threats of the Cold War and Japan didn't have adequate forces to counter it.
During the Korean War (1950–1953) Japan was the forward logistics base and provided many supplies for US and UN forces.
The unilateral renunciation of all military capabilities was questioned by conservative politicians.
These sentiments were intensified in 1950 as occupation troops were moved from Japan to the Korean War (1950–53).
This left Japan virtually defenseless and vulnerable.
They thought a mutual defense relationship with the United States was needed to protect Japan from foreign threats.
In July 1950 the Japanese government, with the encouragement of the US occupation forces, established a National Police Reserve (警察予備隊 Keisatsu-yobitai).
This consisted of 75,000 men equipped with light infantry weapons.
This was the first step of its postwar rearmament.
In 1952, Coastal Safety Force (海上警備隊, Kaijō Keibitai), the waterborne counterpart of NPR, was also founded.
The Allied occupation of Japan ended after the signing of the Treaty of San Francisco on September 8, 1951, which became effective on April 28, 1952, thus restoring the sovereignty of Japan.

On 8 September 1951 the Security Treaty Between the United States and Japan was signed.
The treaty allowed United States forces stationed in Japan to deal with external aggression against Japan while Japanese ground and maritime forces dealt with internal threats and natural disasters.
The United States was permitted to act for the sake of maintaining peace in East Asia and could exert its power on Japanese domestic quarrels.
The treaty has lasted longer than any other alliance between two great powers since the Peace of Westphalia treaties in 1648.

Accordingly, in mid-1952, the National Police Reserve was expanded to 110,000 men and renamed the National Safety Forces.
The Coastal Safety Force was an embryonic navy that was transferred with the National Police Reserve to the National Safety Agency.

Strict civilian control over the military was established with the 1947-constitution to prevent the military from regaining overwhelming political power.
Thus soldiers, sailors and airforce members cannot be involved in political activities.
The Defense Agency of Japan stated that: "Painfully aware of the regrettable state of affairs that had prevailed in this country until the end of World War II, Japan has adopted systems of uncompromising civilian control that are entirely different from those that existed under the former Constitution, so that the JSDF should be established and operated in accordance with the will of the people."

The war-renunciation clause of Article 9 was the basis for strong political objections to any sort of armed force other than a conventional police force.
In 1954, however, separate land, sea, and air forces were created for defensive purposes, under the command of the Prime Minister.
The 1954 Self-Defense Forces Act (Act No.
165 of 1954) reorganized the National Security Board as the Defense Agency on July 1, 1954.
Afterward, the National Security Force was reorganized as the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (GSDF), which is the de facto post-war Japanese army.
The Coastal Safety Force was reorganized as the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF), which is the de facto Japanese Navy.
The Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF) was established as a new branch of the JSDF.
General Keizō Hayashi was appointed as the first Chairman of Joint Staff Council—professional head of the three branches.
Conscription was abolished on 3 May 1947.
Enlistment in the JSDF is voluntary at 18 years of age and older.
The Far East Air Force, U.S. Air Force, announced on 6 January 1955, that 85 aircraft would be turned over to the fledgling Japanese air force on about 15 January, the first equipment of the new force.
On 19 January 1960, the unequal status of Japan with the United States was corrected with the amended Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan by adding mutual defense obligations.
This treaty requires the US to pre-inform Japan of US army mobilization and to not impose itself concerning Japanese domestic issues.
Japan and the United States are obligated to assist each other if there's an armed attack in territories administered by Japan.
Japan and the United States are required to maintain capacities to resist common armed attacks.
This established a security alliance between Japan and the United States.
This treaty doesn't obligate Japan to defend the United States.

Japan is the only country to have suffered nuclear attacks in history.
Thus in 1967, Prime Minister Eisaku Satō outlined the Three Non-Nuclear Principles by which Japan stands against the production or possession of nuclear weaponry.
However, due to its high technology level and large number of operating nuclear power plants, Japan is considered to be "nuclear capable", i.e., it could develop usable nuclear weapons within one year if the political situation changed significantly.
Thus many analysts consider Japan a de facto nuclear state.
Numerous politicians such as Shinzo Abe and Yasuo Fukuda explained that Japan's constitution doesn't ban possession of nuclear weapons.
They should be kept at a minimum and used as tactical weapons.
The 1951 US-Japan Security Treaty puts Japan under the US nuclear umbrella.

The last Japanese soldiers of World War II to surrender were Hiroo Onoda and Teruo Nakamura in 1974.
Onoda was an intelligence officer and second lieutenant in the Imperial Japanese Army.
He continued his campaign after WWII for 29 years in a Japanese holdout on Lubang Island, the Philippines.
He returned to Japan when he was relieved from duty by his commanding officer, Major Yoshimi Taniguchi as per the order of Emperor Shōwa in 1974.
Teruo Nakamura was an Amis aborigine from Japanese Taiwan in the Takasago Volunteer Unit of the Imperial Japanese army.
He was stationed on Morotai Island, Indonesia and discovered by a pilot in mid-1974.
Nakamura was repatriated to Taiwan in 1975.Throughout the post-war Shōwa period, the Japanese had a low opinion of the JSDF.
They were seen as remnants of the imperial military who caused a severe loss and humiliating surrender of World War II.
They were considered "tax thieves" (zeikin dorobo) for being expensive and unnecessary while Japan had decades of booming economy.
So the JSDF was still trying to find its place in Japanese society and earn respect and trust from the public.
The SDF was managed by the Japan Defense Agency which had little political influence compared to ministries.
The JSDF had good personnel and equipment, but mainly served a supplementary role for the US military against the Soviet Union.
Japan had record high economic growth during the Japanese economic miracle.
By the 1970s Japan ascended to great power status again.
It had the world's second largest economy.
However, its military power was very limited due to pacifist policies and article 9 of the 1947 constitution.
Japan exerted disproportionately small political and military influence in the world.
This made Japan an abnormal great power.

===
Heisei era (1989–2019) ===


====
Departure from pacifism ====
During the Gulf War (1990–1991)
the Japan Self-Defense Forces couldn't participate due to restrictions of the 1947 constitution.
However, Japan did make a financial contribution of $10 billion and sent military hardware.
Japan's inability to send troops was regarded as a big humiliation.
They learned that only making financial contributions (checkbook diplomacy) did not earn Japan international respect.
Furthermore, Japan couldn't provide much support to US forces which caused frustration.
This humiliation was decisive in making policymakers and military planners determined to depart from Japan's pacifist foreign policy.
Since 1991, the JSDF has conducted international activities to provide support for peacekeeping missions and disaster relief efforts as well as to help prevent conflict and terrorism.
Particularly humanitarian aid such as helping the victims of the 1995 Kobe earthquake and humanitarian, reconstruction assistance in Iraq (2003 till 2009).

In 1992 a law was passed to permit the JSDF to participate in UN Peacekeeping missions.

The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation were revised in 1997 which increased the scope for the JSDF as rear-support for US forces by providing logistics support near Japan.
On May 28, 1999, the Regional Affairs Law was enacted.
It allows Japan to automatically participate as "rear support" if the United States begins a war under "regional affairs."

==== 21st Century ====
The modern Japan Self-Defense Forces is one of the most technologically advanced armed forces in the world.
The JSDF ranked as the world's fourth most-powerful military in conventional capabilities in a Credit Suisse report in 2015.
It has the eighth-largest military budget in the world with just 1% of GDP (2011).Since 1991 the JSDF has participated in dozens of international peacekeeping operations including UN peacekeeping and disaster relief.
From 1991 to 2016 the JSDF had approximately 32 overseas dispatches.
These were mainly in Southeast Asia, South Asia and the Middle East.

Japan has been a member of the United Nations since 18 December 1956 and served as a non-permanent Security Council member for a total of 20 years.
Japan is one of the G4 nations seeking to gain permanent membership of the Security Council.
In 2004, the former United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan announced a plan to expand the number of permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council.
Despite being the third largest national economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP, with global political influence, some debate whether or not a country with no official standing military can be considered a world power that should have a permanent seat on the council.

The Anti-Terrorism Special Measures Law was passed on October 29, 2001.
It allows the JSDF to contribute by itself to international efforts to the prevention and eradication of terrorism.
While on duty the JSDF can use weapons to protect themselves and others who come under their control.
Previously Japan's policy was non-involvement.
On 22 December 2001, the Battle of Amami-Ōshima was a six hour long confrontation with an undercover North Korean spy and infiltration ship.
The spy ship was heavily armed and 400 km north west of the Japanese island Amami Ōshima.
The spy ship didn't heed warnings of the Japanese Coast Guard and tried to escape.
12 patrol boats and 13 planes of the JCG and 2 MSDF destroyers chased the ship.
Eventually the spy vessel opened fire and, after receiving fire from JCG cutters, sunk with self-destructive explosion.
All 15 crew members died.
This was the first time since World War 2 that Japan attacked and sank a foreign ship in Japan's sea territory.
On March 27, 2004, the Japan Defense Agency activated the Special Operations Group with the mandate under the JGSDF as its Counter-terrorist unit.
On June 8, 2006, the Cabinet of Japan endorsed a bill elevating the Defense Agency (防衛庁) under the Cabinet Office to full-fledged cabinet-level Ministry of Defense (防衛省).
This was passed by the National Diet in December 2006, and has been enforced since January 9, 2007.In 2007, Prime Minister Shinzō Abe said that Japan's constitution did not necessarily ban possession of nuclear weapons, so long as they were kept at a minimum and were tactical weapons, and Chief Cabinet Secretary Yasuo Fukuda expressed a similar view.
On January 9, 2007, Section 2 of Article 3 of the Self Defense Forces Act was revised.
JSDF activities abroad were elevated from "miscellaneous regulations" to "basic duties.
"
This fundamentally changed the nature of the JSDF because its activities are no longer solely defensive.
JMSDF ships can be dispatched worldwide such as in activities against pirates.
The JSDF's first postwar overseas base was established in Djibouti, Somalia (July 2010).

====
Resurgence ====
Since 2010, Japan reemerged as a major military power.
Various policies increased the role of Japan's military in its foreign policy.
Japan's 2010 National Defense Program Guidelines changed its defense policy from a focus on the former Soviet Union to China.
After a decade of defense spending cuts, Japan increased its defense budget in 2013.
The Cabinet of Japan approved the National Security Strategy (NSS) in December 2013.
This explains what instigated Japan's military resurgence: 
China is using military force in the skies and seas to unilaterally change the status quo in the South China Sea and East China Sea.
This is based on China's assertions that are incompatible with the established order.
China also lacks transparency of its military and national security policies.
The Japanese are concerned about a gradual decline in commitment by the United States to support Japan in a multi-polarizing world.
Thus since 2010 Japan has moved to a more autonomous security policy while maintaining the U.S.-Japan alliance.
Japan has increased its power projection capabilities such as with the development of homemade long-range cruise missiles, the Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade and the modification of two Izumo-class destroyers into de facto aircraft carriers with F-35bs.
There's gradual integration among the three JSDF branches so they can operate more autonomously from the US.The United States maintains American military bases in Japan as part of the U.S.-Japan alliance of 1951.
Most US military are in Okinawa Prefecture.
In 2013 there were approximately 50,000 U.S. military personnel stationed in Japan with 40,000 dependents and 5,500 American civilians employed by the United States Department of Defense.
The United States Seventh Fleet is based in Yokosuka, Kanagawa Prefecture.

The 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force (III MEF) is based in Okinawa.
130 USAF fighters are stationed in the Misawa Air Base and Kadena Air Base.
U.S. Fleet Activities Yokosuka is the largest and strategically most important U.S. naval base in the western Pacific.
The base was previously the headquarters of the Yokosuka Naval District of the Imperial Japanese Navy, but now only a small portion of it is used by the JMSDF.
Kadena Air Base is the largest and most active US Air Force base in the Far East.
Japan pays 75% ($4.4 billion) of all US basing costs.
Japan's willingness to host the majority of the US Armed Forces in Asia makes Japan essential to America's security policy in the Indo-Pacific.
This helps the U.S. to project military force in the Pacific and Asia.
The U.S.-Japan alliance is the cornerstone of peace, stability and economic prosperity in the Pacific.
On December 4, 2013, the National Security Council was established to coordinate the national security policies of Japan.
In June 2014, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and his cabinet agreed to lift the long-term ban on Japanese troops engaging in combat abroad.
This was in a bid to strengthen the Japanese situation amid an ever-growing Chinese military aggression and North Korea's nuclear weapons programme.
The JSDF Act was amended in 2015 in order to make it illegal for JSDF personnel/staff to participate in collective insubordination or to command forces without authority or in violation of orders, which was stated to be the reason why Japan was involved in China in World War II.

====
Global U.S.-Japan alliance ====
Until 2015, the U.S.-Japan alliance was a regional alliance with an exclusively defense oriented policy on defending Japan.
The Guidelines for Japan-U.S. Defense Cooperation (2015) changed it into a global alliance with global military cooperation and greater U.S.-Japan coordination.
It removed the regional restrictions that the alliance was only for Japan and the surrounding area.
This allowed Japan to assume a global military role such as in the Indo-Pacific.
It was the first defense cooperation guidelines revision since 1997.
Former U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry reaffirmed that America has an ironclad commitment to Japan's security which covers all territories under Japan's administration.
Constitutional reinterpretations of Article 9 and military legislation have expanded the role of the JSDF such as collective self-defense with allies.

On 18, September 2015, the National Diet enacted the 2015 Japanese military legislation, a series of laws that allow Japan's Self-Defense Forces to collective self-defense of allies in combat for the first time under its constitution.
The Self-Defense Forces may provide material support to allies engaged in combat internationally.
It also allows JSDF troops to defend weapons platforms of foreign countries that contribute to Japan's defense.
The justification is that by not defending/supporting an ally, it would weaken alliances and endanger Japan.
These were Japan's broadest changes to its defense laws since World War II.Since March 2016, Japan's Legislation for Peace and Security enables seamless responses of the JSDF to any situation to protect the lives and livelihood of Japanese people.
It also increases proactive contributions to peace and security in the world and deepens cooperation with partners.
This enhanced the Japan-US alliance as global partners to promote peace and security in the region and the international community.
As of 2012, Japan and its allies want to maintain a "Free and Open Indo-Pacific" (FOIP).
This means any country can freely navigate across the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean from Asia to Africa for economic purposes.
By implementing and guarding the rule of law in the oceans, peace, stability and prosperity can be promoted.
The FOIP strategy became the official policy of Japan and the United States in 2017.
This is the opposite to China's Belt and Road Initiative where China seeks to become the main economic partner with major or dominant influence in countries in Eurasia, the Middle-East and Africa.
There are territorial disputes in the South China Sea, because China claims nearly the whole South China Sea and wants to control the vital sea lanes in Asia.
China built military outposts on islands which intimidate and violate the territorial claims of other countries like Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia,  Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines.
One third of global seaborne trade ($3 trillion) passed through the South China Sea in 2017.A January 2018 survey by the Cabinet Office found 89.8% have a good impression of the JSDF.Japan activated the Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade, its first marine unit since World War Two, on April 7, 2018.
They're trained to counter invaders from occupying Japanese islands.
Japan didn't have an amphibious force since the Imperial Japanese Navy Land Forces.
50 ARDB soldiers were deployed with 4 armored vehicles for the first time in an overseas training exercise with American and Filipino marines in Operation Kamandag in Luzon, the Philippines from 2 to 11 October 2018.
This was the first time that Japanese armored vehicles landed on foreign soil since World War II.The Ministry of Defense said from 1 October 2018, the maximum age for enlisted personnel and non-commissioned officer applicants will be raised to 32 from 26 to secure “a stable supply of Self-Defense Forces (military) personnel amid a declining pool of recruits due to the recently declining birth rate.
”The Ministry of Defense is developing supersonic glide bombs to strengthen the defense of Japan's remote islands, including the Senkaku Islands.
The anti-surface strike capability will be used to help the Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade's landing and recapture operations of remote islands.
Military cooperation increased significantly with other like-minded democratic countries such as India, Australia, the United States and the United Kingdom.
Such as on 2 October 2018, British troops of the Honourable Artillery Company (HAC) exercised together for the first time with Japanese GSDF soldiers in Oyama, Shizuoka prefecture.
This also marked the first time in history that foreign soldiers other than Americans exercised on Japanese soil.
The purpose was to improve their strategic partnership and security cooperation.
Lieutenant General Patrick Sanders said that Japan won't have to fight alone.
The Ministry of Defense allocated $57 million for research and development of a hypersonic missile in the 2019 Defense Budget.
It could travel five times the speed of sound (Mach 5) or faster.
A scramjet engine prototype, jet fuel technology and heat-resistant materials will be built with testing from 2023 to 2025.Japan christened the 84-meter long, 2,950 tons Oryu submarine on October 4, 2018.
It is Japan's first submarine powered by lithium-ion batteries and was developed by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries.
The Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force will utilize it by March 2020.The JGSDF and the Indian Army conducted their first joint military exercise in the Indian state of Mizoram from 27 October to 18 November 2018.
It's primarily anti-terror drills and improving bilateral cooperation with 60 Japanese and Indian officers.
Japan and the United States conducted the biggest military exercise around Japan thus far in the biennial Keen Sword from 29 October to 2 November 2018.
It included a total of 57,000 sailors, marines and airmen.
47,000 service members were from the JSDF and 10,000 from the U.S. Armed Forces.
A naval supply ship and frigate of the Royal Canadian Navy also participated.
There were simulations of air combat, ballistic missile defense and amphibious landings.

Since 2008, the number of scrambles by the JASDF to intercept Chinese aircraft has increased rapidly.
In 2010 there were scrambles against 31 Chinese aircraft and 193 Russian aircraft.
In 2018 this increased to 638 Chinese aircraft and 343 Russian aircraft.
Chinese aircraft flight paths are mostly in the East China Sea, around the Ryukyu islands and through the Korea Strait.
Russia frequently conducts flights orbiting Japan.
The Ministry of Defense reported in fiscal 2018 that there were 999 scrambles by JASDF jets against mainly Chinese and Russian unidentified aircraft.
That is the second highest amount of scrambles by the JASDF since 1958.
638 (64%) were Chinese aircraft and 343 (34%) were Russian aircraft.
On June 20, 2019, two Russian bombers (Tupolev Tu-95) violated Japanese airspace twice on the same day.
In December 2018, the Ministry of Defense announced they would procure an additional 63 F-35As and 42 F-35Bs.
This increases the total F-35 Lightning II procurement from 42 to 147.The Japanese government approved the first ever JSDF dispatch to a peacekeeping operation that's not lead by the United Nations.
Two JGSDF officers will monitor a cease-fire between Israel and Egypt at the Multinational Force and Observers command in the Sinai peninsula from 19 April till 30 November 2019.On 19 April 2019, Japan and the United States confirmed that cyberattacks are also covered by the bilateral security treaty.
This will be judged on a case-by-case basis.
Defense cooperation will increase for outer space, cyber and electronic warfare.
Defense Minister Takeshi Iwaya announced plans to deploy Type 12 surface-to-ship missiles in March 2020.
They have an increased range of 300 km and will be used to protect the southern Ryukyu Islands.
Japan is also developing high-speed gliding missiles with a range of 1000 km.

===
Reiwa era (2019–) ===
People's Liberation Army Navy vessels (PLAN) increasingly make incursions in the Western Pacific Ocean via the Miyako Strait.
The Miyako Strait is one of the few international waterways through which China can access the Pacific Ocean.
There is also increased Chinese naval and aerial activity near the Senkaku islands which are owned by Japan, but claimed by China.
This puts the Southern Ryukyu Islands at the forefront of Japan's national defense.
By 2030 China could have four aircraft carriers.
Meanwhile, Japan only has two relatively small Izumo-class carriers.
Each Izumo can carry just 10 F-35s.
There are currently no plans to build bigger multi-purpose operation destroyers though experts say Japan needs at least four carriers for effective use in real combat situations.
China's military spending increased a lot in 20 years.
In 2019 China was the second highest military spender with $250 billion (1.9% of GDP).
This strengthened its military power in the seas and skies around Japan.
Comparatively, Japan's expenditure was $46.6 billion (0.9% of GDP).
Japan still depends on America for deterrence and offensive attack capabilities due to Article 9 of the 1947 constitution.

In May 2019, the JMSDF participated for the first time in two quadrilateral naval exercises.
It included the JS Izumo and JS Murasame.
It was also the first extended naval deployment of marines of the Amphibious Rapid Deployment Brigade.
The first exercise was a four-way sail-through in the South China Sea with naval ships of the United States, India, Japan and the Philippines.
The second was the La Pérouse exercise in the Bay of Bengal with France, United States, Australia and Japan.
On May 28, 2019, President Donald Trump inspected the JS Kaga, the second ship in the Izumo class, during his visit in Japan and supported the country's effort for an active role in the defense and security of the Pacific region.
This was the first ever inspection by a U.S. president of a Japanese warship.
Trump also stated that the JS Kaga will help defend Japan and America against threats in the region and far beyond.
There is increasing support among Japanese to change Japan from being a pacifist to a "normal" country with an official military.
In April 2019, a Kyodo News poll showed 45% thought Article 9 of the constitution should be revised.
This support for revision is partially due to: the hostility of North Korea, an increasingly assertive China, and unstable relations with Russia due to territorial disputes that prevent a peace treaty being signed.
There are territorial disputes involving the Senkaku Islands, Liancourt Rocks, and the Kuril Islands.
Japanese claim that the U.S. has failed to properly address these issues
, so Japan must grant itself the means to adequately protect itself.

Attempts have been made by multiple Governments of Japan to amend the Japanese Constitution so that Japan can have an official and normal military with offensive capabilities to share an equal burden of national security duties.
This was prevented by an anti-war sentiment among the populace and politicians.
In May 2017, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe set a 2020 deadline for revising the Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution, a clause in the national Constitution of Japan outlawing war as a means to settle international disputes involving the state.
This charter was written by the United States.
The 'Defense of Japan 2019' white paper lists China as a bigger threat than North Korea.
Defense Minister Taro Kono said “The reality is that China is rapidly increasing military spending,” “China is deploying air and sea assets in the Western Pacific and through the Tsushima Strait into the Sea of Japan with greater frequency.”
The paper downgraded South Korea for exiting a military intelligence-sharing pact.
This could make it more difficult to manage threats from North Korea.
On October 21, 2019, a senior U.S. military officer in Tokyo said that "Japan’s avoidance of offensive weaponry under its constitution is no longer acceptable."
The officer stated that Japan needs to rethink its rejection of offensive weapons and that the government should discuss it with the public.
The officer also mentioned restrictions that limit the US forces and the JSDF's preparation for contingencies.
The officer said that the government of Japan should inform the public about the threats of China and North Korea.
In particular China's military buildup with ballistic missiles and its antagonistic behavior threatens Japan and other countries.
On September 10, 2020, Japan and India signed a military pact called the Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA).
The pact allows them to exchange logistical support and supplies.
This includes transportation and cross-use of facilities during joint exercises and U.N. peacekeeping operations and to share food, fuel, spare parts.
Narendra Modi and Shinzo Abe believe it will boost a Free and Open Indo-Pacific region and to deter Chinese aggression in Asia.
Japan already had such agreements with Australia, Canada, France, UK and USA.Australia
and Japan agreed in-principle to sign a Reciprocal Access Agreement (RAA) on 17, November 2020.
This will enhance and streamline strategic and defense co-operation.
Prime Minister Morrison said it is a "pivotal moment in the history of Japan-Australia ties".

==
Japan's militaristic heritage ==
What distinguishes Japan from other countries is that Japan was near continuously ruled by the military class with the shōgun, daimyo and samurai in the top of the Japanese social structure for 676 years (from 1192 till 1868).
In 1192, the shōgun Minamoto
no Yoritomo and the Minamoto clan established a feudal military government in Kamakura.

The Emperor was above the shōgun and revered as the sovereign, but merely a figurehead.
The Imperial Court nobility was a nominal ruling court with little influence.
The actual ruling class were Japanese military figures:
the shōgun (military dictator), daimyo (feudal lords) and the samurai (military nobility and officers).
The samurai were idolized and their conduct was role model behavior for other social classes.
This resulted in Japanese culture to have a long militaristic heritage.
In human history only a few countries had a warrior caste at the top of their social structure, a class that was practically above the aristocracy.
Few military governments lasted more than 600 years.

One key difference between ancient China and Japanese society was the development of the samurai class in Japan.
Feudal China had four classes: Confucian literati and landlords, peasants, artisans and merchants.
The Confucian literati and landlords were at the top of Chinese social structure.
Japanese feudal society was also stratified, but had the samurai class in the top of Japanese society since the 12th century.
Thus many experts consider pre-modern Japan a "warrior nation" as the ideals, ideologies of the samurai permeated through Japanese culture and society.
Such as bushido and the Japanese proverb Hana wa sakuragi,
hito wa bushi
(Japanese: 花は桜木人は武士, literally "the [best] blossom is the cherry blossom; the [best] man is the warrior").
Comparatively the Chinese idiom is Haonan budang Bing, Hao tie bu dading (Chinese: 好铁不打钉、好男不当兵, means "Good iron is not cast into nails; good men are not made into soldiers").

In 1551, during the Sengoku Period, the Navarrese Roman Catholic missionary Francis Xavier was one of the first westerners who visited Japan.
Francis described Japan as follows:
Japan is a very large empire entirely composed of islands.
One language is spoken throughout, not very difficult to learn.
This country was discovered by the Portuguese eight or nine years ago.
The Japanese are very ambitious of honors and distinctions, and think themselves superior to all nations in military glory and valor.
They prize and honor all that has to do with war, and all such things, and there is nothing of which they are so proud as of weapons adorned with gold and silver.
They always wear swords and daggers both in and out of the house, and when they go to sleep they hang them at the bed's head.
In short, they value arms more than any people I have ever seen.
They are excellent archers, and usually fight on foot, though there is no lack of horses in the country.
They are very polite to each other, but not to foreigners, whom they utterly despise.
They spend their means on arms, bodily adornment, and on a number of attendants, and do not in the least care to save money.
They are, in short, a very warlike people, and engaged in continual wars among themselves; the most powerful in arms bearing the most extensive sway.
They have all one sovereign, although for one hundred and fifty years past the princes have ceased to obey him, and this is the cause of their perpetual feuds.

Nakamura explained in 1843:
Our nation is a nation of arms.
The land to the west [China] is a nation of letters.
Nations of letters value the pen.
Nations of arms value the sword.
That's the way it has been from the beginning...
Our country and theirs are separated from one another by hundreds of miles, our customs are completely different, the temperaments of our people are dissimilar – so how could we possibly share the same Way?
(
Nakamura 1843 cited in Watanabe 2012
: 285).

The Meiji Restoration consolidated the political system under the Emperor of Japan with practical abilities.
The shogun and daimyo were abolished.
Their domains were returned to the emperor.
Power was mainly transferred to a group of people called the Meiji oligarchy and the Genrō who helped restore imperial power.
The Genrō were retired senior statesmen and informal advisers to the emperor.
All Genrō except Saionji Kinmochi were descendants of medium or lower ranking samurai families from Satsuma and Chōshū.
They were instrumental in overthrowing the Tokugawa Shogunate in the Boshin War (1868–1869).In 1873, Emperor Meiji abolished the samurai class in favor of a western-style conscripted army.
They lost their privileges such as the only class allowed to wield weapons.
Many samurai volunteered as soldiers, and many advanced to be trained as officers.
Much of the Imperial Japanese Army officer class was of samurai origin, and were highly motivated, disciplined, and exceptionally trained.
Many samurai were literate and well-educated.
Such as Baron Sadao Araki who served as the Minister of Education and Iwasaki Yatarō who founded Mitsubishi in 1870.
So most leaders in Japanese society during the Meiji period (military, politics and business) were ex-samurai or descendants of samurai.
They shared a set of values and outlooks.
This caused Japanese militarism to dominate the political and social life of the Empire of Japan.
The military class has arguably been the de facto rulers of Japan for about 753 years from 1192 until 1945, starting with the first shogun until the last ex-samurai politicians.
The 1947 constitution transformed Japan into a pacifist country.
The former soldiers gained other professions such as salaryman.
Douglas MacArthur was dubbed the Gaijin Shōgun (外人将軍) for being the military governor of Japan from 1945 to 1951.In modern Japan, the warrior heritage is remembered and revered.
For example, famous samurai and soldiers in literature (e.g. Miyamoto Musashi, Hiroo Onoda), festivals (Shingen-ko Festival), martial arts, movies, entertainment, art and feudal castles.
Cultural practices like the Japanese tea ceremony, monochrome ink painting, Japanese rock gardens and poetry such as the death poem are associated with the samurai and were adopted by warrior patrons throughout the centuries (1200–1600).
There are influential Japanese people in business and politics who are descendants of samurai families.
The ideals of the samurai and bushido are integral parts of Japanese culture.
The ideologies that originated from Japan's military class are adapted and utilized when necessary.

==
Japanese military museums ==
These are significant museums about Japanese military history.

Self Defense Force
JMSDF Kure Museum – about the JMSDF and includes the retired JMSDF Yūshio-class submarine Akishio (SS-579).

JGSDF Public Information Center – Asaka, Saitama.
It has a museum with real combat equipment and vehicles of the JGSDF.

Hamamatsu Air Base – it has a museum about the JASDF with Japanese aviation, planes, technology, tokusatsu and military history.

Kanoya Air Base Museum
The Naval History Museum - Etajima, Hiroshima
Modern
Yūshūkan – this is the first and oldest war and military museum in Japan, established in 1882.

Yamato Museum – it has a 1/10 scale model of the battleship Yamato, a Mitsubishi A6M Zero model 62 and Kaiten human torpedo and a Kairyū-class submarine.

Chiran Peace Museum for Kamikaze Pilots – a peace museum dedicated to the hundreds of Kamikaze pilots from the airbase at Chiran.

Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum – dedicated to documenting the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in World War II.

Feudal Japan
Matsumoto Castle – the second floor features a collection of feudal guns, armor, and other weapons.

Ninja Museum of Igaryu – about the history of the ninja and ninjutsu.

Japanese Sword Museum – dedicated to the art of Japanese swordmaking.

== See also ==


== Notes ==


==
References ==


== Sources ==
Connaughton, R. M. (1988).
The War of the Rising Sun and the Tumbling Bear—
A Military History of the Russo-Japanese War 1904–5.
London.
ISBN 0-415-00906-5.

Habu, Junko (29 July 2004), Ancient Jomon of Japan, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-77670-7
Schimmelpenninck van der
Oye, David (2005).
The Immediate Origins of the War.
In Steinberg et al.
2005.

Steinberg, John W.;  et al.,
eds.
(
2005).
The Russo-Japanese War in Global Perspective: World War Zero.
History of Warfare/29.
I. Leiden:
Brill.
ISBN 978-900414284-8.
Lay summary – J. Mil.
Hist.
Vol.
70/1
via Project Muse (January 2006).
==
Further reading ==
Crowley, James B. "Japan's military foreign policies."
in James William Morley, ed.,
Japan's foreign policy, 1868–1941: a research guide (Columbia UP, 1974), Covers, pp
3–117; historiography
Drea, Edward J. Japan's Imperial Army:
Its Rise and Fall, 1853–1945
(2016)
online
Edgerton, Robert B. Warriors of the Rising Sun: A History of the Japanese Military (1997)
online
Farris, William Wayne.
Heavenly Warriors:
The Evolution of Japan's Military, 500–1300 (Harvard East Asian Monographs) (1996)
Friday, Karl F. Samurai, Warfare and the State in Early Medieval Japan (2nd ed 2003) excerpt and text search; online
Friday K. F. "Bushido or Bull?
A Medieval Historian's Perspective on the Imperial Army and the Japanese Warrior Tradition," The History Teacher (1994)
27:339–349, in JSTOR
Gordon, David M.
"The China-Japan War, 1931–1945" The Journal of Military History (Jan 2006)
v 70#1, pp 137–82.
Historiographical overview of major books
Morton, Louis (1960).
"
Japan's Decision for War".

In Kent Roberts Greenfield (ed.).
Command Decisions (
2000 ed.).
United States Army Center of Military History.
CMH Pub 70-7.

Harris, Sheldon H. Factories of death:
Japanese biological warfare, 1932–45, and the American cover-up (Routledge, 1995).

Harries, M. and S. Harries.
Soldiers of the Sun:
The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army (1991).

Hesselink, Reinier H.
"The introduction of the art of mounted archery into Japan."
Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan 6 (1991):
27–48.

Hoyt, E. P. Yamamoto: The Man Who Planned Pearl Harbor (1990).

Kleinschmidt, Harald.
Warfare in Japan (Routledge, 2017).

Lone S. Japan's First Modern War: Army and Society in the Conflict with China, 1894–95 (1994).
excerpt
Nitobe Inazō.
Bushido:
The Soul of Japan (Rutland, VT:
Charles E. Tuttle, 1969)
Paine,
S.C. The Japanese Empire:
Grand Strategy from the Meiji Restoration to the Pacific War
(2017) excerpt
Sansom, George.
A History of Japan to 1334
(Stanford University Press, 1958);
A History of Japan: 1334–1615 (1961); A History of Japan: 1615–1867 (1963).

Tarling, Nicholas. "
The Japanese Occupation of Southeast Asia."
SEJARAH: Journal of the Department of History 9.9
(2017) online free.

Towle, Philip.
From ally to enemy: Anglo-Japanese military relations, 1900–45 (Global Oriental, 2006).

Turnbull, Stephen.
The Samurai Sourcebook.
London: Cassell & Co.
(1998)
Turnbull,
The Samurai: A Military History New York
: Macmillan, 1977.

Turnbull, Stephen (2002).
War in Japan: 1467–1615.
Oxford: Osprey Publishing.

Wood, James B. Japanese Military Strategy in the Pacific War: Was Defeat Inevitable?
(
Rowman & Littlefield, 2007).

==
External links ==
 Media related to Military history of Japan at Wikimedia Commons
Medieval technology is the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule.
After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.
The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder, the invention of vertical windmills, spectacles, mechanical clocks, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques (Gothic architecture, medieval castles), and agriculture in general (three-field crop rotation).

The development of water mills from their ancient origins was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone.
By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages had turnable mills, around 6,500 in England alone.
Water-power was also widely used in mining for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.

European technical advancements from the 12th to 14th centuries were either built on long-established techniques in medieval Europe, originating from Roman and Byzantine antecedents, or adapted from cross-cultural exchanges through trading networks with the Islamic world, China, and India.
Often, the revolutionary aspect lay not in the act of invention itself, but in its technological refinement and application to political and economic power.
Though gunpowder along with other weapons had been started by Chinese, it was the Europeans who developed and perfected its military potential, precipitating European expansion and eventual imperialism in the Modern Era.

Also significant in this respect were advances in maritime technology.
Advances in shipbuilding included the multi-masted ships with lateen sails, the sternpost-mounted rudder and the skeleton-first hull construction.
Along with new navigational techniques such as the dry compass, the Jacob's staff and the astrolabe, these allowed economic and military control of the seas adjacent to Europe and enabled the global navigational achievements of the dawning Age of Exploration.

At the turn to the Renaissance, Gutenberg’s invention of mechanical printing made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.
The technical drawings of late-medieval artist-engineers Guido da Vigevano and Villard de Honnecourt can be viewed as forerunners of later Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola or da Vinci.

==
Civil technologies ==
The following is a list of some important medieval technologies.
The approximate date or first mention of a technology in medieval Europe is given.
Technologies were often a matter of cultural exchange and date and place of first inventions are not listed here (see main links for a more complete history of each).
===
Agriculture ===
Carruca (6th to 9th centuries)
A type of heavy wheeled plough commonly found in Northern Europe.
The device consisted of four major parts.
The first part was a coulter at the bottom of the plough.
This knife was used to vertically cut into the top sod to allow for the plowshare to work.
The plowshare was the second pair of knives which cut the sod horizontally, detaching it from the ground below.
The third part was the moldboard, which curled the sod outward.
The fourth part of the device was the team of eight oxen guided by the farmer.
This type of plough eliminated the need for cross-plowing by turning over the furrow instead of merely pushing it outward.
This type of wheeled plough made seed placement more consistent throughout the farm as the blade could be locked in at a certain level relative to the wheels.
A disadvantage to this type of plough was its poor maneuverability.
Since this equipment was large and led by a small herd of oxen, turning the plough was difficult and time-consuming.
This caused many farmers to turn away from traditional square fields and adopt a longer, more rectangular field to ensure maximum efficiency.
Ard (plough) (5th century)
While ploughs have been used since ancient times, during the medieval period plough technology improved rapidly.

The medieval plough, constructed from wooden beams, could be yoked to either humans or a team of oxen and pulled through any type of terrain.

This allowed for faster clearing of forest lands for agriculture in parts of Northern Europe where the soil contained rocks and dense tree roots.
With more food being produced, more people were able to live in these areas.

Horse collar (6th to 9th centuries)Once oxen started to be replaced by horses on farms and in fields, the yoke became obsolete due to its shape not working well with a horses' posture.
The first design for a horse collar was a throat-and-girth-harness.
These types of harnesses were unreliable though due to them not being sufficiently set in place.
The loose straps were prone to slipping and shifting positions as the horse was working and often caused asphyxiation.
Around the eighth century, the introduction of the rigid collar eliminated the problem of choking.
The rigid collar was "placed over the horses head and rested on its shoulders.
This permitted unobstructed breathing and placed the weight of the plow or wagon where the horse could best support it.
"Horseshoes
(9th century)
While horses are already able to travel on all terrain without a protective covering on the hooves, horseshoes allowed horses to travel faster along the more difficult terrains.
The practice of shoeing horses was initially practiced in the Roman Empire but lost popularity throughout the Middle Ages until around the 11th century.
Although horses in the southern lands could easily work while on the softer soil, the rocky soil of the north proved to be damaging to the horses' hooves.
Since the north was the problematic area, this is where shoeing horses first became popular.
The introduction of gravel roadways was also cause for the popularity of horseshoeing.
The loads a shoed horse could take on these roads were significantly higher than one that was barefoot.
By the 14th century, not only did horses have shoes, but many farmers were shoeing oxen and donkeys in order to help prolong the life of their hooves.
The size and weight of the horseshoe changed significantly over the course of the Middle Ages.
In the 10th century, horseshoes were secured by six nails and weighed around one-quarter of a pound, but throughout the years, the shoes grew larger and by the 14th century, the shoes were being secured with eight nails and weighed nearly half a pound.
Crop rotation
Two-field system (8th century)
Crop rotation involved farmers to plant half of the field with a crop while the other half would be fallowed for the season.
This was also called the two-field system.
This system included the farmers' field being divided into two separate crops.
One field would grow a crop while the other was allowed to lie fallow and was used to feed livestock and regain lost nutrients.
Every year, the two fields would switch in order to ensure fields did not become nutrient deficient.
In the 11th century, this system was introduced into Sweden and spread to become the most popular form of farming.

The system of crop rotation is still used today by many farmers, who will grow corn one year in a field and will then grow beans or other legumes in the field the next year, this system is how farmers allow for nutrients to be replenished in the soil.
Three-field system (11th century)
While the two-field system was used by medieval farmers, there was also a different system that was being developed at the same time.
Around each village in medieval Europe there were three fields that could be used to grow food.
One part holds a spring crop, such as barley or oats, another part holds a winter crop, such as wheat or rye, and the third part is an off-field that is left alone to grow and is used to help feed livestock.
By rotating the three crops to a new part of the land after each year, the off-field regains some of the nutrients lost during the growing of the two crops.
This system increases agricultural productivity over the two-field system by only having one-third of the field not being used instead of one half.
Another advantage of crop rotation is that many scholars believe it helped increase yields by up to 50%.Wine press (12th century)
The act of making wine was people stepping on grapes inside of a box and then draining the fruit juice and allowing the fermentation process to begin.

During the medieval period the wine press had been constantly evolving into a more modern and efficient machine that would give wine makers more wine with less work.

This device was the first practical means of Pressing (wine) on a plane surface.

The wine press was made of a giant wooden basket that was bound together by wooden or metal rings that held the basket together.

At the top of the basket was a large disc that would depress the contents in the basket crushing the grapes and making the juice to be fermented.
The wine press was an expensive piece of machinery that only the wealthy could afford.
The method of Grape stomping was often used as a less expensive alternative.
While white wines required the use of a wine press in order to preserve the color of the wine by removing the juices quickly from the skin, red wine did not need to be pressed until the end of the juice removal process since the color did not matter.
Many red wine winemakers used their feet to smash the grapes then used a press to remove any juice that remained in the grape skins.
Qanat (water ducts) (5th century)

Ancient and medieval civilizations needed and used water to grow the human population as well as to partake in daily activities.

One of the ways that ancient and medieval people gained access to water was through qanats, which were a water duct system that would bring water from an underground source or river source to villages or cities.

A qanat is a tunnel that is just big enough that a single digger could travel through the tunnel and find the source of water as well as allow for water to travel through the duct system to farm land or villages for irrigation or drinking purposes.
These tunnels had a gradual slope which used gravity to pull the water from either an aquifer or water well.
This system was originally found in middle eastern areas and is still used today in places where surface water is hard to find.
Qanats were very helpful in not losing water while being transported as well.

The most famous water duct system was the Roman aqueduct system, and medieval inventors used the aqueduct system as a blueprint to make getting water to villages quicker and easier than diverting rivers.

After aqueducts and qanats many other water based technology was created and used in medieval periods including water mills, dams, wells and other such technology for easy access to water.

===
Architecture and construction ===
Pendentive architecture (6th century)
A specific spherical form in the upper corners to support a dome.
Although the first experimentation was made in the 3rd century, it wasn't until the 6th century in the Byzantine Empire that its full potential was achieved.

Artesian well (1126)
A thin rod with a hard iron cutting edge is placed in the bore hole and repeatedly struck with a hammer, underground water pressure forces the water up the hole without pumping.
Artesian wells are named after the town of Artois in France, where the first one was drilled by Carthusian monks in 1126.

Central heating through underfloor channels (9th century)
In the early medieval Alpine upland, a simpler central heating system where heat travelled through underfloor channels from the furnace room replaced the Roman hypocaust at some places.
In Reichenau Abbey a network of interconnected underfloor channels heated the 300 m2 large assembly room of the monks during the winter months.
The degree of efficiency of the system has been calculated at 90%.Rib vault (12th century)
An essential element for the rise of Gothic architecture, rib vaults allowed vaults to be built for the first time over rectangles of unequal lengths.
It also greatly facilitated scaffolding and largely replaced the older groin vault.

Chimney (12th century)
The first basic chimney appeared in a Swiss monastery in 820.
The earliest true chimney did not appear until the 12th century, with the fireplace appearing at the same time.
Segmental arch bridge (1345)
The Ponte Vecchio in Florence is considered medieval Europe's first stone segmental arch bridge since the end of classical civilizations.

Treadwheel crane (1220s)
The earliest reference to a treadwheel in archival literature is in France about 1225, followed by an illuminated depiction in a manuscript of probably also French origin dating to 1240.
Apart from tread-drums, windlasses and occasionally cranks were employed for powering cranes.
Stationary harbour crane (1244)
Stationary harbour cranes are considered a new development of the Middle Ages; its earliest use being documented for Utrecht in 1244.
The typical harbour crane was a pivoting structure equipped with double treadwheels.
There were two types: wooden gantry cranes pivoting on a central vertical axle and stone tower cranes which housed the windlass and treadwheels with only the jib arm and roof rotating.
These cranes were placed on docksides for the loading and unloading of cargo where they replaced or complemented older lifting methods like see-saws, winches and yards.
Slewing cranes which allowed a rotation of the load and were thus particularly suited for dockside work appeared as early as 1340.Floating crane

Beside the stationary cranes, floating cranes which could be flexibly deployed in the whole port basin came into use by the 14th century.
Mast crane
Some harbour cranes were specialised at mounting masts to newly built sailing ships, such as in Gdańsk, Cologne and Bremen.
Wheelbarrow (1170s)
The wheelbarrow proved useful in building construction, mining operations, and agriculture.
Literary evidence for the use of wheelbarrows appeared between 1170 and 1250 in north-western Europe.
The first depiction is in a drawing by Matthew Paris in the mid-13th century.

===
Art ===
Oil paint (by 1125)
As early as the 13th century, oil was used to add details to tempera paintings and paint wooden statues.
Flemish painter Jan van Eyck developed the use of a stable oil mixture for panel painting around 1410.

===
Clocks ===
Hourglass (1338)
Reasonably dependable, affordable and accurate measure of time.
Unlike water in a clepsydra, the rate of flow of sand is independent of the depth in the upper reservoir, and the instrument is not liable to freeze.
Hourglasses are a medieval innovation (first documented in Siena, Italy).

Mechanical clocks (13th to 14th centuries)
A European innovation, these weight-driven clocks were used primarily in clock towers.

===
Mechanics ===
Compound crank
The Italian physician Guido da Vigevano combines in his 1335 Texaurus, a collection of war machines intended for the recapture of the Holy Land, two simple cranks to form a compound crank for manually powering war carriages and paddle wheel boats.
The devices were fitted directly to the vehicle's axle respectively to the shafts turning the paddle wheels.

===
Metallurgy ===
Blast furnace (1150–1350)
Cast iron had been made in China since before the 4th century BC.

European cast iron first appears in Middle Europe (for instance Lapphyttan in Sweden, Dürstel in Switzerland and the Märkische Sauerland in Germany) around 1150, in some places according to recent research even before 1100.
The technique is considered to be an independent European development.

===
Milling ===
Ship mill (6th century)
The ship mill is a Byzantine invention, designed to mill grains using hydraulic power.
The technology eventually spread to the rest of Europe and was in use until ca.
1800.

Paper mill (13th century)
The first certain use of a water-powered paper mill, evidence for which is elusive in both Chinese and Muslim paper making, dates to 1282.Rolling mill (15th century)
Used to produce metal sheet of an even thickness.
First used on soft, malleable metals, such as lead, gold and tin.
Leonardo da Vinci described a rolling mill for wrought iron.

Tidal Mills (6th century)
The earliest tidal mills were excavated on the Irish coast where watermillers knew and employed the two main waterwheel types: a 6th-century tide mill at Killoteran near Waterford was powered by a vertical waterwheel, while the tide changes at Little Island were exploited by a twin-flume horizontal-wheeled mill (c. 630) and a vertical undershot waterwheel alongside it.
Another early example is the Nendrum Monastery mill from 787 which is estimated to have developed seven to eight horsepower at its peak.

Vertical windmills (1180s)
Invented in Europe as the pivotable post mill, the first surviving mention of one comes from Yorkshire in England in 1185.
They were efficient at grinding grain or draining water.
Stationary tower mills were also developed in the 13th century.

Water hammer
(12th century at the latest)
Used in metallurgy to forge the metal blooms from bloomeries and Catalan
forges, they replaced manual hammerwork.
The water hammer was eventually superseded by steam hammers in the 19th century.

===
Navigation ===
Dry compass (12th century)
The first European mention of the directional compass is in Alexander Neckam's On the Natures of Things, written in Paris around 1190.
It was either transmitted from China or the Arabs or an independent European innovation.
Dry compass were invented in the Mediterranean around 1300.Astronomical compass (1269)
The French scholar Pierre de Maricourt describes in his experimental study Epistola de magnete (1269) three different compass designs he has devised for the purpose of astronomical observation.

Stern-mounted rudders (1180s)
The first depiction of a pintle-and-gudgeon rudder on church carvings dates to around 1180.
They first appeared with cogs in the North and Baltic Seas and quickly spread to Mediterranean.
The iron hinge system was the first stern rudder permanently attached to the ship hull and made a vital contribution to the navigation achievements of the age of discovery and thereafter.

===
Printing, paper and reading ===
Movable type printing press (1440s)
Johannes Gutenberg's great innovation was not the printing itself, but instead of using carved plates as in woodblock printing, he used separate letters (types) from which the printing plates for pages were made up.
This meant the types were recyclable and a page cast could be made up far faster.

Paper (13th century)
Paper was invented in China and transmitted through Islamic Spain in the 13th century.
In Europe, the paper-making processes was mechanized by water-powered mills and paper presses (see paper mill).

Rotating bookmark (13th century)
A rotating disc and string device used to mark the page, column, and precise level in the text where a person left off reading in a text.

Materials used were often leather, velum, or paper.

Spectacles (1280s)
The first spectacles, invented in Florence, used convex lenses which were of help only to the far-sighted.
Concave lenses were not developed prior to the 15th century.

Watermark (1282)
This medieval innovation was used to mark paper products and to discourage counterfeiting.
It was first introduced in Bologna, Italy.
===
Science and learning ===
Theory of impetus (6th century)
A scientific theory that was introduced by John Philoponus who made criticism of Aristotelian principles of physics, and
it served as an inspiration to medieval scholars as well as to Galileo Galilei  who ten centuries later, during the Scientific Revolution, extensively cited Philoponus in his works while making the case as to why Aristotelian physics was flawed.
It is the intellectual precursor to the concepts of inertia, momentum and acceleration in classical mechanics.

The first extant treatise of magnetism (13th century)
The first extant treatise describing the properties of magnets was done by Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt when he wrote Epistola de magnete.

Arabic numerals (13th century)
The first recorded mention in Europe was in 976, and they were first widely published in 1202 by Fibonacci with his Liber Abaci.

University
The first medieval universities were founded between the 11th and 13th centuries leading to a rise in literacy and learning.
By 1500, the institution had spread throughout most of Europe and played a key role in the Scientific Revolution.
Today, the educational concept and institution has been globally adopted.
===
Textile industry and garments ===
Functional button (13th century)
German buttons appeared in 13th-century Germany as an indigenous innovation.
They soon became widespread with the rise of snug-fitting clothing.

Horizontal loom (11th century)
Horizontal looms operated by foot-treadles were faster and more efficient.

Silk (6th century)
Manufacture of silk began in Eastern Europe in the 6th century and in Western Europe in the 11th or 12th century.
Silk had been imported over the Silk Road since antiquity.
The technology of "silk throwing" was mastered in Tuscany in the 13th century.
The silk works used waterpower and some regard these as the first mechanized textile mills.

Spinning wheel (13th century)
Brought to Europe probably from India.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Chess (1450)
The earliest predecessors of the game originated in 6th-century AD India and spread via Persia and the Muslim world to Europe.
Here the game evolved into its current form in the 15th century.

Forest glass (c. 1000)
This type of glass uses wood ash and sand as the main raw materials and is characterised by a variety of greenish-yellow colours.

Grindstones (834)
Grindstones are a rough stone, usually sandstone, used to sharpen iron.
The first rotary grindstone (turned with a leveraged handle) occurs in the Utrecht Psalter, illustrated between 816 and 834.
According to Hägermann, the pen drawing is a copy of a late-antique manuscript.
A second crank which was mounted on the other end of the axle is depicted in the Luttrell Psalter from around 1340.Liquor (12th century)
Primitive forms of distillation were known to the Babylonians, as well as Indians in the first centuries AD.
Early evidence of distillation also comes from alchemists working in Alexandria, Roman Egypt, in the 1st century.
The medieval Arabs adopted the distillation process, which later spread to Europe.
Texts on the distillation of waters, wine, and other spirits were written in Salerno and Cologne in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Liquor consumption rose dramatically in Europe in and after the mid-14th century, when distilled liquors were commonly used as remedies for the Black Death.
These spirits would have had a much lower alcohol content (about 40% ABV) than the alchemists' pure distillations, and they were likely first thought of as medicinal elixirs.
Around 1400, methods to distill spirits from wheat, barley, and rye were discovered.
Thus began the "national" drinks of Europe, including  gin (England) and grappa (Italy).
In 1437, "burned water" (brandy) was mentioned in the records of the County of Katzenelnbogen in Germany.
Magnets (12th century)
Magnets were first referenced in the Roman d'Enéas, composed between 1155 and 1160.

Mirrors (1180)
The first mention of a "glass" mirror is in 1180 by Alexander Neckham who said "Take away the lead which is behind the glass
and there will be no image of the one looking in."

Illustrated surgical atlas (1345)
Guido da Vigevano (c. 1280 − 1349) was the first author to add illustrations to his anatomical descriptions.
His Anathomia provides pictures of neuroanatomical structures and techniques such as the dissection of the head by means of trephination, and depictions of the meninges, cerebrum, and spinal cord.
Quarantine (1377)
Initially a 40-day-period, the quarantine was introduced by the Republic of Ragusa as a measure of disease prevention related to the Black Death.
It was later adopted by Venice from where the practice spread all around in Europe.

Rat traps (1170s)
The first mention of a rat trap is in the medieval romance
Yvain, the Knight of the Lion by Chrétien de Troyes.

==
Military technologies ==


===
Armour ===
Quilted Armour (pre 5th - 14th Century)
There was a vast amount of armour technology available through the 5th to 16th centuries.

Most soldiers during this time wore padded or quilted armor.
This was the cheapest and most available armor for the majority of soldiers.
Quilted armour was usually just a jacket made of thick linen and wool meant to pad or soften the impact of blunt weapons and light blows.
Although, this technology predated the 5th century, it was still extremely prevalent because of the low cost and the weapon technology at the time made the bronze armor of the Greeks and Romans obsolete.
Quilted armour was also used in conjunction with other types of armour.
Usually worn over or under leather, mail, and later plate armour.
Cuir Bouilli (5th-10th Century)
Hardened leather armour also called Cuir Bouilli was a step up from quilted armour.
Made by boiling leather in either water, wax or oil to soften it so it can be shaped, it would then be allowed to dry and become very hard.
Large pieces of armour could be made such as breast plates, helmets, and leg guards, but many times smaller pieces would be sewn into the quilting of quilted armour or strips would be sewn together on the outside of a linen jacket.
This was not as affordable as the quilted armour but offered much better protection against edged slashing weapons.

Chain Mail (11th-16th Century)
The most common type during the 11th through the 16th centuries was the Hauberk, also known earlier than the 11th century as the Carolingian byrnie.
Made of interlinked rings of metal, it sometimes consisted of a coif that covered the head and a tunic that covered the torso, arms, and legs down to the knees.
Chain mail was very effective at protecting against light slashing blows but ineffective against stabbing or thrusting blows.
The great advantage was that it allowed a great freedom of movement and was relatively light with significant protection over quilted or hardened leather armour.
It was far more expensive than the hardened leather or quilted armour because of the massive amount of labor it required to create.
This made it unattainable for most soldiers and only the more wealthy soldiers could afford it.
Later, toward the end of the 13th century banded mail became popular.
Constructed of washer shaped rings of iron overlapped and woven together by straps of leather as opposed to the interlinked metal rings of chain mail, banded mail was much more affordable to manufacture.
The washers were so tightly woven together that it was very difficult penetrate and offered greater protection from arrow and bolt attacks.
Jazerant (11th century)
The Jazerant or Jazeraint was an adaptation of chain mail in which the chain mail would be sewn in between layers of linen or quilted armour.
Exceptional protection against light slashing weapons and slightly improved protection against small thrusting weapons, but little protection against large blunt weapons such as maces and axes.
This gave birth to reinforced chain mail and became more prevalent in the 12th and 13th century.
Reinforced armour was made up of chain mail with metal plates or hardened leather plates sewn in.
This greatly improved protection from stabbing and thrusting blows.

Scale Armour (12th century)
A type of Lamellar armour, was made up entirely of small, overlapping plates.
Either sewn together, usually with leather straps, or attached to a backing such as linen, or a quilted armor.
Scale armour does not require the labor to produce that chain mail does and therefore is more affordable.
It also affords much better protection against thrusting blows and pointed weapons.
Though, it is much heavier, more restrictive and impedes free movement.

Plate Armour (14th century)
Plate armour covered the entire body.
Although parts of the body were already covered in plate armour as early as 1250, such as the Poleyns for covering the knees and Couters - plates that protected the elbows, the first complete full suit without any textiles was seen around 1410-1430.
Components of medieval armour that made up a full suit consisted of a cuirass, a gorget, vambraces, gauntlets, cuisses, greaves, and sabatons held together by internal leather straps.
Improved weaponry such as crossbows and the long bow had greatly increased range and power.
This made penetration of the chain mail hauberk much easier and more common.
By the mid 1400s most plate was worn alone and without the need of a hauberk.
Advances in metal working such as the blast furnace and new techniques for carburizing made plate armour nearly impenetrable and the best armour protection available at the time.
Although plate armour was fairly heavy, because each suit was custom tailored to the wearer, it was very easy to move around in.
A full suit of plate armour was extremely expensive and mostly unattainable for the majority of soldiers.
Only very wealthy land owners and nobility could afford it.
The quality of plate armour increases as more armour makers became more proficient in metal working.
A suit of plate armour became a symbol of social status and the best made were personalized with embellishments and engravings.
Plate armour saw continued use in battle until the 17th century.

===
Cavalry ===
Arched saddle (11th century)
The arched saddle enabled mounted knights to wield lances underarm and prevent the charge from turning into an unintentional pole-vault.
This innovation gave birth to true shock cavalry, enabling fighters to charge on full gallop.

Spurs (11th century)
Spurs were invented by the Normans and appeared at the same time as the cantled saddle.
They enabled the horseman to control his horse with his feet, replacing the whip and leaving his arms free.
Rowel spurs familiar from cowboy films were already known in the 13th century.
Gilded spurs were the ultimate symbol of the knighthood - even today someone is said to "earn his spurs" by proving his or her worthiness.

Stirrup (6th century)
Stirrups were invented by steppe nomads in what is today Mongolia and northern China in the 4th century.
They were introduced in Byzantium in the 6th century and in the Carolingian Empire in the 8th.
They allowed a mounted knight to wield a sword and strike from a distance leading to a great advantage for mounted cavalry.

===
Gunpowder weapons ===
Cannon (1324)
Cannons are first recorded in Europe at the siege of Metz in 1324.
In 1350 Petrarch wrote "these instruments which discharge balls of metal with most tremendous noise and flashes of fire...
were a few years ago very rare and were viewed with greatest astonishment and admiration, but now they are become as common and familiar as  kinds of arms.
"Volley
gun
See Ribauldequin.

Corned gunpowder (late 14th century)
First practiced in Western Europe, corning the black powder allowed for more powerful and faster ignition of cannons.
It also facilitated the storage and transportation of black powder.
Corning constituted a crucial step in the evolution of gunpowder warfare.

very large-calibre cannon (late 14th century)
Extant examples include the wrought-iron Pumhart von Steyr, Dulle Griet and Mons Meg as well as the cast-bronze Faule Mette and Faule Grete (all from the 15th century).

===
Mechanical artillery ===
Counterweight trebuchet (12th century)
Powered solely by the force of gravity, these catapults revolutionized medieval siege warfare and construction of fortifications by hurling huge stones unprecedented distances.
Originating somewhere in the eastern Mediterranean basin, counterweight trebuchets were introduced in the Byzantine Empire around 1100 CE, and was later adopted by the Crusader states and as well by the other armies of Europe and Asia.
===
Missile weapons ===
Greek fire
(7th century)
An incendiary weapon which could even burn on water is also attributed to the Byzantines, where they installed it on their ships.
It played a crucial role in the Byzantine Empire's victory over the Umayyad Caliphate during the 717-718 Siege of Constantinople.

Grenade (8th century)
Rudimentary incendiary grenades appeared in the Byzantine Empire, as the Byzantine soldiers learned that Greek fire, a Byzantine invention of the previous century, could not only be thrown by flamethrowers at the enemy, but also in stone and ceramic jars.

Longbow with massed, disciplined archery (13th century)
Having a high rate of fire and penetration power, the longbow contributed to the eventual demise of the medieval knight class.
Used particularly by the English to great effect against the French cavalry during the Hundred Years' War (1337–1453).

Steel crossbow (late 14th century)
European innovation came with several different cocking aids to enhance draw power, making the weapons also the first hand-held mechanical crossbows.

===
Miscellaneous ===
Combined arms tactics (14th century)
The battle of Halidon Hill 1333 was the first battle where intentional and disciplined combined arms infantry tactics were employed.
The English men-at-arms dismounted aside the archers, combining thus the staying power of super-heavy infantry and striking power of their two-handed weapons with the missiles and mobility of the archers using longbows and shortbows.
Combining dismounted knights and men-at-arms with archers was the archetypal Western Medieval battle tactics until the battle of Flodden 1513 and final emergence of firearms.

==
Gallery ==
== Notes and references ==


==
Bibliography ==
Andrews, Francis B.
The Medieval Builder and His Methods.
New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1973.
Medieval construction technique, with a brief chapter on tools.

Blair, John, and Nigel Ramsay, editors.
English Medieval Industries: Craftsmen, Techniques, Products London:
Hambledon Press.
1991.
ISBN
1-85285-326-3
Burns, Robert I. (1996), "Paper comes to the West, 800−1400",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.)
,
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
413–422, ISBN
3-7861-1748-9
Crosby, Alfred.
The Measure of Reality : Quantification in Western Europe, 1250-1600.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997
Jared Diamond, Guns, germs and steel.
A short history of everybody for the last 13'000 years, 1997.

Di Ieva, Antonio;  et al.
(
2007), "The Neuroanatomical Plates of Guido da Vigevano", Neurosurgical Focus, 23 (1): 1–4, doi:10.3171/FOC-07/07/E15
Gies, Frances and Joseph.
Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel:  Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages.
New York:
Harper Collins, 1994.
ISBN 0-06-092581-7
Gimpel, Jean.
The Medieval Machine:
The Industrial Revolution of the Middle Ages.
London: Pimlico, (2nd ed.
1992)
ISBN 0
-14-004514-7
Hägermann, Dieter; Schneider, Helmuth (1997), Propyläen Technikgeschichte.
Landbau und Handwerk, 750 v. Chr.
bis 1000 n. Chr (2nd ed.),
Berlin, ISBN 3-549-05632-X
Hall, Bert S. (1979), The Technological Illustrations of the So-Called "Anonymous of the Hussite Wars".
Codex Latinus Monacensis 197,
Part 1, Wiesbaden:
Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag, ISBN 3-920153-93-6
Holt, Richard (1988), The Mills of Medieval England, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, ISBN 978-0-631-15692-5
Long, Pamela O.,editor.
Science and Technology in Medieval Society.
in Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, vol 441 New York: New York Academy of Sciences, 1985 ISBN 0-89766-277-6
A series of papers on highly specific topics.

Lucas, Adam Robert (2005), "Industrial Milling in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds.
A Survey of the Evidence for an Industrial Revolution in Medieval Europe", Technology and Culture, 46 (1): 1–30, doi:10.1353
/tech.2005.0026
Makdisi, George (1970), "Madrasa and University in the Middle Ages", Studia Islamica, 32 (32): 255–264, doi:10.2307/1595223, JSTOR 1595223
Matheus, Michael (1996), "Mittelalterliche Hafenkräne",  in Lindgren, Uta (ed.),
Europäische Technik im Mittelalter.
800 bis 1400.
Tradition und Innovation (4th ed.),
Berlin
: Gebr.
Mann Verlag, pp.
345–348
, ISBN 3-7861-1748-9
Matthies, Andrea (1992), "Medieval Treadwheels.
Artists' Views of Building Construction", Technology and Culture, 33 (3): 510–547, doi:10.2307/3106635, JSTOR 3106635
McErlean, Thomas; Crothers, Norman (2007), Harnessing the Tides:
The Early Medieval Tide Mills at Nendrum Monastery, Strangford Lough, Belfast:
Stationery Office Books, ISBN 978-0-337-08877-3
Murphy, Donald (2005), Excavations of a Mill at Killoteran,
Co. Waterford as Part of the N-25 Waterford By-Pass Project (PDF), Estuarine/ Alluvial Archaeology in Ireland.
Towards Best Practice, University College Dublin and National Roads Authority, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-11-18
Rynne, Colin (2000), "Waterpower in Medieval Ireland",  in Squatriti, Paolo (ed.),
Working with Water in Medieval Europe, Technology and Change in History, 3, Leiden:
Brill, pp.
1–50
, ISBN 90-04-10680-4
Singer, Charles, editor.
History of Technology.
Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1954.
Volumes II and III cover the Middle Ages with great scope and detail.
This is the standard work.

Taylor, E. g. r. (1951), "The South-Pointing Needle", Imago Mundi, 8: 1–7, doi:10.1080/03085695108591973
Thompson, Susan (1978), "Paper Manufacturing and Early Books", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 314: 167–176,
doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.1978.tb47791.x
White, Jr., Lynn (1962), Medieval Technology and Social Change, Oxford:
At the Clarendon Press
White, Lynn, Jr., "The Study of Medieval Technology, 1924-1974:
Personal Reflections" Technology and Culture 16.4 (October 1975), pp.
519–530.
A chronology and basic bibliography of landmark studies.

Wikander, Örjan (1985), "Archaeological Evidence for Early Water-Mills.
An Interim Report", History of Technology, 10, pp.
151–179


==
See also ==
Earlier periods:
Ancient Greek technology
Ancient Roman technologyMedieval
period:
Medieval medicine of Western Europe
Medieval transport
Renaissance of the 12th century
Islamic Golden Age
List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world
History of science and technology in the Indian subcontinentGeneral
:

History of technology


==
External links ==
The Medieval Technology Pages
Technology in the Medieval Age
